- COUNTERING THE VIRTUAL CALIPHATE: THE STATE DEPARTMENT'S PERFORMANCE

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

COUNTERING THE VIRTUAL CALIPHATE:
THE STATE DEPARTMENT'S PERFORMANCE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 13, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-205

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
20-744PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2016

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESS

The Honorable Richard Stengel, Under Secretary for Public
Diplomacy and Public Affairs, U.S. Department of State.........     4

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

The Honorable Richard Stengel: Prepared statement................     6

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    40
Hearing minutes..................................................    41
The Honorable Lois Frankel, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Florida: Material submitted for the record............    43

COUNTERING THE VIRTUAL CALIPHATE:
THE STATE DEPARTMENT'S PERFORMANCE

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 13, 2016

House of Representatives,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:01 a.m., in
room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Edward Royce
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Chairman Royce. This hearing will come to order. Today we
continue our oversight of the administration's response to ISIS
and to Islamist extremism. Specifically we will be looking at
the State Department's effort to counter ISIS' message online.
As the committee heard last month, the Internet is awash
with terrorist propaganda and this includes horrific videos of
beheadings, of firing squads, of torture of men, women, and
children. ISIS operates a vast network of online recruiters;
online propagandists. The mission of these individuals is to
expand their ranks across multiple continents, including our
continent, including right here at home.
So this is on the Internet, what would be called their
``virtual caliphate.'' They use popular media sites, and
through that process ISIS can reach a global audience--it does
this within seconds. Once lured in, they communicate privately
on platforms with sophisticated encryption encouraging tens of
thousands--including many from Western countries--to travel to
Syria, to travel to Iraq, to travel to Libya and join the
fight. But more and more the virtual caliphate is calling on
its followers not to take that trek to Syria or Iraq or Libya
or other camps, terrorist camps that they have set up, but
instead to attack where they are--to take up arms at home. That
is the new messaging. And Orlando is a grim example of that.
As we will hear today, ISIS' online presence is just as
critical to the organization as the large amounts of territory
that it controls, whether that control be in Iraq or Syria or
Libya. Defeating ISIS on both the physical and virtual
battlefields requires very strong, very decisive action.
Now in the past unfortunately the State Department effort
to respond to extremist content online has struggled. Its
Center for Strategic Counterterrorism Communications was
designed to identify and to respond to extremist content
online. Yet because its communications were ``branded'' with
the official State Department seal, nobody listened.
In March, the President issued an executive order to revamp
this effort, renaming it the Global Engagement Center. And
Richard Stengel, our new Under Secretary for Public Diplomacy
and Public Affairs, is here with us to testify today. It was
given the mission to lead the government-wide effort to
``diminish the influence of international terrorist
organizations.'' We look forward to hearing from the Department
on how the Global Engagement Center is taking on this fight.
At a basic level key questions remain, including the type
of message that would be most effective in the face of this
virulent ideology. Some suggest that the voices of disaffected
former jihadists are particularly potent in deterring future
jihadists. These are individuals who quickly discovered that
life under ISIS was not as advertised, is not the utopia that
they were promised, and they have the skill to communicate just
how disillusioned they were.
But if this is the message, how should it be delivered?
Should the Federal Government produce and disseminate content?
Is the Federal bureaucracy equipped for such a fast moving
fight? I suspect not. Does any association with the State
Department mean this message is dead on arrival? As one witness
told the committee last month: ``Worst of all, Government is by
definition risk averse which is the opposite of what you have
to be online.''
Previous witnesses suggested that a more effective approach
could have the U.S. Government issuing grants to outside groups
to carry out this mission. This would have the advantage of
allowing the U.S. Government to set the policy, but put those
with the technical expertise and credible voice in the driver's
seat. After all, such separation and distance from the U.S.
Government has helped our democracy promotion programs through
the National Endowment for Democracy, for those of us that
remember their method of operation over the years. They work in
areas of the globe where official U.S. support just isn't
feasible.
And what role should technology companies play in all this?
What about that sector? In recent weeks, some have announced
promising new technologies that would automatically remove
extremist content as soon as it goes online. We need everyone
acting in sync, including the tech sector, including the
entertainment industry, including the government.
Time is of the essence. If we don't come to grips with the
virtual caliphate now, this struggle against Islamist terrorism
will become more challenging by the day.
So I will now turn to the ranking member, Mr. Elliot Engel
of New York, for any opening comments that he may have.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for calling
this hearing. Under Secretary Stengel, welcome to the
committee. I used to be a big fan of Casey Stengel. I don't
know if he is related. I know the director of the Global
Engagement Center, Michael Lumpkin, has briefed us there a
couple of times and it is great to have you with us today.
Thank you.
The development of information technology during our lives
has dramatically changed the way people around the world
communicate, share information, and conduct business. We are
connected on a global scale like never before and so much good
that can come of that. But we know it cuts both ways. This
incredible tool can also be used for incredible harm and there
is no better example of that than the way ISIS has harnessed
technology to spread its hateful message and recruit more
fighters into its ranks. With a click of a button ISIS can
broadcast its shocking violence to virtually anyone with a
laptop or a smart phone, and with social media ISIS works to
radicalize people around the world urging so-called lone wolves
to attack targets in their communities, urging terrorists to
take full advantage of lax gun laws that make buying a weapon
as easy as buying a secondhand baseball card.
Though we cannot spot it on a map, our efforts to confront
ISIS' virtual violence is another major front in our
Counterterror Campaign. In fact, this online battlefield may be
ISIS' last stand. It was reported today that even ISIS
terrorists realize their days are numbered when it comes to
controlling large swaths of territory. That is why the group
has shifted tactics, lashing out around the world, so as the
coalition continues to reverse ISIS gains in Iraq we also need
to focus on taking away this recruitment and propaganda tool.
The Obama administration began focusing on this problem
years ago with the creation of the Center for Strategic
Counterterrorism Communications, what we call the CSCC at the
State Department. Diplomats and national security professionals
were given the job of taking online space back from violent
groups that had filled it with propaganda. The model followed
our traditional approach to public diplomacy, speaking on
behalf of the U.S. Government.
But an evaluation of these efforts after a few years showed
us some areas that needed improvement. First of all, we needed
better coordination with outside partners. Secondly, we needed
to provide information from sources that the target audience
would consider credible. And lastly, we needed to find a better
way to determine whether our efforts actually help prevent
radicalization.
These are real challenges, particularly the last one. It is
virtually impossible to count the number of people who may have
joined the terrorist group but then decided not to. To deal
with these concerns, the administration created a new
organization at the State Department called the Global
Engagement Center which is designed to coordinate and integrate
all of our counter messaging efforts.
It has moved away from direct U.S. Government messaging to
partner-driven approach tapping a global network of NGOs,
foreign governments, and individuals who can better deliver our
message to the right audience. It aims to encourage ordinary
people in at-risk communities to launch grassroots messaging
campaigns of their own and it places a premium on cutting edge
technology and top talent from the private sector.
So I firmly support this approach and I am glad my friends
on the other side of the aisle do as well. The counter
messaging provisions of the Speaker's new national security
action plan echo the administration's strategy almost word for
word. Both plans explicitly focus on empowering locally
credible voices and employing new tools to effectively measure
results.
And we are starting to see some good outcomes. It was
reported yesterday that ISIS' Twitter traffic has dropped by
nearly 50 percent in the last 2 years, so we are on the right
track. The question now is how do we see this agenda through?
How do we continue to refine our strategy, identify credible
actors, improve our ability to measure results, and keep up
with ISIS as its online campaign continues to evolve?
I personally think we should be investing a lot more money
into this effort. Since 2013, the budget has jumped from less
than $5 million to a 2017 request for $21.5 million. That is a
good increase, but in my opinion we should go even farther.
I am curious to hear from our witness about what other
steps the administration is taking to implement the current
plan and keep building on it. I look forward to your testimony.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Engel. So today we are
pleased to be joined by Under Secretary for Public Diplomacy
and Public Affairs Richard Stengel. And prior to serving in
this position, as everyone knows Mr. Stengel was the managing
editor of Time as well as the president and chief executive
officer of the National Constitution Center in Philadelphia.
We are going to, without objection, ask that the witness'
full prepared statement be made part of the record, and members
here will have 5 calendar days to submit any additional
statements or questions for the record that they might have and
any materials.
And we would ask, Mr. Stengel, if you could summarize your
remarks and we will have 5 minutes and then go to questions.
Thank you very much.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE RICHARD STENGEL, UNDER SECRETARY FOR
PUBLIC DIPLOMACY AND PUBLIC AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Mr. Stengel. Chairman Royce, thank you for that kind
introduction. I am delighted to be here. And I want to thank
you personally for your interest and support of public
diplomacy. The 21st century is the public diplomacy century and
your support is vital.
Ranking Member Engel, Chairman Royce, distinguished
committee members, thank you for the opportunity to have me
appear today to discuss the role of public diplomacy in
countering violent extremism. This hearing comes at a critical
time in our fight against ISIL and violent extremism.
In just the last few weeks, from Istanbul to Baghdad to
Dhaka, we have once again seen the terrorists' wanton brutality
and disregard for the lives of innocent people. Yet at the same
time as we have seen these attacks the narrative is changing.
There are signs of progress in our efforts to counter ISIL's
message. The amount of anti-ISIL content on social media
platforms is increasing, while ISIL's own content, as the
ranking member mentioned, is decreasing. The virtual caliphate
itself is shrinking.
Across the U.S. Government our strategy for countering ISIL
in the digital world has become more coordinated and more
effective. The tech companies as well have stepped up their
efforts at our behest. I would like to outline a few of the
steps we are taking, some of which you have heard about already
and note at the same time that much needs to be done.
Now I think as folks know, this past fall we did an
intensive review of what was CSCC, the Center for Strategic
Counterterrorism Communications, which was formed in 2010 to
fight a different enemy. That was al-Qaeda. But they saw that
this new enemy ISIL was coming on board and we began to shift.
So we evolved into the Global Engagement Center with an
executive order signed by the President, and that Global
Engagement Center has two missions. One is to coordinate anti-
ISIL and anti-extremist violent messaging within the
government, and the second, again as both of you gentlemen have
mentioned, is to enable third party voices--to optimize them,
to amplify them--because their voices are more powerful against
ISIL than ours. That is the core insight that made for this
change--that our voice is not necessarily the best voice to be
out there.
And now we see this, the tide turning. Now I am just going
to take exception and back to something the chairman said in
the beginning of the hearing, this idea that the Internet is
awash with ISIL or pro-ISIL content. There is a RAND study that
came out recently, it is confirmed by our own GEC study that
there is now six times as much anti-ISIL content on the
Internet as pro-ISIL content.
When I started in this job it was one to one. The tide is
shifting. This idea that Twitter is awash with ISIL content, we
did an analysis recently: 0.0124 percent of Twitter's content
is pro-ISIL content. So--and these beheading videos that people
talk about, every week I have a briefing about ISIL's top ten
and I had a briefing yesterday and I asked to see any new
videos. And the problem was is that the videos are being taken
down so quickly that we don't even get to monitor them.
So I think this narrative that we are losing the
information war with ISIL is wrong. In fact, mainstream Muslims
are winning the information war with ISIL and that is why we
have seen that great boost of content. So--but this issue faces
public diplomacy all around the world. There is a digital iron
curtain going up around the world. There is a gigantic increase
in disinformation at the same time coupled with countries that
are decreasing their free speech in their areas. This is a
gigantic challenge for democracies and it is something I am
happy to talk about as well.
We believe the most effective tool against this is the free
flow of information and independent press, which we support. So
this is long term and important work. I am happy to talk about
it all. We will face setbacks I know, but I believe that we
have embarked in the right direction and we have the right
strategy. And I want to thank you again for having me here. I
know we have been trying to do this for a while and I look
forward to taking and answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stengel follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Chairman Royce. Well, I think you make a good point, Mr.
Stengel. At the end of the day we have seen a quantum increase
in the effort to push back. Part of the difficulty though is
that when those messages get through from ISIS or ISIL, as we
saw in Bangladesh, it apparently doesn't take that much breach
into the society in order to be able to find those disaffected
people or those who can be easily radicalized.
So even though we are mounting a more aggressive counter
offensive, we still find the effectiveness of their ongoing
drumbeat. And the reason for the hearing is to look at how we
might better be able to counter in real time as I discussed the
new programming that can be done on software that takes their
sites down automatically. That is worth looking at.
Some of the concepts that you and I have talked about,
engaging the tech sector in this, we have both had these
conversations out in Palo Alto with allies in this effort who
would like to be part of the solution. With advertising firms
or with Hollywood or with others who have experience with
writing a narrative or a counter narrative in order to offset
ideology which is extremist.
So how can some of these come into play, I would ask? How
do we reach out also to foreign media outlets? Are they
receptive to running content on our behalf?
Mr. Stengel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I share your concerns
about this and I want to talk first about what you said about
that their messaging is getting out there and it is being
effective. I think again there is a misnomer about what they
are doing. That somehow ISIL's messaging is so diabolically
clever that they are taking nice young Muslim boys and girls
and turning them into foreign terrorist fighters.
That is not the case. They are tapping into an already
existing market of grievance and unhappiness that is throughout
the Arab and Muslim world. They are sometimes pushing on an
open door. Not only that but they are targeting young men and
young women who have mental illness and who are psychotic. That
is what we have seen in these so-called lone wolf cases.
So it is not so much that their messaging is so special and
so good, it is that they are tapping into a market that already
exists. I too share your belief, Mr. Chairman. That ultimately
we win this information war through credible voices, through
third parties, through Hollywood, through the kind of content
that people who reject ISIL's dark ideology and that is
happening.
I mean, as you know I went out to California recently. We
had a meeting with the Sunnylands with content providers from
the Middle East and from Hollywood. We came up with an idea of
a virtual writer's room where we helped them with their
narratives, a film festival. I took the secretary out there. We
met with the heads of all the major studios. As someone said we
have never been in the same room before except at the Oscars.
So we are trying to enable that. And I think using software
as you mentioned, the tech companies have been actually very,
very diligent, very, very aggressive in this area taking down
content. Twitter itself said recently they have taken down more
than 125,000 handles. They are all out there taking content off
their platforms.
Chairman Royce. Yes. Yes. I have a question on a related
issue and it has to do with an initiative, Under Secretary
Stengel, that kind of caught me by surprise in terms of some of
my colleagues on the Senate side.
Now as you have lain out, the Global Engagement Center is
focused on ISIL. It is focused on international terrorist
organizations and that is what we have been working on and that
is where your focus is. That is a difficult task enough. Some
would like to see the GEC's mission expanded to include all
foreign propaganda, such as the disinformation coming out of
Russia.
I am somewhat hesitant here because we have a mission in
front of us that you are engaged on. Where are the efforts and
resources of this new office that you have set up best focused,
and are the threats to U.S. national security from state-
sponsored propaganda that might come out of Moscow or Beijing,
and on the other hand violent extremism messaging from groups
like ISIL or Hezbollah, are those similar enough that they can
be addressed by the same organization or with the same set of
tools? If not, which Federal agency should lead in responding
to each of these challenges? To me they seem very different.
But I would ask you, you know, between your office at the
Department of State, the Global Engagement Center, and the
Broadcasting Board of Governors, which organization has the
lead in communicating with foreign audiences and how are policy
messages communicated to each? This gets into my question about
this suggested alternative that has been put out there.
Mr. Stengel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for that question
which is very broad and what I will try to do is go from the
micro to the macro. You talked about the resources of GEC. We
have tripled GEC's budget. But most of their money and
expertise goes to trying to amplify and help and give greater
credibility to those voices out there in the region.
They are helping to create content. They are helping to
disseminate content. Not always in their own name. As you saw,
as you mentioned early on, CSCC's problem was partially that it
was government branded content. We have seen the metastization
of ISIL to their so-called provinces and we are creating
content. We have two Hausa speakers at GEC who are creating
content to fight against Boko Haram in Nigeria. So we see this
growth of the digital caliphate to the provinces and we are
combating that too.
So you mentioned this idea of a larger disinformation
center. I mentioned this rise in disinformation around the
world as a problem. I think it is an interesting idea. I think
sometimes people think because disinformation is on the same
platform that all disinformation is equal. I don't think that
is the case. I think what Russia is doing is different than
what ISIL is doing. I think it is an interesting idea to
explore for the next administration, and where that would live
I am not sure.
But I do feel that in our public diplomacy realm between
the GEC, between the BBG which you have been so supportive of,
we have big battalions of people that can help. I have 700
public affairs officers around the world. Our posts help with
all of these things too. So it is a very good question and one
that I am happy to continue talking to you about.
Chairman Royce. Yes. I just think in terms of trying to put
it all in the GEC, I think under the proposal that I heard
GEC's mission would become far too broad for us to focus,
really, on the issue at hand that they have been given right
now which is to, you know, take down this virtual caliphate or
the attempts by ISIS or ISIL to continue to recruit.
So--but I appreciate your thoughts on it, and I should turn
to Mr. Eliot Engel of New York. My time is expired.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The administration's
strategy for countering violent extremism and Executive Order
13721, which created the Global Engagement Center, both call
for empowering credible third parties to counter ISIS'
messaging online. I think that is good, the right approach and
there seems to be broad support for it, but actually
identifying and empowering these credible voices, I think is
easier said than done.
So let me ask you, what do you look for in a credible
voice? What tools do you use or will you use to assess whether
it is actually credible in the eyes of our target audience?
Mr. Stengel. It is a very good question, Ranking Member
Engel. And one of the resources that we use, that I mentioned
to the chairman, are our posts around the world who our locally
employed staff there as well our Foreign Service officers who
are dealing with local groups throughout the Gulf, throughout
the Middle East, throughout the Horn of Africa. They help us
determine who is a credible voice that we might want to work
with.
At the same there are people that we have worked with for a
while. As you know we created the Sawab Center with the UAE in
Abu Dhabi. They work with local voices. We work with them. We
are creating a messaging hub as well in Kuala Lumpur with the
Malaysians. They are looking for local people as well. And
these are people who have knowledge of Islam, who have
knowledge of ISIL on the ground, who have credibility too
because in part they haven't always been supporters of the
United States.
So we are looking for people who are effective in that
information war with ISIL. We started a defector's campaign
which was the voices of young men and women who had been to the
caliphate and came back and said it is not what it is cracked
up to be. The engagement on that campaign eclipsed anything
that we had done before.
Mr. Engel. And we are still continuing to do it.
Mr. Stengel. We are. A group of partners is doing another
one this fall. We have done campaigns about governance. We have
done campaigns about ISIL's brutal treatment of women. This
campaign model, which was an evolution of what CSCC did which
was more direct tit-for-tat messaging, that campaign model we
have discovered is much, much more effective.
Mr. Engel. And do you have the resources to do an adequate
job? I know everybody can always use more money, but are your
resources adequate?
Mr. Stengel. Well, as you know, Congressman, I ran a media
company once upon a time and frankly I had a lot more resources
running Time than I have running the GEC. I also want to
mention that I am not running the GEC, coordinator Michael
Lumpkin, who the chairman mentioned, is running GEC and he is
doing a terrific job in terms of really changing its focus,
giving it momentum which he has.
So even though we have tripled the budget it is from a very
small base. When I came in CSCC's budget was only $5 million a
year. So I actually think the GEC under Coordinator Lumpkin's
leadership could actually use more money and be more effective.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. At our hearing on this issue in June,
we had a panel of nongovernmental experts who discussed two
different approaches to identifying credible voices. Some
experts have suggested a top-down approach using American media
professionals to develop content and create messaging for third
parties to disseminate. Others propose a bottom-up approach
that would encourage Internet users from around the world to
produce their own messaging through YouTube contests and other
outreach.
This bottom-up approach could generate a lot of content for
very little cost. It wouldn't all be effective, but some of it
I believe would be exceptional and authentic. What do you see
as the advantages and disadvantages of each approach, and in
your view what is the most effective role of the U.S.
Government in supporting these approaches?
Mr. Stengel. Thank you for that question. As with so many
questions like that the answer really is all of the above and
both, both top level and lower level. But as I mentioned in my
opening statement, the fact that there is now six times as much
content on social media that is anti-ISIL as pro-ISIL is really
a tribute to those grassroots voices, the voices of mainstream
Muslim men and women who are repulsed by ISIL's vision. They
are creating that content.
We are helping some groups that are doing that. We are
trying to give capability to both individuals and groups, and
to me that is ultimately where that battle of narratives will
be won when those regular voices dominate. At the same time,
you know, we can help give them greater capability, help
streamline their message. I have talked to the people at
different Islamic universities in saying here is how you
shorten a 68-page fatwa to three different tweets. That is more
effective.
Mr. Engel. I guess my time is up, Mr. Chairman, so--well,
the one question I would ask is I would ask you about large
social media platforms like Facebook and Twitter. They do play
a prominent role in the radicalization process, so how do we
work with these companies to combat radicalization? We have
seen social media companies improve content removal, but what
more should these companies do to support counter messaging
efforts?
Mr. Stengel. Yes. I mean their platforms, they do not
support radicalization obviously, their platforms hold content
that does preach radicalization. But I think the story of the
social media companies and the tech companies is an
underwritten story. They are all aggressively out there getting
content off their platforms. As one of them said to me, this is
our ecosphere. We don't want to have it polluted with this kind
of noxious content.
So 2 weeks ago I was out in Silicon Valley. I was with the
Secretary of State. We met with Mark Zuckerberg at Facebook
about what they are doing. They have dozens and dozens of
people, Arabic speakers, 24/7, taking down content. As I
mentioned, Twitter has publicly said that they have taken down
more than 125,000 handles.
When I was out there last year I met with a YouTube
executive. I see these videos are taken down now within minutes
where it just has 25 or 50 views, whereas a year ago they were
up for minutes or even hours. So I think the tech companies are
really aggressive in this space in ways that people don't
always realize.
Mr. Engel. Well, that is good news and thank you for your
efforts.
Mr. Stengel. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Dana Rohrabacher of California.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, thank you very much. And Mr. Under
Secretary, it is very good to hear that we actually are making
headway in something that is very vital to our security and the
safety of ordinary people throughout the world against this
radical Islamic philosophy that seems to have gained a certain
amount of strength and power over these last few years which
threatens normal people whether they are Muslims or Christians
or Jews or whoever they are. So it is very good that you have
been on top of this and had some positive things to report to
us today.
Let me ask you a couple questions about, not necessarily
what we are against on the Internet, but what we are for and
what we have promoted. The counterpart to this growth of a
movement that is intolerant and preaches hatred and repression
of other faiths, we have people who are heroic people in the
Muslim world. General el-Sisi now having been elected being
President el-Sisi of Egypt, for example, is a pivotal character
in the Middle East and actually in the world.
If Egypt would in some way, let's say, turn into a country
dominated by those who would have a caliphate and those who
would have the same type of controls and monstrous policies
that ISIL has been promoting we would see a--that would
destabilize the entire region, and I doubt if any other of the
smaller governments would survive if Egypt became a radicalized
society.
Are we doing something to promote those people for example
in Egypt who, the clerics that have for example gotten behind
President el-Sisi? President el-Sisi himself has reached out to
Christians and other faiths. I might add one of the first
leaders to do so. But have we done anything--I understand that
actually there are more attacks on the administration in Egypt
than there are as we say recognitions of the positive steps
that he has made.
Mr. Stengel. Congressman, thank you for that question. And
of course I share your belief and understanding of Egypt's
pivotal role in the Middle East and how so many countries in
the Middle East look to Egypt for guidance.
Another area where people look to Egypt is their expertise
in Islamic studies. So we have worked with Al-Azhar University
in Egypt to try to help get the message that ISIL is anti-
Islamic, that it is a perversion of Islam out in a way on
platforms that they traditionally don't use. I mean, you know,
having a book on paper is not going to get as much reach as
being on social media.
So we have also worked as I mentioned with other countries
in the region. We started the Sawab Center with the Emirates
and we--and the idea of the Sawab Center is that we will create
a network of networks and they will loop in other countries who
share the revulsion with ISIL. So the Sawab Center is already
working with members of the coalition, including Egypt on
counter ISIL messaging.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, that is--thank you very much for
giving us some positive news. Let me ask you this about the
methodology that we would use in approaching this. There is a
big controversy as to whether or not the Muslim Brotherhood
should be declared a terrorist organization. Are we in some way
working with the Muslim Brotherhood in terms of the Internet
and communications and the type of activities that you are
talking about, or have we put that as to one of the groups we
won't work with?
Mr. Stengel. That is outside of my purview, Congressman,
and I am happy to go back and talk to the Middle East Bureau or
NEA about that question. But to my knowledge we are not doing
any kind of joint messaging with the Muslim Brotherhood.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Let's just note that there has been a lot
of, how do you say, hesitancy if not outright opposition in the
administration to efforts to try to come to grips with what the
Muslim Brotherhood is all about. And after looking at the
Muslim Brotherhood we know that it doesn't advocate violence
itself, but it seems to lay the intellectual foundation for
ISIL and other radical, just radical Islamists which then leads
the radicals who have been captured by that philosophy to
believe that they can have a caliphate and they are going to
wipe anybody else out who doesn't agree with it. So it actually
in the end causes there to be violence based on a philosophy
that leads to that end.
So I would hope that we, while we debate whether or not it
should be, the Muslim Brotherhood should be declared a
terrorist organization, at the very least we should be very
weary of having Muslim Brotherhood advocates laying the
intellectual foundation for the debate on ISIL and other
movements in the Middle East. So I thank you very much and I
appreciate the positive report that we got today.
Mr. Stengel. Thank you, Congressman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Rohrabacher. Mr. Brad
Sherman of California.
Mr. Sherman. I want to thank you for your efforts. Our
failure to deter terrorists is seen in San Bernardino and
Orlando, and of course people will ask, well, why weren't we
100 percent successful? But we will never know how many young
men were turned away from terrorist acts perhaps here in the
United States by your efforts.
I am very pleased to hear you praise the media companies.
It is good to know that they are helping. This was not the case
a year and a half ago. In particular, you mentioned Twitter has
taken down 125,000 handles, perhaps even more. This committee
was very involved in pushing Twitter back a year and a half
ago, and I hope I can add for the record our letter of March
6th signed by the ranking member, the chairman and some other
members of this committee sent at a time when Twitter had a
very different policy.
And I have a question that I hope you will respond to just
for the record and that is, can you identify some social media
companies that are not exemplarily helpful or extraordinarily
helpful in their efforts, including those that are based
abroad? Not every social media company is in Northern
California.
I was pleased to talk to you before the hearing and learn
that you have on your staff a gentleman who has done some
graduate work at Al-Azhar. Many on the committee have heard me
talk about the need for incredible expertise in Islamic
theology and jurisprudence, but I hope that you will go further
beyond someone who has done some graduate work at Al-Azhar to a
graduate to a professor or someone qualified to be a professor
at Al-Azhar and its Shiite counterparts.
I know that such a person might not pass the Civil or
Foreign Service examination, so please let us know whether you
have the flexibility to hire such a person. And not just a
Schedule C, which is a temporary job. You need to be able to
offer people more than a temporary job.
You point out that grievance opens the door. Everybody has
a grievance. And there are those in the Muslim world who will
say it is not enough, that it is outrageous that Israel exists
where Muslims once ruled, but Al-Andalus also must be returned
to Muslim rule that being Portugal and Spain. So there will
always be a grievance as long as there are churches in Spain.
But these are psychotic people. They get to kill and rape
and engage in pedophilia, get applauded for it on earth and be
told they are going to heaven for it. They need to be branded
as people who use piety as an excuse for their psychopath.
We have moved from broadcasting to narrow casting to chats,
where you need thousands of people conversant in what potential
terrorists are thinking. There are thousands of American
Muslims who I think would help you if you called upon them to
help you. But you have to do more than just ask them. You have
to provide them some guidance. Not all of them are tech
whizzes. Not everybody who wants to help you is under 30.
But also, and this is something where you can, or somewhere
in the U.S. Government perhaps your office can be
extraordinarily helpful, and that is a way to register as a
trusted blogger. Because I go to my friends and they have
talked about this. They say, now let me get this straight,
Sherman. I am supposed to spend--I have a Muslim name. I am a
practicing Muslim. I am supposed to spend hundreds of hours in
terrorist chat rooms. What happens when someone knocks on my
door and looks at my hard drive?
And I say, well, I will vouch for you. And they say, yeah,
Sherman, clever. That is your way to make sure that you always
have to reelected, because as soon as you can't vouch for me
how am I going to explain that hard drive?
So I would hope that you would create a program where
people can perhaps provide copies. I don't know if you will get
a chance to read them, but at least get copies of everything
they are putting in. But can some way identify themselves as on
the right side, because otherwise I can't advise my friends to
have these sites on their hard drive.
And finally, I hope you work with and--well, why don't I
let you comment on that and----
Mr. Stengel. Good. Thank you, Congressman Sherman, for that
question and we touched on some of this in speaking before the
hearing. All of the social media platforms have opportunities
for individual users to flag content that violates the terms of
service of those companies. The terms of service are their
constitutions.
And they also have so-called trusted flagger systems where
if you, Congressman, are a trusted flagger that complaint goes
straight to a higher authority. In fact next week we have a
meeting of all the anti-ISIL coalition countries and we are
doing a presentation on that flagging service for those
countries.
You asked about the tech companies that are not doing their
fair share. In my experience everybody is alarmed about this.
But one of the consequences of the effectiveness and
aggressiveness of the tech companies on unencrypted platforms
is that the bad guys are moving to encrypted platforms like
Telegram, like WhatsApp, like Kik. And that is an area that the
good news is that they are reaching a much smaller audience.
The bad news is that we don't know what they are saying. So
that is an interesting area for you all to probe as well.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Mo Brooks of Alabama.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Under Secretary
Stengel, I was listening to your opening statement and you made
an interesting comment and I hope I was able to write it down
verbatim, something to the effect of that ISIS or the Islamic
State is already ``tapping into an already existing Muslim
market.'' And then you mentioned I think grievance or anger or
things like that. What did you mean by that already existing
market?
Mr. Stengel. I don't think it will come as a surprise to
you, Congressman, or anyone on the committee, that in many of
these places where they are searching out sympathizers there is
high unemployment, there is lack of education, there are
governments that don't necessarily value free speech. So there
is this market of unhappiness that exists already.
I think now because the digital caliphate is shrinking they
are looking for people who have mental health issues, who are
psychotic, and they are trying to pinpoint those. But I think
we are all aware that in terms of that, the Muslim world, there
are places where there are unhappy youth although I am happy to
say the Burson-Marsteller poll that came out a couple of months
ago shows that 80 percent of the youth, 18 to 24, in the Middle
East completely reject ISIL's ideology even if they became
nonviolent.
Mr. Brooks. Well, there are lots of places around the
planet that have high unemployment, some degree of lack of
education, some degree of unhappiness. What is it about Islam
in particular that causes you to assert that that is an already
existing market for terrorism as opposed to all these other
places around the planet that have those similar
characteristics but are not adherence to Islam?
Mr. Stengel. Well, there is terrorism that goes by many
different flags around the planet, not all terrorism is ISIL
based. In fact one of the things that we have seen with the
metastization of ISIL is that it has become a brand of
convenience for people who have grievances that had not
anything necessarily to do with ISIL's ideology.
And I should have said this in the answer to the first
question. One of the other misconceptions is that ISIL's
content is all negative and filled with beheadings. We estimate
that 80 percent of their content is positive about the beauties
and the joys of the caliphate and the duty of every Muslim to
go to the caliphate. So for many people it is actually an
inspirational message.
Mr. Brooks. Where in the world is there the kind of
terrorism that we have seen associated with Islam? Because you
mentioned that there is terrorism around the planet, can you
name anything that competes with or does as much damage as what
was seen with the Islamic State in particular or say in
America--Orlando, Boston, Chattanooga, San Bernardino and so
forth? What other area of the world is so inspired to engage in
these kind of organized terrorist barbaric acts of murder?
Mr. Stengel. No, I would, I certainly agree with you that
ISIL's terrorism and the effect that they are having is having
the largest share of the market and the largest share of
concern.
Mr. Brooks. Have you ever read the Quran?
Mr. Stengel. I have not read the entire Quran, but I have
certainly read pieces of the Quran and have studied the Quran,
yes.
Mr. Brooks. Let me share with you why there might be an
already existing Muslim market for this kind of terrorism that
you referenced early on, and these are quotes from the Quran:
``When the Lord inspired the angels saying, I am with you, so
make those who believe stand firm. I will throw fear into the
hearts of those who disbelieve, then smite the necks and smite
of them each finger. That is because they opposed Allah and his
messenger. Who so opposes Allah and his messenger, for him, lo,
Allah is severe in punishment.'' And that is Quran 8-12.
Then, ``Then when the sacred months have passed, slay the
idolaters wherever you find them and take them captive and
besiege them and prepare for them each ambush. But if they
repent and establish worship and pay the poor-due, then leave
them their way free. Lo, Allah is forgiving and merciful.''
That is Quran 9-5.
And then, ``The hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a
disease and the agitators in the city do not desist, cursed.
Wherever they are found they shall be seized and murdered, a
horrible murdering.'' That is in Quran 33-60 through 62.
Is that what you mean by an already existing market for
terrorism?
Mr. Stengel. One of the things that I have seen that
Islamic scholars say about the perversion of ISIL's ideology
about Islam is they cherry pick passages from the Quran and
from the hadiths, which as you know there are 200,000 hadiths,
and it is pretty easy to find hadiths or parts of the Quran
that may contradict each other and you have to look at it in
context. I don't know the larger context of the passages that
you mentioned, but one of the issues that mainstream Islamic
scholars say is that they, ISIL perverts Islam by cherry
picking these passages that seem to support its ideology.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you for your insight.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the time.
Chairman Royce. Ami Bera of California.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Secretary
Stengel. You know, in your opening comments you talked about
two broad goals that you have in terms of coordinating anti-
ISIL message and then amplifying the voices of the third
parties that are trying to coordinate and counter the ISIL
message. I would like to focus a little bit on that second
broad goal.
I do think broadly in the United States as well as across
the Muslim world, the vast majority of folks reject ISIL's
message and want to counter that. That said, you know, their
mechanisms of using social media and communicating in real time
and building the message, you know, the imams may not be very
adept at using social media, right. They may go on a blog and--
in our prior hearing we talked about some of the difficulties
that traditional anti-ISIL Islamic groups and third parties who
want to counter may not be adept at, you know, countering in
real time that message, building that relationship.
And what are some strategies that we can use along with
technology companies that understand how to use these newer
technologies to make them more effective in countering the
message?
Mr. Stengel. Yes, Congressman, thank you. It reminds me of
the famous Mark Twain quote about the lie going around the
world in the time that it takes the truth to tie its shoes.
That the truth being these mainstream Muslim clerics who take
the time to read the Quran, take the time to read the hadith
and don't necessarily have an expertise in social media the way
some of the bad guys do.
So one of the ideas that we have discussed and the chairman
alluded to it earlier is, is there a private sector foundation
or NGO of content creators, people who can help content
creators, who can help the imam in Detroit to get on Twitter,
who can help some of these voices get out there? Because what
we have seen, and I have seen this in the Middle East, there is
often a reticence among the good guys to be out there and we
need to get them out there and we need to give them the skill
set to be out there.
Mr. Bera. And as someone who is not of the--you know, when
I think about my daughter or think about our younger staff
members, they will roll their eyes when I talk about how I
communicate on social media because it evolves so quickly. And
I think it is more than just training those scholars and third
party individuals, but it is probably partnering with them to
take those messages and in very real time continually
communicate and counter ISIL messaging in real time, and using
the same tools that ISIL probably is using better than we are.
So that would be one point. You touched on something else
though that certainly is of concern and came up in our prior
hearing as well. As Twitter starts to take down a lot of these
handles, as Facebook starts to take down these messages, we
are, as you alluded to previously, starting to see folks go to
apps like Telegram that are much more encrypted and much more
difficult to monitor. That is of certainly some concern,
because as we are trying to counter a message those apps become
much more difficult. What are some strategies that we might be
able to work on?
Mr. Stengel. It is an area that we are just beginning to
explore, this migration onto encrypted platforms. And again as
I mentioned, the good news about is they are reaching much,
much smaller audiences, but they are using it as tools of
violence and violent acts not so much about persuading
according to the ideology.
And we also know, again not to be pessimistic about it that
the ability to create encrypted platforms is something that is
becoming more widespread itself so that people are going to be
able to do that in the field. And I am happy to talk more about
that in a different setting where it would be appropriate but I
share your concerns.
Mr. Bera. Great. And then in my brief remaining time, in
our prior hearing, you know, we are certainly talking about
countering the message online, but in our prior hearing we also
had a discussion about using traditional media tools, right,
using Hollywood, using movies to counter a narrative. Again,
you know, in the Middle East as well as in certain ethnic
communities they will consume television, they will consume
movies. And what are our strategies to continue to put out an
anti-ISIL message, an anti-radical ideology message? And that
is one that I certainly think we ought to be doing a little bit
more.
Mr. Stengel. Yes. I mean, as you know, Congressman, the
most powerful and comprehensive platform in the Middle East is
satellite TV. It is not social media. And just during this past
Ramadan--which is like sweeps week for television--Middle East
Broadcasting, which is led by a brilliant man named Ali Jaber,
did a series called Selfie 2. Selfie 1 was a satirical, comedic
exploration that satirized ISIL and made fun of ISIL. This
Ramadan it was the most successful and the most watched program
in the Middle East. This is the kind of thing that we applaud.
We had Ali at a retreat at Sunnylands that I mentioned earlier
for content makers from Hollywood and the Middle East, and that
is the kind of thing that I think again will actually win this
war of narratives.
Mr. Bera. Great. And I am out of time, I will yield back.
Chairman Royce. Scott Perry of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, sir, for
your attendance. I just want to hearken back to your initial
statements and some curiosity. You have given us some good
information, I think, this morning that gives us some hope that
we can turn the tide on these folks in the digital arena, but
there are also some things that concern me and at least I am
curious about.
And maybe it is just that we pick up the narrative and we
repeat the narrative without really thinking about it. When we
say ``lone wolf,'' these folks that are engaged in this cause
of theirs that attack Americans and attack all around the
world, they are not lone wolves. They are not the Unabomber.
They are not holed up in some cabin somewhere only to
themselves. They are connected to a network where they were
inspired and where they were urged on and commanded and
supported. And I think we do potentially a disservice to seeing
this for what it is if we consider them in the lone wolf
context. And I would just urge you to maybe reconsider a
different terminology for them.
And then it also concerns me or at least I am curious about
the assertion that they are mentally ill. Because people that
kill a bunch of other people that have no connection to them
personally or there is no grievance, they are not in a war or
something like that where one side is against the other so to
speak, in the traditional sense they are mentally ill and I
think we can make that leap.
But I would submit to you that--and I am going to give you
a couple names. And there was also, you know, in regard to what
Mr. Brooks said regarding unhappiness, unrest, economic unrest,
social mobility, whatever you alluded to there that that is
what drives these people. Al-Zarqawi, bin Laden, Zawahiri,
Baghdadi, people of means, people of education, people of
status in their communities, we are talking about billionaires,
millionaires, doctors; these are people that lead this
organization and this effort.
And sir, when we say they are mentally ill, again I think
we cloud, potentially cloud our view of--these are people who
are committed to their religious cause. Now whether we feel it
is a perversion of Islam or not is a wholly other discussion,
but they feel that the people they are killing are perverting
Islam. And they are not, you know, I would say that they are
not what we classically consider mentally ill. They know
exactly what they are doing. They have their faculties about
them and they are committed to a cause. And I just worry that
and I am concerned that that narrative, that position
potentially clouds our judgment on how to address these folks.
And I know I haven't asked you a question yet, but let me
ask you this. You know, ISIS cells in Raqqa are directing
training and operations specifically at targeting Americans and
people in the West, right. So if you are not aware, Assistant
Secretary Atkin, he did defer to a classified setting and you
may want to do the same. But when he said we also have to
respect--we are talking about shutting down the network, the
ability to gain access to the Internet in Raqqa, Syria. He said
we have to respect the rights of citizens to have access to the
Internet and balance that even in Raqqa.
We don't want to be at war with these people, but these
people are at war with us. I would think that shutting down the
Internet or the access to the Internet in Raqqa where the
headquarters of ISIS is would be a tactical and strategic
consideration that would diminish their capabilities. What is
your opinion about that?
Mr. Stengel. Thank you, Congressman. I am going to begin by
saying that I share your wariness and concern about the term
``lone wolf.'' I think it is a misnomer. I think it is a term
that is in part created by the media because it is a cliche.
One of the things that we have seen is that the idea that
someone is self-radicalized by himself or herself almost
doesn't exist. I had a very smart person say to me it is much
more of a epidemiological model for radicalization, i.e.,
frequent, intimate contact over and over.
Everything we have seen with any of these so-called lone
wolves is that it wasn't about being radicalized about content.
It was they were being touched repeatedly over and over by
particularly recruiters who were trying to get them to go down
that road. So I share your concern about that.
One of the reasons in the--to go to your question in the
diminution of content that is out there is our success on the
military battlefield that early on a Brookings study estimated
that there were as few as 500 of these ISIL fan boys, these
hyperactive people on social media who were creating the lion's
share of the content out there.
Basically with our success on the military battlefield of
getting back almost 40 percent of the territory in Iraq that
ISIL once held we are getting rid of a lot of those people who
are creating that content. And we have plans which as you say
might be better discussed in a different setting about how to,
while not getting rid of regular people's access to the
Internet, getting rid of some of these hyperactive ISIL fan
boys' connection to the web.
Mr. Perry. My time is expired. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Royce. Lois Frankel of Florida.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Stengel,
for being here today. I want to just ask about maybe just a
little, an adjoining subject I will say which is, you know, we
have been told that one of the recruiting tools of ISIS or ISIL
was making sex slaves available to them and we know there have
been thousands at least physically and there has been the use
of the Internet.
We saw that--Mr. Chairman, we went to Tunisia. I think we
saw some people, giving you some examples, if it is okay I am
going to put this----
Chairman Royce. Without objection, we will submit it to the
record.
Ms. Frankel. Okay, put them in the record. But I will
just--this was an example I will show you. This was a young
girl, I think she was 12, 12 years old, being sold by ISIL over
the Internet. So my question to you is, if you know, is there
continuing to be a prevalence of this issue? What are we doing
to try to shut it down?
Mr. Stengel. Yes, Congresswoman, I share your revulsion
with ISIL's treatment of women and girls. It is unimaginable
and speaks to exactly what their values are rather than what
they say. My understanding is that it continues. It is actually
relevant to the discussion we had about unencrypted versus
encrypted platforms. They are using encrypted platforms for
this slave trade. They are using the so-called dark web.
This is not something that happens on the social media
platforms that we all know, it is something that happens behind
that digital curtain that we talked about and it again is
something that we are working on. Again happy to talk about it
in a different setting.
Ms. Frankel. Are some countries more successful at stopping
the virtual terrorism than others and could you explain why?
Mr. Stengel. It is a very good question and I am more in
the messaging business which obviously the ultimate goal is to
stop the flow of terrorists and foreign fighters. There are
certainly some countries that are more aggressive, more active,
more willing in the messaging space which I think has a direct
correlation in deradicalization.
And I mean, I have mentioned before the Sawab Center which
is in partnership with the UAE. I mean, the UAE has been very,
very forward-leaning in getting into this space but yet we have
had conversations and relationships with the Jordanians, with
the Egyptians. As I mentioned there is another center that we
are working on with the Malaysians. We have talked to the
Indonesians. Everybody understands that they have to be in the
space now.
Ms. Frankel. Because there seems to be now, if the physical
caliphate is being reduced, it sounds to me like the danger now
is these inspired attacks.
Mr. Stengel. Again it is a very good question and it is a
very big concern. We make a distinction between inspired
attacks and directed attacks. And the unintended consequence of
destroying the physical caliphate, which by the way was the
raison d'etre of ISIL in the beginning; that they were creating
a physical caliphate. The unintended consequences of that is
that they are spreading into becoming more of an insurgency
group and a non-state terrorist group and that is extremely
dangerous, as we have seen from San Bernardino to Orlando to
Paris, and there seems to be a correlation between the physical
battlefield being shrunk and their expansion into this
terrorist insurgency battlefield.
Ms. Frankel. I want to make sure I have the correct
terminology here. But directed and inspired, is the difference
that one, the attacker comes to it on their own versus being
recruited? I think you referred to attacks because somebody
kept going after someone.
Mr. Stengel. Right. A number of months ago, Muhammad
Adnani, who is the alleged spokesperson for the so-called
Islamic State, said that while we are being reduced on the
physical battlefield, the caliphate is physically shrinking, so
you should take the battle--don't come to Iraq and Syria. Take
the battle to wherever you are and attack infidels wherever you
are. And so those are not directed attacks but they are
inspired by that kind of pernicious ideology.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you. I will yield back.
Mr. Duncan [presiding]. I thank the gentlelady. The chair
will now go to Mr. DeSantis from Florida 5 minutes.
Mr. DeSantis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
coming, Mr. Stengel. How would you define this term that gets
bandied about ``violent extremism''?
Mr. Stengel. I am sorry. Can you repeat the question?
Mr. DeSantis. How would you define this concept of violent
extremism?
Mr. Stengel. I would define it as people who take a radical
or extreme belief to the extreme of actually committing
violence in its name.
Mr. DeSantis. And when we are talking about violent
extremism, what type of beliefs have we seen that lead people
to commit those acts of violence?
Mr. Stengel. What types of belief have caused them to
commit the acts of violence? Again I would, and we have circled
around this a little bit today. I would say that it is not so
much a belief system or an ideology, but it is this recruitment
by people who are trying to get people to commit violence in
the name of an ideology or an idea that it doesn't necessarily
espouse violence by its very nature.
Mr. DeSantis. So I guess because I think it is important
because some of the stuff you have outlined I think is good,
but how you see the problem I think is important. So for
example, when we hear about some violent extremists I get the
sense from some people in the administration that somebody who
is committing terrorism in the name of Islamic jihad let's say
that they are really not doing it because of any type of
religion. What they are doing is they are trying to co-opt
religion to justify, but really their main goal is to just
kill.
And so that is kind of one view. I would say it is a very
narrow view. Or you could have another view which says these
folks actually are motivated by an ideology and maybe it is not
necessarily the same way that most Muslims in the world view
the faith, but they honestly believe it and they think it is
their religious duty to wage war against societies and
individuals who don't or aren't willing to submit to that
belief system.
So when you are approaching this how is it? Are these
people whose main goal is just to kill and they kind of use
religion as a convenient excuse, or do you see groups like
ISIS, groups like al-Qaeda, other terrorist groups as being
people who really are committed to militant Islam and believe
that they are commanded to do this based on that belief system?
Mr. Stengel. Congressman, I think it is both. I think we
have seen both. I mean, one of the statistics that I didn't
mention earlier is that there has been an enormous decline in
the flow of foreign terrorist fighters. The DoD estimates that
it has declined by 80 to 90 percent. One of the things that we
saw with those for the most part young men who were becoming
foreign terrorist fighters is that 80 percent of them had very
little or almost no knowledge of Islam. Their attraction to
being foreign terrorist fighters ranged everything from just
wanting to kill to adventurism to publicity, and yet there were
others who believed in this apocalyptic ideology. And so we see
both.
But I think for the most part, particularly as the actual
physical caliphate is shrinking, they are looking for people
who are willing to commit violence for any reason. But I do
think----
Mr. DeSantis. But they, the ``they'' are people you would
acknowledge who really are committed to the ideology, correct?
Mr. Stengel. They are committed to that twisted ideology
which embraces violence as a means to the end that they desire.
Mr. DeSantis. So as you approach this how do you view,
because I have seen a lot of different surveys down in the
Islamic world where you have very high numbers of people who
support the imposition of Sharia Law and which obviously has
some very harsh consequences for women, for people who don't
believe, who are non-Muslims, and what have you. The vast
majority of those people I don't think would ever join a
terrorist group, but they do believe in that kind of concept of
civil society. Now you have the terrorist groups who want a
caliphate under Islamic law as well.
So how do you deal with trying to reach people whose
conception of civil society is radically different from ours
but we don't necessarily, we want to give them an option other
than just going into the terrorist camp? Because some of these
people, if they believe deeply in Sharia and they have Western
folks, and you did make a good point in your testimony about us
not always wanting to be the messenger, but if they have
messages that are coming, even though ISIS may not be their
ideal cup of tea that may seem a little bit more attractive
than if we are selling something that they think is contrary to
their faith.
Mr. Stengel. Congressman, it is a really difficult question
and a really good one and philosophical one. And I am probably
not supposed to mention people's books here, but I recently
read a book called ``Islamic Exceptionalism'' by Shadi Hamid.
And the thesis was that this separation of church and state
that we have in the West and with Christianity, which happened
over hundreds and thousands of years, isn't necessarily true of
Islam. That Islamic law is intrinsic to being a good Muslim
citizen, and this idea of a separation doesn't exist in Islam
the same way it exists in the West and Christianity. I think
that is an interesting and provocative point that needs to
influence our policy and understanding.
Mr. DeSantis. Great. I am out of time. I will just say I
would like to submit a question about some of the clerics like
Sheikh Qaradawi, very important with the Brotherhood, how we
deal with the messages that they are sending. And I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. And I thank the gentleman. The chair will now
go down to the gentleman from Rhode Island, Mr. Cicilline.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary, for your testimony and for your extraordinary
leadership and the progress that has been made under your
leadership. I want to begin first with the level of financial
support that Congress provides to your work.
When you consider the level of information that is being
produced by violent extremists online I think you have already
hinted at the fact that you could obviously do more with more
resources, but I am going to ask you directly. Is the
government adequately resourcing the Global Engagement Center
to fully support its mission? From your experience what level
of funding do you need?
And then the second part of the question is really what are
other countries doing and what are the capabilities of other
countries to engage in this fight and are there countries that
should be doing more or do we have great partners? But the real
first question is are we doing our part in terms of funding the
work of your department?
Mr. Stengel. Mr. Congressman, thank you for your----
Mr. Cicilline. I mean as a comparison, in the U.K. for
example the agency that deals with online counter messaging and
anti-terrorist activities is funded at $8 million. So that is
just a relative comparison. It seems like we are seriously
under funding this effort.
Mr. Stengel. Well, I thank you for that question and it is
an issue that we discuss and think about every day.
I just want to pull back for 1 second and say that the GEC,
as effective as it is, it is only 4 months old. It is one part
of a constellation of things that we are doing, you know, not
only public diplomacy issues but working with partners. I mean,
you mentioned the British. We have worked with the U.K. to
stand up the coalition Web site which tracks, in English, the
successes of the coalition against ISIL. That is something we
literally didn't have a year ago. So we leverage our
partnerships and that has a dollar value as well.
But I do think, Congressman, and even though we have
tripled the very small budget of CSCC into GEC, we have asked
for, I believe, $21 million for Fiscal Year 2017, I think $60
million for Fiscal Year 2018. So we think we could do more with
more.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. Next I want to ask you about the
work of sort of building the cadre of people who would be
authentic, credible sources on social media to respond to Daesh
and other terrorist organizations. I think we recognize that
the United States Government is not the best provider of that
content or to actually do it, and I am wondering what the other
public diplomacy efforts that you are engaged in are doing to
leverage that. For example, the exchange programs, the young
leadership program, the Fulbright scholarships so that we can
help build capacity and create those authentic voices who are
then responding kind of organically to some of this in addition
to funding, providing resources and building capacity of people
who are already prepared to do it and are capable of doing it.
Mr. Stengel. I am glad you asked that question. In fact I
sent out a tweet yesterday about the beginning of the TechGirls
exchange, which is bringing young Muslim women in STEM subjects
to study here on exchanges. I mean, the exchanges are golden
and transformational and frankly, you know, every dollar we
spend in them I think we get much, much, much in return.
In that same vein we have IVLPs, international visitor
leadership exchanges, in this area. We have increased the
number of CDE IVLPs at my urging. And then we have also, we
have something called TechCamps which was started in a previous
administration but what I have beefed up and brought into
public diplomacy. So we have doubled the number of TechCamps
and I am doing it in this part of the world where we give
people skills to combat that message in real time and they are
often coupled with hackathons where they are actually creating
contact.
Mr. Cicilline. Great. And the final question is the FBI
recently announced the Shared Responsibility Committees
program, which offers an alternative path to intervention
besides arrest. As you know, Canada and many of our European
allies have a history of utilizing this deradicalization and
intervention approach.
Have those been successful? Should we be, you know,
developing similar deradicalization programs or should we be
providing some additional emphasis on that approach? Has the
history of that been effective?
Mr. Stengel. As you know, Congressman, my focus from a
statutory standpoint is on foreign audiences rather than
domestic audiences. That being said, in my travels throughout
the region, and I was at a conference in Jakarta on
deradicalization, particularly in the Muslim Asia, the belief
in deradicalization is something that is very powerful and they
see it as something that jibes with this mainstream view of
Islam.
And I do think it is something that we need to explore,
that Americans need to know more about. And I don't have any
data about success rates in North America, but it is something
that frankly I would encourage a closer look at.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. I yield back. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman's time is expired. Thank you so
much. I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes. Thanks for
being here. I would just ask the committee to remember
Congressman Ted Poe in our thoughts and prayers. Announced
today he has leukemia, and he is a valuable member of this
committee, a valuable Member of Congress, and a great American.
Mr. Under Secretary, I am on Homeland Security Committee as
well and been in Congress almost 6 years, and the Homeland
Security Committee and the Department was formed after the 9/11
Commission really identified a lot of the walls that were put
up between the sharing of information between agencies that led
to some of the failures that allowed the 9/11 attacks on
America to happen.
But when I think about this as I am sitting here listening
to the testimony today, the Department of State has a Bureau of
Counterterrorism and Countering Violent Extremism area. Now we
have the Global Engagement Center which was formerly the Center
for Strategic Counterterrorism Communications. So that is at
the Department of State.
We also have the DoD which is using SOUTHCOM and AFRICOM
and other elements to combat terrorism globally, whether it is
in this hemisphere or whether it is in Africa or whether it is
prosecuting the war against terrorism by dropping bombs and
drone strikes against actual ISIL and al-Qaeda elements
throughout the war on terror.
We also in the country have the NCTC, National
Counterterrorism Center. We have JTTFs, Joint Terrorism Task
Forces, all over the country working with law enforcement in
the states. We have the National Targeting Center which is
looking at container shipping and understanding how potential
threats may transit the globe.
We have an agency known as the Department of Homeland
Security which was created, what, in 2003, 2004 which combined
22 existing agencies into one huge bureaucracy of all homeland
security elements whether that is, other than the FBI maybe
that is a justice division, but NCTC, Secret Service, Border
Patrol, Customs and Border Protection, Immigration and Customs
Enforcement, USCIS, I could go through all 22 of them. There is
a lot.
The reason I point out that is we have all these elements
out here within this huge bureaucratic United States Government
that are all trying to do the same thing and that is ultimately
to keep Americans safe and stop terrorism. Terrorism is a
global effort against freedom. To establish a caliphate is the
goal of ISIS, but there are other terrorist elements out there
that are not involved with ISIS. That is Boko Haram. That is
Abu Sayyaf. That is Iran's Quds Force. They are responsible for
so many attacks on Western elements.
So the question I have is we continue to change names and
set up different groups, how effective are we? And are we not
creating or recreating the problems we solved prior to 9/11
with all these different groups? I guess what I am asking is
there information sharing or are there walls?
Mr. Stengel. Congressman, thank you for that question. If
you recall, I came into government from the private sector and
I think I spent the first 6 months trying to memorize all the
acronyms of all the groups that I needed to know to be able to
communicate with.
Mr. Duncan. I didn't scratch the surface. I mean, as you
know I didn't scratch the surface on the acronyms and alphabet
soup of government.
Mr. Stengel. That being said, I think one of the effects of
9/11 is that people realize that there were these silos of
information and we weren't communicating. And the GEC by
definition in the President's executive order creates it as an
interagency body and an information coordinating body. So there
are detailees from NCTC, detailees from DoD, detailees from the
intelligence community, two detailees from Homeland Security at
GEC that make up the staff.
And the idea is that by its very nature it is a
coordinating entity to create coordination among messaging
across the government, so I think to that extent it is doing a
pretty good job of that. You know, it has been creating
messaging coordination memos that go out to all of those folks.
So I think we do both know more what everyone else is doing and
we are beginning to do it together.
Mr. Duncan. What I am concerned with, Mr. Under Secretary,
is that we are not being effective. And the reason I say that
there are groups like Kronos Advisory, which is a private
enterprise looking at global terrorism and they are monitoring
not only social media, Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, you name
it. They are also monitoring the dark web which I don't know
that that element of the dark web and encryption has been
brought up today, but ISIS is becoming a lot smarter. Social
media is an easy way to attract those recruits. The
communication is happening beyond the normal person's purview,
not happening on Twitter.
So when I see a group like the one I just mentioned, a
private group who can inform me as a Member of Congress and
elements within the U.S. Government's intelligence service a
lot faster about what they see on Twitter, what they pick up on
social media than these alphabet agencies, I wonder how
effective we are as a big government that is so seemingly
disconnected.
And I think about the Department of State. I am sorry, but
that is foreign relations. That is policies between
governments. I don't really understand the Department of
State's role in counterterrorism activities that I see the
Bureau of Counterterrorism and Countering Violent Extremism. I
am sorry, but I don't. I think that is a national security
apparatus function with the Department of Homeland Security
which I mentioned earlier, 22 agencies combined together to
create this mega-bureaucracy as known as DHS. I wonder how
effective that is being so large and cumbersome, but then I
hear about the Department of State. I know what DoD is doing.
And my gosh, America just wants to be safe and they want to
make sure we are all communicating. I think the gist of what I
am asking today, and you don't have to answer this but the
point I want to make is this. We don't need walls. We need to
make sure that we are communicating. And I am not sure that
large government agencies and the number of agencies that I
mentioned all doing similar things is the most effective way,
because sometimes smaller is better. Joe Montana proved that as
quarterback of the San Francisco 49ers.
With that I will go down to Mr. Deutch for 5 minutes.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank
the chairman and ranking member for making countering violent
extremism a priority of this committee and appreciate the
opportunity to engage with Under Secretary Stengel today. I
would also like to associate myself with the remarks of the
ranking member and so many others who have commended the
administration for pursuing a strategy to combat ISIS and other
terror groups online.
And I just wanted to follow up on a few points that have
been raised here. One, with respect to social media, obviously,
Mr. Stengel, it is not just that ISIS uses social media to
recruit members and spread propaganda. After the shootings in
Tel Aviv just weeks ago, Hamas took to Facebook to praise those
attacks. Now the victims of Hamas' terror have filed a lawsuit
against Facebook.
And I know as you point out that companies like Facebook
have been aggressively getting content off of their platform
and the peer-to-peer challenge that they have been actively
engaged in I think also deserves great credit. The question is
just a broader one and I would just like to start the
conversation. Should a designated foreign terrorist
organization be allowed to use U.S. based social media
platforms?
Mr. Stengel. Congressman, thank you for that question. And
it is a large and philosophical question. And one of the things
just to go down into the weeds for a second, in my
conversations with the social media companies and in the trip
that was publicized that was led by Denis McDonough to meet
with the heads of the tech companies, one of things I hear over
and over is we need help discerning one terrorist message from
another. You know, is this a group that you might actually
support as opposed to one that their content should be taken
down? The intelligence community also creates messages that are
sometimes confused for terrorist messaging.
So I think the tech companies are eager to collaborate with
government about finding the kind of message that they want to
take off their platforms, the messages that is polluting their
platform. And as I mentioned they have their own constitution
in terms of service and it isn't necessarily about designated
terrorist organizations but the kind of content that is put up.
And that is not something that we police, that is something
that they police themselves.
Mr. Deutch. Well, it is and it isn't. I absolutely agree
that they are policing content and they devote incredible
resources to taking down content that violates their standards.
But I really am getting at just the basic point of whether--and
as I said it is a conversation I just think that needs to take
place.
Referring to this specifically, is there a place, should
foreign terrorist organizations be allowed to have a platform
and I guess part of that conversation is, is there content--
should we be making decisions and distinctions about the
content on pages and sites, social media sites of designated
foreign terrorist organizations or should we simply take the
position that there is no reason to distinguish between
something that is offensive and violates the standards of the
company and something that I suppose may not technically
violate the standards but still represents the words, the
urgings of a terrorist organization?
Mr. Stengel. If you are asking me, Congressman, no. I don't
think a foreign terrorist organization should have a platform
on any of these social media sites. That being said, one of the
issues that we face all of the time is how the First Amendment
applies to these American companies which is different than any
other countries around the world.
As I mentioned earlier, so much of the ISIL content is
actually positive. A few weeks ago I saw a tweet from an ISIL
sympathizer and it showed a picture of a basket of apples and
all it said was the caliphate is bounteous. Is that protected
by the First Amendment or not? Is that content that Twitter
should take off? I mean, I think these are very difficult
questions and our environment on that continuum between freedom
and security puts all of these things----
Mr. Deutch. I completely agree. I am sorry, because I am
about out of time. But I think that is, and I don't know the
answer but that is exactly the question. The question is are we
doing less than we can if we allow terrorist organizations to
post what would not be deemed, which would only be viewed as a
positive post by anyone else? But to suggest that the caliphate
is bounteous, it actually plays into a narrative that they are
using to try to radicalize individuals around the world. I just
think it is something we really need to struggle with and I
appreciate the opportunity to start these exchanges with you
here today. I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentleman. Especially when
conservative content is deleted or denied and they allow
radicalized content to remain up. I will now recognize Mr.
Donovan from New York 5 minutes.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I apologize. I have
to be some place at 11:30. It is 11:40 already, so I am just
going to ask quickly, Mr. Secretary, and I came to the hearing
late so a lot of the questions were already answered.
I was very interested when you were saying how there is so
much more anti-ISIS content online than there is--that
surprises me--than there is pro-ISIS. Is that information,
counter ISIS information things that our Government is putting
online? Is that individuals putting online the anti-ISIS
information and content?
Mr. Stengel. Congressman, the lion's share of it is
individuals and organizations and clerics and imams. It is not
government messaging. Some of it is government messaging, some
of it is government messaging of our partners. But as I say
most of it is the voices of mainstream Muslims.
Mr. Donovan. And I know it is difficult to measure a
negative, but is there a way? Can we tell how effective this
anti-ISIS messaging is, the effect of it?
Mr. Stengel. It is a very good question and it is hard to
say. I mean, we do want to drown out their message with
positive messages and positive narratives and that is something
not just countering their message but providing alternatives.
And I think one of the positives of that is that there are a
lot of alternatives that are now being proposed and are out
there.
Mr. Donovan. And I, like the chairman, am on Homeland
Security as well and there was a debate, discussion on whether
or not we should use folks who are radicalized who then have
seen that the life they were promised was filled with
falsehoods and whether or not we should use those individuals
who want to explain to others that what you are being promised
is not true, and I think that debate continues.
Let me just ask you quickly about the size of the recruits.
I know you had also said that they are recruiting from a
community of existing potential sympathizers and not expanding.
I know some people are thinking that community of people of
potential recruits might be as large as 20,000 people. Do you
have any idea about how big that community of potential
sympathizers might be?
Mr. Stengel. Well, the numbers that I have seen of the
number of foreign terrorist fighters who have gone to Iraq and
Syria from the very beginning is something on the number of
40,000, many of whom are killed, many of whom are gone. What I
have also seen is a statistic from DoD that their flow every
month used to be 1,500 to 2,000 and now it is 200 to 400. So it
has been radically reduced, although that was a period quite a
while ago in time so we don't know exactly what is happening
today.
Mr. Donovan. And you answered my final question. I was
going to ask you if you think that community is growing or
shrinking and apparently it seems to be shrinking. Thank you so
much for your time.
Mr. Stengel. Thank you very much.
Mr. Duncan. The chair will now go to the former chairwoman
of the committee, Ms. Ros-Lehtinen for 5 minutes.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Chairman Duncan, and I
had several conflicting events so I apologize if some of these
questions have been asked before. I have several questions and
pick which one you would like to answer within my time, sir.
As radical Islamist groups become more and more
sophisticated we have seen them become more adept at
manipulating social media platforms as tools to spread their
propaganda, recruit vulnerable individuals to their cause, and
extremist groups have found a way to adapt much quicker than we
have been able to and they take advantage and exploit the rules
we have in place in free societies that obviously protect
privacy and speech. And that really seems to me to be the crux
of the issue for Western societies.
How do we battle an ideology and a methodology that are not
constrained by the same rules under which we operate?
Individuals do not radicalize in a vacuum and I worry that our
efforts to counter message the existing narrative may already
be lost before they begin. How effective can counter messaging
work when it is likely that by the time we identify at-risk
individuals they are already well on the path toward
radicalization?
And here in the U.S. we have invested a lot in countering
violent extremism programs like this and how do our programs
compare to the efforts of our allies in the Middle East? Are
they more effective than our own capabilities?
And also, a few weeks ago a team from my alma mater, the
University of Miami, led by Professor Neil Johnson, published a
study in the academic journal Science entitled, ``New Online
Ecology of Adversarial Aggregates: ISIS and Beyond.'' And among
its findings it found that pro-ISIS narratives develop through
smaller, self-organized online groups and they have the ability
to adapt, to extend their longevity, and even increase their
numbers despite constant pressure from law enforcement groups
and other anti-ISIS entities.
The study suggested that if these groups are not broken up
at a fast enough pace then pro-ISIS support and material can
expand exponentially faster through its networks. But it also
suggested that anti-ISIS entities can use data mining and
analysis to focus on taking down these hundreds of smaller
groups before they get too strong. Are you familiar with this
research, sir, and are you employing similar tactics at the
Global Engagement Center?
And lastly, how effective is this Big Data mining and
analysis when ISIS continues to adapt to employ techniques to
avoid detection by the same people who are sifting through the
information looking for them? Thank you so much.
Mr. Stengel. Thank you, Congresswoman, for that question.
And indeed you have touched on some of the things that we have
talked about here today, but they are all very good questions.
That is why it is so difficult in this space. The actual
particular research that you mentioned I am not familiar with.
I would very much like to----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. I will send it to you. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Stengel. Thank you very much. I have seen research that
is similar about the distributed networks that ISIL has that
they don't have a strong center. That these provinces and these
other communication entities are distributed and they don't get
a central message and that is one reason that it is difficult
to compete with them.
Your point about the platforms is it is a difficult one.
These are the greatest platforms for information in human
history and they can also be abused by disinformation and this
negative content. That is why we work so closely with those
companies to help them get that content off their platforms.
Those companies as much as we, maybe more, want to have that
content off their platform because it ruins it for everybody
else.
And the idea of Big Data is something that we want to
explore. I didn't mention this earlier, but the GEC, the Global
Engagement Center, is creating a Big Data hub, a data analytics
hub, and it is using some tools from the interagency. There is
a DARPA tool that they are using, Congressman Duncan that is
worth mentioning. And so these are all issues that we are
wrestling with and this is why it is a tough fight.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. I fight that we must win. Thank you so
much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back. I will
take the opportunity to tell you, Mr. Stengel, we appreciate
your time today. You have been a great witness. And this issue
is critical. That was pointed out by all the committee. You
assert that the counter-ISIL message is gaining steam and look,
I hope you are right. I think we all hope you are right. And as
I noted, at the end of the day we are dealing with a huge
bureaucracy, Federal bureaucracy that has its challenges.
So the committee looks forward to continuing the work on
this effort and I look forward to continuing the work as a
member of the Homeland Security Committee as well, and I look
forward to us continuing to discuss this critical topic.
With no further business, we will stand adjourned.
Mr. Stengel. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 11:51 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
