- U.S. POLICY AFTER RUSSIA'S ESCALATION IN SYRIA

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

U.S. POLICY AFTER RUSSIA'S ESCALATION
IN SYRIA

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 4, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-116

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
97-460PDF                    WASHINGTON : 2015

_______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York

TOM EMMER, MinnesotaUntil 5/18/
15 deg.
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York
As
of 5/19/15 deg.

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

The Honorable Anne W. Patterson, Assistant Secretary, Bureau of
Near Eastern Affairs, U.S. Department of State.................     5
The Honorable Victoria Nuland, Assistant Secretary, Bureau of
European and Eurasian Affairs, U.S. Department of State........    13

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

The Honorable Anne W. Patterson: Prepared statement..............     7
The Honorable Victoria Nuland: Prepared statement................    15

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    62
Hearing minutes..................................................    63
The Honorable Eliot L. Engel, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New York: Prepared statement......................    65
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in Congress
from the Commonwealth of Virginia: Prepared statement..........    67

U.S. POLICY AFTER RUSSIA'S ESCALATION
IN SYRIA

----------

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 4, 2015

House of Representatives,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:08 a.m., in
room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Edward Royce
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Chairman Royce [presiding]. This hearing will come to
order.
So, this hearing is on U.S. policy after Russia's
escalation in Syria. It is now nearly 5 years into the Syrian
conflict. That conflict has claimed more than \1/4\ million
lives. There are 4 million people right now that have been
driven from their homes in Syria. Now, through it all, the
administration's response has been tepid. It has been a series
of steps that were micromanaged by the White House that were
very ineffectual. When I say ``ineffectual,'' we had a
situation here where we had hearings during the time, a 1-year
period in which as ISIS began to move out of Raqqah, Syria and
take major cities, during that period of time, as we were
calling for airstrikes, as our Ambassador in Baghdad was
calling for airstrikes, there were 14 major cities that fell to
ISIS, fell at a time when in pickup trucks on an open desert
road these were clear targets that could have been taken out.
But a choice was made. Sometimes indecision, the decision
not to make a decision, is itself a choice. The choice was made
in the United States not to stop ISIS then, when it could have
been stopped. And the choice was also made not to arm the
Kurds. Three trips out here by the Foreign Minister of
Kurdistan asking for the anti-tank weapons, the artillery, the
long-range mortars that they needed. Thirty percent of their
troops, 30 percent of their brigades are women, females,
fighting on the frontlines against ISIS on a 600-mile front.
And the decision was made not to arm them.
So, ISIS now stands where it stands gaining ground as a
result of our failure to act. Today the President still hasn't
put forward the broad, overarching strategy needed to defeat
this brutal movement, this movement of terrorists and, frankly,
to secure vital U.S. national security interests here. But,
instead, it is now Russia that is taking the decisive role in
shaping Syria's future and not in a helpful way. Putin saw
Assad losing ground. So, Russian jets have teamed up with the
Iranian ground forces to solidify the Syrian dictator, and the
focus of the Russian and Iranians' joint offensive is not ISIS.
It is not their strongholds, but it is the opposition forces
backed by the United States and Saudi Arabia.
Russian bombs, according to the NGO groups that report on
this, they say over half of the Russian attacks have now been
on civilian targets. Russian bombs have flattened markets,
schools, villages. And the Russians at one point were bombing
more targets, more targets, in one solitary day than we hit in
a month and our air campaign there is even more anemic, for
those of you that have followed what has happened as a
consequence of Russia moving into these operations. The
administration claims that it lacks targets. Yet, the special
forces it is sending to Syria won't even be spotting targets.
Russian attacks on the opposition and the slowdown in coalition
airstrikes has actually allowed ISIS now to gain territory.
ISIS is expanding. Let no one be under the delusion that Russia
is focused on ISIS.
While the President characterizes Russia's moves as a sign
of weakness, it is Assad who is growing stronger. Moscow's
efforts show no sign of slowing. Russian cargo aircraft have
been seen running Iranian weapons into Syria, a violation of
the U.N. arms embargo, a violation that I assume is not going
to be called to attention or challenged. But it is a clear
violation of that agreement at the United Nations.
This is especially troubling as we begin another attempt to
restart talks between the regime and the opposition on a new
constitution and elections, and here is why: Russia claims its
goal is a united secular and democratic Syria, but its efforts
to prop up the Assad regime prove otherwise. How do we expect
the opposition to sign onto any sort of ceasefire as long as
Russia and Iran are demanding that Assad, who has murdered over
200,000 civilians? For those of us in this hearing room, we
have heard in the past Caesar come forward with his photographs
that he took, 50,000 photographs, of people tortured by the
regime. That kind of conduct by this regime means it has lost
all legitimacy with the Syrian people. So, the Russian plan is
to have him stay in power and to ask at the outset that he
stays in power. The statement from Vienna didn't even demand
that that Assad regime stop using crude barrel bombs, some
filled with chlorine gas, against civilians. That would have
been a minimum step that the Russians could have supported. But
their planes, they provided the air force originally to Assad.
So, a diplomatic solution is only possible with a strong,
coherent, moderate opposition that can serve as a bridge from
Assad to a new post-conflict government. Yet, the
administration has done little to help the opposition. Its
feeble train and equip program is now defunct. Washington
bureaucracy and over-deference to the Shia-led Iraqi Government
has held up desperately-needed weapons shipments to the Kurds,
and no one believes Friday's announcement of 50 special forces
will be decisive.
Ultimately, it is President Obama's responsibility tp step
up and outline a plan to engage our partners and allies and
bring stability to the Middle East. He is the Commander-in-
Chief, but here is where I would start. As I have already said,
we have urged for the longest time: Decisive airstrikes against
ISIS. We have urged for the longest time: The arming of the
Kurdish and Yazidi men and women out there on the frontlines
with the weapons they need to turn back ISIS.
If we want an opposition to negotiate from a position of
strength, why not help create sanctuary areas in Syria? This
would help the Syrian people escape both the Assad regime and
the Islamic State. This would also allow for more effective
humanitarian relief and even slow the exodus of refugees.
We must also push back on Russia and Iran's destabilizing
intervention in this conflict, and that means passing tough new
sanctions on Iran's terrorist proxy, Hezbollah, because it is
Hezbollah that is taking over homes in this region that used to
be inhabited by Sunnis, as the ethic cleansing continues. So,
we need to pass that legislation, as the House has done, and
take action to uphold the U.N. arms embargo on Iran in the face
of Russian violations.
Everyone but the White House seems to know the status quo
cannot stand. General David Petraeus recently testified to
Congress that ``Syria is a geopolitical Chernobyl and, like a
nuclear disaster, the fallout from the meltdown of Syria
threatens to be with us for decades,'' he said, ``and the
longer it is permitted to continue, the more severe the damage
will be.'' Those were his words.
I will now turn to the Democratic side for any opening
statement. Yes, Lois.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Royce.
And I thank the witnesses for being here today. I know
you're going to be able to well handle the questions that are
going to be asked you.
Mr. Chair, I wanted to just express a little different
point of view. First of all, I want to say this, Mr. Chair:
Thank you for this hearing. I think you have raised some very
good questions and you have expressed the great frustration
that a lot of us feel about Syria. I mean, it is horrific what
is going on.
But, I mean, some people would say that ISIS or Daesh,
whatever we call them today, came about not because of
something President Obama did, but, I mean, there are some who
would argue that it was the previous administration's decision
to go into Iraq erroneously that started this mess that we see
there today with a failed occupation of Iraq, a new government
that was not inclusive. You have a void, and then, you see ISIS
come from that void.
But I do want to say this: I don't want to play the blame
game. That is what some people say. But I think what is
important now is just to focus on the here and now and what we
need to do.
This mess in Syria and the Middle East is not the fault of
our President. There is a lot of blame to go around, but I am
going to put it on terrorists more than the President of the
United States.
I will be very interested in hearing what our two witnesses
have to say.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Keating. Will the gentlelady yield?
Ms. Frankel. Yes.
Mr. Keating. Thank you.
We have time left, the opening statement time, and I just
want to set a framework here as we have this discussion.
I will say this with the administration and, frankly, with
the critics of the administration: I, for one, did not see the
value of pursuing with a vetting of the Syrian rebel army. I
can say that myself, looking at what happened.
But the one thing I want to have emphasized in this hearing
is that you can't things both ways. You can't say we should be
putting in U.S. troops on the ground there, and you can't do
that and do even a modicum of security for those troops unless
you are willing to hold that troop and have a huge investment
of our troops.
So, the people that say the President didn't come in and he
should have come in with troops, you just can't come in, drop
them in, pull them out. We didn't have intelligence on the
ground in Syria to make that safe for those troops that the
time.
No. 2, we have to be prepared for those people that say
that, that those troops have to have the support of tens of
thousands of other troops. So, let's not have it in this
hearing both ways. If you are going to take that tack with the
President, you have to be able to say, ``Well, I support ground
troops for the long term,'' tens of thousands on the ground,
because you can't put them in there without supporting them
safety.
So, I hope when we have this discussion today, we bear that
in mind. If people have that opinion, then I respect their
opinion, but I don't think that that is the best thing for our
country at this time.
And I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Keating.
I would like to make it clear that that is not the opinion
of the members of this committee. What the members of this
committee called for, for a full year of indecisive action, was
the use of our air power; was a memory that we had had 116,000
airstrikes during the first Gulf War against 42 divisions of
Saddam Hussein. These were armored divisions, many of them, and
that it was very successful during the invasion of Kuwait.
What we called for here was not the introduction of U.S.
brigades. What we called here was for the President of the
United States to use the authority he had in order to take out
the beginning of insurrection that started in pickup trucks.
And if you can take out armored divisions, you could certainly
from the air take out pickup trucks from the open desert.
And the frustration that I am expressing is over the fact
that for 1 year nothing was done, as city after city fell to
this marauding terrorist organization.
But I should transition to the witnesses today.
But it is partly that frustration and it is partly with
meeting time after time on a bipartisan basis with the Kurdish
and the Yazidi opposition asking for arms and being denied the
arms to defend themselves. Those are the issues I am speaking
to.
But, at this time, I would like to go to Ambassador Anne
Patterson, Assistant Secretary of State of Near Eastern
Affairs. She is a career member of the Senior Foreign Service
and previously Ambassador Patterson served in multiple posts,
including Egypt and Pakistan, and as Assistant Secretary of
State for International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs.
And then, to Ambassador Victoria Nuland, before assuming
her position as Assistant Secretary for the Bureau of European
and Eurasian Affairs at the Department of State, Ambassador
Nuland served as the Department of State's spokesperson. She
also served as the United States permanent representative to
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization from 2005 to 2008,
focusing heavily on NATO Russia issues.
Without objection, the witnesses' full prepared statements
will be made part of the record, and the members here will have
5 calendar days to submit any statements or questions or
extraneous material for the record.
Ambassador Patterson, if you could begin?

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE ANNE W. PATTERSON, ASSISTANT
SECRETARY, BUREAU OF NEAR EASTERN AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
STATE

Ambassador Patterson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members of
the committee. Thank you for the opportunity to appear before
you today to explain our strategy for resolving the devastating
conflict in Syria and defeating ISIL there.
Coming after the President's decision to intensify the
campaign against ISIL and Secretary Kerry's meetings in Vienna,
the design of a path forward for a political transition, this
hearing is particularly well-timed. Secretary Kerry said it
best in Vienna: ``Our task is to chart a course out of hell.''
Since the start of the Syrian war, as you outlined, Mr.
Chairman, over 225,000 Syrians have died and we face the
largest refugee crisis since World War II. The conflict has
become a magnet for extremists seeking to change the map of the
Middle East, destroy economies and cultures, and terrify an
entire population. It is threatening Syria's neighbors Iraq,
Jordan, Lebanon, and Turkey, with major consequences for U.S.
national interests and beyond.
We are pursuing four interlinked goals. One, to defeat ISIS
militarily in both Syria and Iraq. Two, to develop a political
transition that gives Syria a future without Bashar al-Assad.
Three, to ease the suffering of the Syrian people. And four, to
stabilize our allies as they cope with massive refugee
outflows.
Our strategy is to leverage military action and intensive
diplomacy to achieve a political transition in which Syrians
ultimately have a government that respects the rights of its
people. This political transition is critical to rooting ISIL
out of Syria and ending ISIL's ability to threaten Iraq from
Syria.
As Secretary Kerry said in Vienna, ``There is absolutely
nothing that could do more to fight Daesh than to achieve a
political transition that strengthens the governance capacity
of Syria, sideline the person we believe attracts so many
foreign fighters and so much terror, and unites the country
against terrorism.'' We cannot defeat ISIL in Iraq without also
defeating ISIL in Syria.
Moving forward, we first are intensifying the military
campaign against ISIL through airstrikes and cooperation with
local partners who have already pushed ISIL out of all but 68
miles of the nearly 600-mile border between Syria and Turkey.
We and our coalition partners have launched over 2600 strikes
in Syria and, thanks to Turkish support, we are deploying A-10s
and F-15s to Incirlik Airbase to expand our strike capacity.
The President, as you mentioned, has ordered the deployment
of up to 50 U.S. Special Operations Forces in northern Syria to
work with our Arab and Kurdish partners, and we will support
them with additional air power.
Next, the United States is providing $150 million a year to
the moderate opposition to meet humanitarian needs and provide
governance support in areas liberated from ISIL. As the largest
single donor since 2011, we have provided over $4.5 billion in
humanitarian assistance to Syria. This includes nearly $2.5
billion for aid inside Syria, almost $1 billion for UNHCR
programs in Lebanon, and over $650 million to Jordan.
We are enhancing military assistance to help our regional
allies, including Jordan and Lebanon, repulse extremist threats
from ISIL and Nusra. Thanks to General Allen's leadership, we
are leading a global 65-member coalition working to degrade and
defeat ISIL.
Mr. Chairman, let me address head-on Russia's dangerous
military intervention in Syria. Moscow deployed forces because
its ally, the Assad regime, was losing territory, and even Iran
support was insufficient to protect it. Moscow has cynically
tried to claim that its strikes are focused on terrorists, but,
so far, 85 to 90 percent of Syrian strikes have hit the
moderate Syrian opposition and they have killed civilians in
the process.
Despite our urging, Moscow has yet to stop the Assad
regime's horrific practice of barrel-bombing the Syrian people.
So, we know that Russia's primary intent is to preserve the
regime.
In Vienna, Secretary Kerry brought together all those who
can help in the conflict. Iran was invited for the practical
reason that it is an active participant that needs to support a
political transition. It will come as no surprise to you that
this group disagreed on several subjects, most notably, the
fate of Assad.
They did agree, however, to convene regime and opposition
representatives on the basis of the Geneva Communique of 2012
which set out goals for the transfer of power to a transitional
governing body and to explore modalities for a ceasefire in
parallel with the political process. They also agree we must
preserve Syria's unit and territorial integrity, ensure state
institutions remain intact, protect the rights of all Syrians,
assure humanitarian access, defeat ISIL and other terrorist
groups designated by the U.N. Security Council, and establish a
political process leading to a new constitution and elections
administered under U.N. supervision and standards. We will
convene parties at the ministerial level in the next few weeks
to discuss next steps.
Mr. Chairman, no one has any illusions about the difficulty
of these efforts, but one thing is clear: Assad cannot unite
and govern Syria and we cannot continue to hold the lives of
the Syrian people hostage to the desire of one man to remain
power. We, the Syrian people, and our regional allies need a
political transition that ends ISIL's reign of terror and
allows displaced Syrians to return home.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would be happy to take
questions.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Chairman Royce. Thank you.
We go now to Ambassador Nuland.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE VICTORIA NULAND, ASSISTANT
SECRETARY, BUREAU OF EUROPEAN AND EURASIAN AFFAIRS, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Ambassador Nuland. Thank you, Chairman Royce, members of
this committee, for the opportunity to join you and my
colleague, Assistant Secretary Anne Patterson today.
While Syria is in Assistant Secretary Patterson's area of
responsibility, the conflict there increasingly imperils
Turkey, the EU, and the rest of Europe, as refugees stream out
of Syria and head both north and south. Russia's new direct
combat role in Syria has exacerbated an already-dangerous
refugee outflow, straining even the most generous European's
ability to cope.
Turkey currently hosts 2.2 million refugees and, by its
account, has invested over $8 billion toward their care and
well-being. This year the Turkish Coast Guard rescued an
estimated 68,000 individuals attempting a dangerous sea voyage.
Just since Russian combat operations began in Syria, Greece
has recorded its highest level of migration flows per week with
an estimated 48,000 refugees and migrants crossing into the
country in 1 week.
The Western Balkans is also stretched thin from increased
migration, primarily through Macedonia, Serbia, and Croatia.
These countries report an average of 5,000 to 8,000

thousand  deg.migrants passing through their borders
daily.
Germany is under strain. It has recorded over 577,000
arrivals just in the last 9 months.
Inside Syria, just over the last month while the Russians
have been active, the United Nations reports at least 120,000
Syrians have been internally displaced as a result of the
regime's attacks aided by Russian airstrikes. Fifty-two
thousand eight hundred people were displaced from northern Hama
and southern Idlib alone.
These numbers validate what we already know and what you,
yourself, Chairman, pointed out. While Moscow asserts that its
military actions are directed at ISIL, the vast majority of
Russian airstrikes are targeted in areas where the Assad regime
has lost territory to forces led by the moderate opposition:
Hama, Homs, Aleppo, and Idlib.
Now Russia is fielding its own artillery and other ground
assets around Hama and Homs, greatly increasing Russia's own
soldiers' vulnerability to counterattack, and Moscow has
failed, as you said and as Assistant Secretary Patterson said,
to exact any humanitarian concessions from the Assad regime as
the price for Russian support. The regime continues to barrel-
bomb its own citizens with impunity, perhaps even emboldened by
Moscow's help.
None of this has been cost-free for Russia itself. In pure
economic terms, the price of its air campaign is estimated at
$2 million to $4 million per day, this at a time when average
Russians are feeling the pinch of recession brought on by
economic mismanagement, low oil prices, and sanctions applied
for the Kremlin's last military adventure in Ukraine.
Russian casualties are also reportedly on the rise,
although the Kremlin is again working overtime to mask them and
silence the loved ones of the lost. As the dumb bombs that
Russian is dropping inevitably hit the wrong targets--a market
in Damascus, the Aleppo provincial headquarters, and ammunition
dump of the Free Syrian Army--Russia is paying a very steep
price to its reputation in the fight against terror. That is
why, for now, we have limited our own military cooperation with
Russia to the most basic of aviation de-confliction procedures
to protect our own aircrews.
What would positive cooperation by Russia look like? First,
Russia would turn its guns on ISIL and stop the carnage in and
around Syria's western cities. As the price of its support,
Moscow would insist that Assad ground the helicopters and
planes that he is using to barrel-bomb innocents on a daily
basis. And it would urgently work with us, our allies, and U.N.
Envoy Steffan De Mistura to turn the statement of principles
that Secretary Kerry, Foreign Minister Lavrov, and 17 other
ministers and institutions released in Vienna last Friday into
a true ceasefire, a parallel political transition process, and
hasten the day that Assad's bloody tenure comes to an end.
The quality of our cooperation with Russia and Syria
depends on the choices that Moscow makes. In the meantime, as
the Secretary has said, and as Assistant Secretary Patterson
has outlined, we are accelerating the work we are doing to
support the moderate Syrian opposition and to protect Syria's
neighbors, including those in my area of responsibility, Turkey
and the countries of Europe.
Turkey has increased its own participation in the counter-
ISIL fight, opening its bases to U.S. and coalition members and
conducting its own airstrikes on ISIL targets inside Syria. As
we accelerate our own work with Turkey and other like-minded
partners to roll back ISIL in northern Syria, a collateral
benefit could be the creation of a space where Syrian civilians
are free from Assad's barrel bombs as well as ISIL's
atrocities.
A large number of Europeans have contributed aviation
assets for strike operations in Iraq and some are also
considering strike operations in Syria. We are obviously also
working with our allies and partners to address the refugee
crisis. We have provided Turkey with over $325 million in
assistance through the U.N. and private NGOs, and we have
provided $26.6 million for UNHCR operations in Europe,
including to help with food, water, and legal assistance for
refugees, including $600,000 now to respond to requests from
Western Balkan countries for equipment and training in the area
of border management.
As the Secretary's diplomatic efforts made clear, it is
going to take leadership and resolve by dozens of countries and
by the Syrians themselves to end the bloodshed there. In Vienna
last week, 17 assembled nations, the U.N., and the EU
reaffirmed the path forward to peace and a political
transition. It remains to be seen whether Russia, Iran, and the
Assad regime will join us in walking that path.
We look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ambassador Nuland follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Chairman Royce. Thank you, Ambassador Nuland.
I mentioned my frustration with how the administration has
approached Syria and ISIS. The fact is that we had the State
Department here, officials, in front of this committee 2 years
ago sounding the ISIS alarm, explaining that action had to be
taken.
The Iraqis and our own officials pushed for airstrikes
early on and pushed for those airstrikes when ISIS was most
vulnerable in Raqqa, in Syria, but the White House sat
paralyzed. Once the airstrikes did start--and that is after a
year of watching cities fall from Fallujah to Mosul and the
Central Bank being taken over by ISIS--after that, we finally
saw airstrikes averaging 19 a day, but in a circumstance in
which three-quarters, because of exceedingly restrictive rules
of engagement, three-quarters of those planes flew back to
their bases without dropping their ordnance. If we compare that
and consider the first Gulf War, Desert Storm, those airstrikes
averaged 1,000 combat sorties per day, not 19.
And now, enter the Russians. The State Department said that
this wouldn't impact our air mission over Syria. And yet, the
numbers that the committee put together say otherwise. In
October, while the Russians did 800 airstrikes for the full
month, mostly aimed, by the way, at the opposition, we managed
just 100 against ISIS.
Assistant Secretary Patterson, are we ceding the skies to
Russia here and, in effect, allowing the ISIS threat to grow,
because, after all, ISIS has gained territory here during this
timeframe? So say the NGOs on the ground.
Ambassador Patterson. Mr. Chairman, obviously, I am not
from DoD, but let me try to answer this question. Actually,
this question came up at a very high-level meeting, and I will
quote to you what a senior military officer said, which is we
don't hit targets we can't see--and this was in reference to
the very bad weather that had overtaken the area last week when
the strikes were limited--and that we can't be compared to the
Russians in any moral or operation or tactical sense.
The battlefield, I might suggest, Mr. Chairman, is very
different and a very complex battlefield mixed in with
civilians. There are very high standards vis-a-vis collateral
damage and civilian casualties that I would suggest the Russian
air force is not subject to, and that we are appropriately
subject to, which is different, very different, than the first
Gulf War and the amass of conventional forces.
So, that I think is at least a partial answer, Mr.
Chairman, to your question.
Chairman Royce. Well, from the way I perceive it here,
especially given my frustration with the first year of this
conflict and not utilizing any air power when it could be very
effective, we have a situation today where we are hitting the
bad guys in this, ISIS, 100 times, and the Russians are hitting
those that are opposed to ISIS and Assad 800 times. That is my
takeaway in a broad sense of where we are now.
But, Ambassador Nuland, this isn't just Russia reaching out
to save an old ally, when we look at those remarks. We are
seeing Russia and Iran work together in ways most had not
expected. I certainly don't think the administration expected
it. I don't think they expected we find Hezbollah fighters and
Iranian Quds Forces and Russian headquarters working together
in this kind of a circumstance.
But this was General Soleimani traveling to Moscow in the
middle of our nuclear negotiations and putting this plan in
place. Twice, as I understand it, he made that travel, in
violation, by the way, of the embargo. Again, something that
wasn't objected to when I raised the issue that the head of the
Quds Forces, who by the way was responsible himself indirectly
for the death of some 600 Americans, I am told by the Pentagon,
that he was in Moscow making arrangements with the Russians.
There was no protest that I am aware of, of this being a
violation of the travel ban.
Of late, Russian aircraft have been seen running Iranian
weapons into Syria. Again, that is a very clear violation of
the embargo which we all support.
So, what steps are being taken to uphold the U.N. arms
embargo on Iran in the face of the Russian violations?
Ambassador Patterson. Mr. Chairman, I am unaware of those
reports about the movement of Iranian arms into Syria on
Russian aircraft, but we will certainly get you a report as
soon as possible.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
I am out of time. I will mention, when Mr. Engel returns--
he is at the White House--we will give him ample time for his
opening statement and for his questions.
But, in the meantime, I think Karen Bass of California is
next in the queue.
Ms. Bass. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
In light of the President's statement last week that we
were deploying 50 Special Operation Forces to Syria, I wanted
to know what you see as their mission. Do you expect them to be
engaged in direct combat? And how can we be sure that this
limited deployment won't be a slippery slope to involve U.S.
troops?
I would join my colleague, Ms. Frankel, who said that, had
we not invaded Iraq years ago, that the whole region wouldn't
be destabilized as it is now. But, in light of that, I wanted
to know if you could respond.
I also want to ask you a couple of questions regarding a
future transitional government in Syria.
Ambassador Patterson. Thank you.
Let me say that I was in a briefing yesterday, and some of
these responses on the activities and location of the Special
Forces are classified.
Ms. Bass. Sure.
Ambassador Patterson. And so, perhaps we will come back to
you in a written answer on that.
Ms. Bass. Okay.
Ambassador Patterson. We would be very happy to do so. And
their exact role is also a classified response.
But let me also say that we are also deploying, as I
mentioned in my statement, additional aircraft to Incirlik. The
President is looking at a number of other options to intensify
our efforts in this battle space.
Ms. Bass. In terms of the future transitional government in
Syria, there were talks held in Vienna last week, and I wanted
to know if you could talk about those. In the future, what do
you feel is the best way to compel the regime to a negotiated
transition? And that is for either one of you.
Ambassador Patterson. Yes. Let me give you an outline, if I
might, a brief one, of the Secretary's conversations in Vienna
last week.
He brought together 20 countries, including the Russians
and the Iranians and our Gulf allies and the Turks, to discuss
a way forward. We agreed, obviously, to disagree on the future
of Assad, but he did plot a way forward on a transitional
government/constitutional reform, and a series of meetings and
working groups that would take place with the international
community, with the U.N., and with the opposition to try to
implement the Geneva Communique of 2012.
The next meeting will likely be in Vienna within the next 2
weeks. There will be a series of groups and consultations with
the U.N. beforehand and with the opposition. The idea is to
have a transitional government, to work on a timetable for
Assad's departure--and let me be clear that that is a critical
element of this policy--and, then, to work on constitutional
review and, ultimately, an election in Syria. That is the basic
outlines of Secretary Kerry's strategy.
Ms. Bass. So, at this point, if there were to be a
transitional government, who do you see composing that?
Ambassador Patterson. Well, a number of opposition figures
and people already on the ground. It would be key--and this was
in the Communique--that Syria's institutions, the military,
intelligence, police, civil service, would remain intact. So,
you wouldn't have a total collapse of state authority. The idea
is just to remove Bashar al-Assad----
Ms. Bass. Like what happened in Iraq?
Ambassador Patterson [continuing]. And his cronies from
power.
Ms. Bass. Thank you. I yield back my time.
Mr. Connolly. Would my colleague yield?
Ms. Bass. Oh, yes, sure.
Mr. Connolly. Ambassador Nuland, what in the world makes us
think Russia would agree to that? Why would Russia agree to a
transitional government with opposition figures and the removal
of Assad? And did you get that commitment?
Ambassador Nuland. Congressman, Russia did agree to that
general framework in 2012 when it signed onto the original----
Mr. Connolly. Well, that is before they started bombing and
military activities on the ground. It is now 2015. You had a
meeting in Vienna. Did the Russians agree?
Ambassador Nuland. So, as Assistant Secretary Patterson has
said, they have agreed to the general framework that we need a
ceasefire, we need a transitional government, we need
elections. The area of dispute is at what stage in that process
Assad departs the scene.
Mr. Connolly. Well, I must say my time is up, but given
what is happening on the ground, that sounds like fantasy to
me.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Chris Smith of New Jersey.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman for
calling this important hearing.
Welcome to our two distinguished witnesses.
Let me just ask a couple of questions. First, I chaired a
hearing last week with the Helsinki Commission on refugees
emanating or coming out of Syria, and the High Commissioner's
Regional Representative testified. His bottom line was that
there were two big trends that have led to the mass exodus.
One, a political solution will not be found anytime soon to the
war. Secondly, after so many years in exile, many people's
resources have dwindled to next to nothing.
But he said the third factor is the trigger. It is the
raison d'etre why people have up-staked and have made their way
into Europe. He said the trigger was that a few months ago
there was a lack of funding for the World Food Programme. They
cut their assistance by 30 percent. And he testified and said,
as a consequence, many refugees felt that the international
community could be starting to abandon them.
He pointed out as well that the interagency Syria Regional
Refugee and Resilience plan for 2015 is only 41 percent funded.
People are living on less than 50 cents a day. He said they
decided to go into flight.
My question would be, I know we are generous supporters of
the WFP and I am very glad that Congress and the administration
has done that. But did we anticipate that this might be a
trigger, that there was such a huge cut to the World Food
Programme?
Secondly, let me ask, as Iran reaps its billions of dollars
in windfall attributed to the Iranian nuclear deal, what is
your assessment? Of course, you could provide this in a written
form to elaborate on it. But what is your assessment of how
that cash might be used to assist Assad?
I also asked Assistant Secretary Richard last week about
establishing a P-2 program for especially minorities like the
Yazidis and the Christians who really don't pose a threat. I
know we have a very, very robust vetting process, as we ought
to, to ensure that we don't have ISIS or any other al-Qaeda
types embedded in the refugees that come here. But a P-2 that
targets people who are far less likely to be a threat to
Americans seems to be something that I hope is on the table
being very actively discussed.
I yield.
Ambassador Patterson. Mr. Smith, let me go through those as
quickly as possible. On the question of the reduction in WFP,
let me first say that we have done everything humanly possible
to increase our contribution to WFP and to also solicit
contributions from some or our prosperous allies in the Gulf
who, in truth, have come through with an enormous amount of
money, up to $2 billion for the Syrian refugees.
Mr. Smith. Pardon my interruption. But is that getting to
the people, so they know?
Ambassador Patterson. Did we anticipate that it would be a
trigger? I can't answer that, but we certainly anticipated that
it would be a huge problem and deprive these people of
desperately-needed resources. So, we are doing everything we
can to beef up our humanitarian support.
On the question of Iranian resources, I know this has been
a frequent discussion with this committee and with other
committees. The Iranian economy has been in free fall for the
past several years because of sanctions. We believe there are
huge pent-up needs in infrastructure, energy, reconstruction,
consumer demand that the Iranian Government will have to meet
and Rouhani, in particular, as an elected leader, will have to
meet. But I don't want to be naive, Mr. Smith, that some of
this money won't be used for the destabilizing activities of
General Qasem Soleimani.
Then, finally, I know that you had asked my colleague Anne
Richard that, about P-2 program. Let me say, of course, that
there is, frankly, a lot of concern, Mr. Smith, about people
coming out of this area, that they are properly vetted and
reviewed, given some of the history. But I know you have asked
that and, believe me, it will certainly be under consideration,
and we will get you a staffed-out answer.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Bill Keating of Massachusetts.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I realize you are not speaking for the Department of
Defense, as Assistant Secretary Patterson had mentioned.
However, I just want to ask you if you have been at briefings
and things you could disclose. Because in open hearings with
this committee and subcommittees, we have had witnesses,
generals, military experts, time after time saying that the
unilateral approach of just bombing itself would not be
effective strategy, that it had to be accompanied by the
ability with troops on the ground to hold that area they had
bombed. Otherwise, it was basically a worthless military
strategy and approach.
And so, it brings me back to my opening comments where I
said simply bombing by itself without the ability, whether it
be through Sunni Arab troops or other troops on the ground, or
in absentia U.S. troops, the criticism about not continuing on
that bombing aspect, it has to be incorporated with a land
force complement.
So, are you familiar with those kinds of discussions,
Assistant Secretary?
Ambassador Patterson. Yes, Mr. Keating, those topics, as
you suggest, are frequently discussed within the
administration. And let me first say that I think the bombing
campaign has had very considerable impact on the leadership of
ISIL. I can get you the exact figures, but a number of
prominent leaders have been essentially taken off the
battlefield and removed from office.
Mr. Keating. Can I just jump in? Thank you. Can I just jump
into this aspect? There has been a lot of discussion about
rules of engagement, and it is a very difficult issue. But
Russia is approaching this in a manner where, without
discrimination, they seem contented bombing and killing
innocent civilians, and not even trying to make efforts to
avoid doing that, as opposed to the U.S. policy which takes
that into consideration, as most countries in the world do. Can
you comment on the importance of following rules of engagement
to try, as the U.S. does, to minimize civilian deaths?
Ambassador Patterson. Yes, Mr. Keating. As I mentioned, we
have, particularly in this campaign, we have very strict, the
U.S. Air Force has very strict rules of engagement on
collateral damage, and that is in accordance with the
President's instructions that our job is to minimize civilian
casualties in every way possible.
It is not only, might I mention, Mr. Keating, a moral
issue, but it is also an issue of practicality, that you don't
want to alienate, that the United States does not want to
alienate the people on the ground.
If I might go back to your issue of the ground forces, let
me also say that one of our goals now is to work with partners
on the ground who can serve this role as ground troops in
support of a U.S. air campaign. We have supported, as you know,
the Syrian Kurds and the Syrian Arabs, the Syrian Arab
Coalition, and it has been very effective, I think, in closing
the border, both to the influx of foreign fighters and to the
export of refined products that provide revenue for ISIL.
Mr. Keating. Is it fair to say, is it a fair statement to
say that, not to categorize the Russian bombing actions as
decisive, but rather immoral? Is that a fair statement?
Ambassador Patterson. Yes, I would say that. I read
yesterday rather graphic reports of the civilian casualties
that they had inflicted on a village nearby. It seems quite
indiscriminate, if I might say so.
Mr. Keating. Okay. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Keating.
We go to Mr. Jeff Duncan of South Carolina.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for holding
this hearing.
We are seeing a tremendous migration crisis in Europe as a
result of the Syrian civil war and ISIS aggression in western
Iraq and in Syria. This migration crisis is really threatening
regional stability in Europe really to the tune that we hadn't
seen since probably the 1930s. It is mind-boggling when you
watch the videos of the number of migrants streaming into
Eastern European countries and now Western European countries.
I just have a question for Ambassador Nuland. Ambassador
Colleen Bell works for you, does she not? Okay. The Ambassador
to Hungary for the record.
Ambassador Nuland. Yes.
Mr. Duncan. You were also Ambassador to NATO. So, you
understand the key role that NATO countries play with the
security of the world and with cooperating with the United
States, correct? Hungary is a very valuable ally, NATO ally,
are they not?
Ambassador Nuland. Yes.
Mr. Duncan. So, why, then, after months of seemingly
improved relations between Hungary, a western democracy and a
NATO ally, as we have just confirmed, did the U.S. Ambassador
decide to launch an unprovoked attack on Hungary last week? You
are familiar with what Ms. Bell said, correct?
Ambassador Nuland. Congressman, I am not sure specifically
what comments of hers you may be referring to. She gave a
speech last week where she reaffirmed U.S. support for a
Hungary that is increasingly democratic. We have had concerns
about government policy with regard to attacking corruption. We
have had concerns about repression of media. I think she was
probably, if it is the speech on----
Mr. Duncan. She chastised the sovereign nation's ability to
secure its own borders and put fencing up, if they so chose,
did she not?
Ambassador Nuland. Again, I would have to go back and look
at precisely what she said. We have had concerns, as has the EU
as a whole, about EU member states erecting fences, against EU
policy, between each other. We have, instead, tried to support
the policy of the EU as a whole to work together and to be in
solidarity with each other in addressing the migrant crisis by
registering, by----
Mr. Duncan. I mean, I disagree. I disagree with some of
that, based on what she said. So, the question to you is, is
our diplomatic mission not to improve relations with our allies
or is it one to scold those we need in NATO in order to meddle
in their domestic affairs while stroking whatever egos are
satisfied by such actions? Is that our diplomatic mission
there?
Ambassador Nuland. Congressman, even with our NATO allies,
it has been the longstanding, one might argue 50-year, policy
of the United States to support an increasingly democratic,
stable, clean Europe. So, when we have concerns that a country
is not attacking corruption in its midst, when we have concerns
about the rollback of the democratic principles that undergird
NATO membership, we are going to speak out about it, yes.
Mr. Duncan. Well, Madam Ambassador, I disagree. I do think
you are meddling in the affairs of a sovereign nation. When we
look at the mass migration that is coming across Europe, are
you going to interfere and chastise Germany if they decide to
deal with the migrants that are affecting their nation? Are you
going to chastise Slovenia or some of the other nations who are
having to deal with this? They are having to deal with these
huge--almost 1 million migrants have made their way into
Eastern and now Western Europe. It is an issue, a crisis for
them. The demographic is going to change the political
atmosphere in those countries. These are sovereign nations that
are going to have to deal with this. It is going to be a strain
on their social programs, on their ability to do things for
their own citizens. The demands being placed on them by these
migrants, it is a game-changer in Europe.
Is the U.S. policy one to interfere with sovereign nations
in Europe and their ability to provide services for their own
citizens and deal with the migration crisis? Is that the policy
of the administration?
Ambassador Nuland. On the contrary, Congressman, we are
strongly supportive of the overall EU policy that they are
putting in place now, which is to support each other in
resettling these migrants appropriately and treating them
tolerantly and sharing the burden in contributing to post-
country--in providing more funds to those countries where
refugees are coming from.
Mr. Duncan. My time is just about up, Madam Ambassador.
Ambassador Nuland. However, when they start rebuilding
walls between themselves and among themselves in contradiction
of EU policy, we are going to support those who support----
Mr. Duncan. I would recommend that you listen to Ms. Bell's
statements and we have a retraction on that.
I yield back.
Chairman Royce. We go now to Lois Frankel of Florida.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you.
Well, first, I thank you for being here. I think you are
just hearing some frustration. You know not to take this
personally from anyone. But thank you.
First of all, I just want to say and applaud, I think, the
administration, the President, Mr. Kerry trying to get as many
of the relevant world leaders together to try to come to grips
with what is going on in Syria, is going in the right
direction. That is a good step.
It sounds to me that you, from comments especially--I
forget which one of you said this--but it sounds to me that it
is your opinion that Russia's actions in Syria are such that it
will be self-destructive. I think that is what I glean from
your comments.
But, in the meantime, before Russia self-destructs
themselves with what they are doing, there are so many innocent
people who are being harmed. So, my question is, what kind of
strategies or actions are you taking with Russia that can maybe
change their course? That is my first question.
Second is, what are we doing to actually protect the Syrian
civilians within Syria and are there any further plans or is it
hopeless to do a safe zone or a no-fly zone? Or is anything
else being considered that we have not heard about?
Ambassador Patterson. Ms. Frankel, let me say, first, that
we don't think this is a slam dunk from the Russians by any
means. They have basically got the whole Sunni world against
them now, and I think it is an analytical fact that we may not
have seen anything yet in terms of Jihad, because we have
already seen imams in the Gulf call for increased Jihad against
the godless Russian presence in Syria. So, I won't say they
have bitten off more than they can chew, but they certainly
have issues that they are going to confront, not the least of
which is their huge Islamic population inside and on the
perimeter of Russia vis-a-vis the civilians inside Syria, Ms.
Frankel.
Of course, half the assistance is provided, our
humanitarian assistance to the tunes of billions of dollars
provided to Syrians within Syria. Of course, there are zones we
can't reach. But in terms of safe zones--and I am glad you
asked this because there has been a lot of discussion about
this--this is a hugely-complex and resource-intensive issue.
And the administration has looked at this over and over and
over again, and there is no option on the table, nor
recommended by the Department of Defense, that does not require
a massive amount of air support would, then, detract from the
effort against ISIL. We continue to look at this. We continue
to study this, but there is no viable option on the table at
this time.
Ms. Frankel. Ambassador Nuland, did you have anything to
add?
Ambassador Nuland. Simply to say that we have been very
clear with the Russians about what we are seeing in terms of
the results of their strikes. The Secretary has spoken to
Foreign Minister Lavrov virtually every day; also, about our
insistence that they exact some kind of restraint out of Assad
for the support that they are giving, at least in the area of
barrel-bombing. We will continue to share not only with the
Russians directly, but with all of you and publicly, what we
see. I think, as Assistant Secretary Patterson said, what the
Secretary's hope is here is that, if you rope them into this
diplomacy, they will see a better way to a peaceful solution
than what they are doing.
Ms. Frankel. Just one more question. I think we all have
heard that the conditions for these Syrian refugees are dire,
especially at the borders. I heard stories yesterday that my
hair would go up straight if it could do that, but it sounded
horrible.
What kind of actions are you taking? I mean, I heard people
living out in the open, no sanitation, very little food. What
is the response?
Ambassador Patterson. Ms. Frankel, occasionally, the
neighboring countries close the border and these poor people
get caught in these pockets. Usually, that is short-lived and
the countries will open the border again. And so, we work with
them constantly on that issue, to get these refugees into their
countries.
Most of these countries are hosting these refugees in host
communities, and it puts a very significant strain on their
public services and education, which is why support from the
international community and continued financial support is so
important.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Royce. Thank you. Thank you, Ms. Frankel.
Okay. Mr. Darrell Issa of California.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ambassador, Ambassador.
Subject du jour, Syria. Fourteen years ago, I made my first
trip to Syria to meet with the unknown President Assad. He has
been pretty well-defined over 14 years, and the Alawite
dictatorship he heads has been pretty well defined over many
decades.
So, let me ask a question and, Ambassador Patterson, I
think I will primarily frame it to you. More than 4 years, this
administration called for regime change and not only did very
little to make that come about, but, then, directly and through
the Russians, negotiated various agreements, including,
obviously, the chemical weapons departure.
At this point, isn't it time to ask the question of, what
do we really want to achieve in Syria since, one, the so-called
Free Syrian Army has cost us some incredible number that I am
not even going to say on television again, because it has been
a complete failure. We have no Free Syrian Army. More Sunnis
are fighting independent of us than with us by a factor of
probably 1,000 to 1.
So, let me ask you it in succinct way. Ambassador, isn't it
time we figure out what is possible in a Syria that allows the
millions of Syrians, Sunni, Shia, Alawite, Christian to return
to their country?
Ambassador Patterson. Mr. Issa, we don't believe it is
possible to have any sort of settlement there, either a
political settlement or any military defeat of ISIL, without
the departure of Assad. These two issues now are inexorably
linked. He has turned out to be, as you know, a magnet for
terrorists all over the world, particularly, well, for many
countries, even including our own.
I guess I would differ from you that the Free Syrian Army
has been a bust. I think there are efforts underway that, if
corralled--and I know that you are aware of these efforts
underway that have corralled our Gulf allies and our European
allies in a common effort in Syria. So, I think there is really
no alternative but to talk about his departure.
Mr. Issa. Ambassador, I am not for a moment trying to
predetermine the departure of Bashar al-Assad. I happen to
agree with you that a future Syria should be a Syria with
greater Sunni representation, with rights of Christians
respected, and that he is probably not the ideal--he is a
failed leader in many ways and I think history has already
borne that out.
But my question, and the reason I am asking it this way,
is, if I were to ask you, do we have an effective battalion of
Free Syrian military, you would have to say no. If I said, do
we have an effective company, you would have to say no. If I
asked if we had an effective platoon, you would say, well, we
have got a platoon, but it is not quite effective.
I just left the Marines' 240th birthday. Trust me, if I
sent Marines in to evaluate those people, they would come up
short of effective for any of them, and it has been 4 years.
Isn't it true that the effective forces against Assad today
are, in fact, non-ISIS fighters who disagree, but are not
aligned with us; in other words, Sunnis who oppose Assad who
are being bombed by the Russians as we speak?
Ambassador Patterson. That is true in the north, Mr. Issa.
I would say that it is not true in the south. But, certainly,
in the north, the al-Nusra Front, which is an al-Qaeda
affiliate, has absorbed, as have other smaller groups, have
absorbed a number of what we would have previously called the
moderate opposition, yes, that is correct. It is not true in
the south, Mr. Issa, where I believe the moderate fighters are
holding their own and holding territory.
Mr. Issa. And let's go to the moderate fighters in the
south and the effect on Lebanon for just a moment, which is the
lead question people always assume I will ask. Today in Lebanon
it has been widely reported, unclassified, that, in fact, the
sectors that are being protected in Lebanon from ISIS are, in
fact, a combination of the Lebanese armed forces, wherever
possible, and Hezbollah in many of the Shia areas essentially
protecting their own.
Is that a workable solution and is the United States able
to ensure that the Lebanese armed forces continue to get what
they need will not unreasonably embolden Hezbollah for the
future?
Ambassador Patterson. Mr. Issa, I think the Lebanese armed
forces under the circumstances have done nothing short of a
remarkable job in protecting Lebanon. We have tried to increase
the flow of material to them. We have, as you know, a robust
training program by some of our highly-trained American forces.
We have worked particularly with the Saudis to get them some
additional funds to buy military equipment. It is an extremely
high priority. I think they just had an encounter with ISIL day
before yesterday. Contrary to many expectations, it seems to be
working.
Mr. Issa. And I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this
opportunity on Syria, and I want to thank the Ambassador for
pointing out the success, which is Lebanon hosting nearly a
third of its population as refugees while keeping ISIS out of
that country. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Issa, for making that point.
Joaquin Castro of Texas.
Mr. Castro. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you,
Ambassadors, for being here today, for your testimony, and,
most of all, for your service to the country.
My first question is on migration. What effect has the
Russian bombing campaign had on the flow of migrants, whether
it has changed it, whether it has increased it? What is our
read on that?
Ambassador Nuland. Congressman Castro, as I said in my
opening, we believe that it has led to an acceleration of
migrants into Europe, in particular. We have seen those upticks
in Greece, in Turkey, into Germany just since the Russian
bombing.
Mr. Castro. And have we found that the migrants intend to
stay in Europe or want to come back? What is our understanding
of that?
Ambassador Nuland. With regard to Syrians, what we are
getting from our European friends is that it is a mixed
picture. You know, those who have hope that their country can
come back together have left some relatives there and property,
but many of them have lost hope and are looking for permanent
resettlement in Europe, which is a question that Europe is
struggling with.
Mr. Castro. Sure. What about our Gulf partners? What role
have they played with respect to migration and refugees?
Ambassador Patterson. Our Gulf partners have been generous
with funding. The Kuwaitis, in particular, have hosted three
funding donors' conferences, given hundreds of millions of
dollars, the United Arab Emirates as well.
Perhaps the question you are asking is on the resettlement.
The Gulf countries do not take in refugees. What they do is
take in, basically, guest workers, and a number of the Gulf
countries have a large number of Syrian employees really, but
you cannot say that they are refugees. But they have been
generous with their money.
Mr. Castro. My second question is on the use of chemical
weapons. Of course, in 2013, Russia agreed to essentially
extract the chemical weapons from Syria, and Syria is now bound
by the Chemical Weapons Convention. What kind of use of
chemical weapons have we seen in Syria, specifically with
regard to chlorine gas?
Ambassador Patterson. We believe that we have seen chlorine
gas. It would be a violation of the Chemical Weapons
Convention, of which, of course, Syria is a signatory. We have
referred it to the Organization for Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons, and they are going to do an analysis and a report.
Once we receive that, we will decide what steps to take.
Mr. Castro. Have we determined that it is the Assad regime
that is using the chemical weapons or could it be other actors
as well?
Ambassador Patterson. Our strong judgment is it is the
Assad regime because they were seemingly dropped from
helicopters, which are not in the possession of the opposition.
Mr. Castro. Thank you. I yield back, Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Castro.
Now we go to Mr. Mo Brooks of Alabama.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In your opinion, is Russia's use of military force in Syria
good or bad, productive or counterproductive?
Ambassador Nuland. Congressman Brooks, I think we have been
pretty clear here that we do not think that Russia's military
intervention is leading to a settlement of the Syrian conflict,
that, instead, it is giving Assad confidence that he can stay
in power.
Mr. Brooks. Using words such as ``immoral'' to describe how
bad Russia's conduct in Syria, is that fair?
Ambassador Nuland. Assistant Secretary Patterson confirms
that word and I don't have a problem with it, either.
Mr. Brooks. What thought has been given to using a
diversion strategy whereby we force the Russian military to be
engaged in different parts of the globe; thereby, weakening
their abilities to prosecute their military aggression in
Syria? More specifically, how would a more aggressive military
action in the Ukraine impact Russia's limited ability to expand
its military operations in the Middle East? And by ``military
action,'' I am talking about where we arm the Ukrainians;
thereby, forcing the Russians to divert some of their military
capabilities from Syria and other parts of the globe to Ukraine
to try to protect the territory that they have either
unlawfully invaded themselves or assisted their proxies in
unlawfully invading.
Ambassador Nuland. Congressman, I think you know that we
have had a ceasefire in Ukraine that has largely been holding,
not completely, but largely been holding since September 1st. I
am confident that you would not be suggesting here that the
Ukrainians reignite the war to draw the Russians deeper into
conflict there. I don't think that would be good for Ukraine or
for the stability of Europe.
Mr. Brooks. Well, is this ceasefire, in actuality, just a
way in which the Russians and their proxies can consolidate
their territorial gains? Is that putting Ukraine in a position
where they have to forfeit hopes of recapturing the land
wrongfully taken by Russia and its proxies?
Ambassador Nuland. Congressman, under the Minsk Agreement,
as you know, the first step is ceasefire; the second step is
pull back of weapons, then political progress in the Donbass,
and then, return of the territory and closure of the border.
So, what we are now starting to see for the first time in the 2
years of this conflict is some pullback of Russian and
separatists' weapons. So, that is a good thing. We are seeing
that in Luhansk and now we are starting to see that in Donetsk,
even though the ceasefire is not complete and we have had some
tactical attacks in the last couple of days.
So, again, if you want Ukraine to get that territory back,
if you want Minsk implemented, what is most important is to
lean on Russia and the separatists to complete those
obligations, pull back their weapons, and allow real elections
and allow return of the border.
Mr. Brooks. Well, as of today, given the shifting of
military equipment, has any of the territory taken by Russia or
its proxies been returned to the Government of the Ukraine, any
significant amount of territory? And if you could, if you are
going to be able to answer that, give us all an idea as to how
much, what percentage of territory has been returned to the
Ukraine after Russia's invasion and how much has been kept in
the hands of the Russians, keeping in mind that the Crimea
itself is a rather large land mass.
Ambassador Nuland. About 7 percent of Ukraine, if you count
Crimea plus the occupation of eastern Ukraine, is lost to the
control of the Ukrainian Government. As I said, with this
ceasefire and the beginning of pullback of heavy weapons,
Ukrainian authorities have not had access to that territory,
but, increasingly, OSCE monitors have had access, and we need
to encourage and accelerate that process. If we can get to----
Mr. Brooks. One second. So, is your answer to the question
zero?
Ambassador Nuland. Zero.
Mr. Brooks. As of today, zero land has been returned to the
Ukrainian Government?
Ambassador Nuland. As of today, zero.
Mr. Brooks. How much in the way of weapons has the United
States delivered to the Ukrainian Government in order to
enhance Ukraine's ability to defend its territory?
Ambassador Nuland. Congressman, through bipartisan
generosity of both halves of this Congress, we have supplied
over $266 million in security support for Ukraine. That
includes extensive training of the national guard, now moving
on to training the military. We have provided lots of kinds of
non-lethal assistance, including UAVs----
Mr. Brooks. Okay. I am talking about weaponry. What
weaponry has been given to the Ukrainian Government to enable
it to defend its territory or to recapture territory taken by
Russia?
Ambassador Nuland. It depends how you define weaponry, but
we have provided counter-radar batteries, including short-range
and now longer-range ones----
Mr. Brooks. Any missiles?
Ambassador Nuland [continuing]. UAVs. We have not provided
lethal assistance to date.
Mr. Brooks. No tanks?
Ambassador Nuland. No, but we have provided combat vehicles
like humvees, night vision, combat protection, et cetera.
Mr. Brooks. Mr. Chairman, with indulgence, may I have 30
more seconds?
Chairman Royce. Yes, Mr. Brooks.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you.
The reason I mention this is due to the leadership of
Congressman Engel, who is not here at the moment, of New York,
the House passed a resolution in March of this year by a 348-
to-48 vote, about an 88-percent-to-12-percent bipartisan vote,
which is overwhelming in the United States House of
Representatives and to some degree a little bit unusual.
That resolution of the House of Representatives in an
overwhelming bipartisan fashion stated,

``That the House of Representatives strongly urges the
President to fully and immediately exercise the
authorities provided by Congress to provide Ukraine
with lethal defensive weapon systems to enhance the
ability of the people of Ukraine to defend their
sovereign territory from the unprovoked and continuing
aggression of the Russian Federation.''

I would hope that you would carry back to this
administration that message with a double benefit. One is we
help Ukraine fight against aggression and, two, I would submit
that it weakens Russia and Syria, which, in turn, helps to
alleviate some of the problems that we have there.
Thank you for your indulgence.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Brooks.
Robin Kelly of Illinois.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
About 10,000 ISIS fighters have been killed this past year,
but it seems like, despite that, they have been replaced by new
recruits, new fighters. If we are going to destroy them, how do
we cut off those new fighters, those new recruits?
Ambassador Patterson. That is a big challenge, Congressman,
and let me tell you the steps that are being taken. First,
there is a step, under General Allen's leadership, who
regrettably he is soon to leave the position. We have developed
a number of working groups with our allies, for instance, with
the United Arab Emirates, to try to message, to try to get to
these young men and persuade them that ISIL isn't a viable
future.
We have worked with the Turkish Government--Ambassador
Nuland can speak more to that--to close the border. And again,
most of the border now is closed. We have worked with them to
deport individuals who try to cross over into Turkey, into
Syria.
We have worked with our Gulf allies, again, to increase
their message and their surveillance of individuals who might
undertake extremist activities in Syria.
But it is a big challenge, Congresswoman, because ISIL has
managed to tap into Sunni grievances in a very big way. But we
continue to press on this. I believe we are having some modest
success, but, obviously, that is key to restraining the growth
of ISIL.
Ms. Kelly. What do you think about even the Americans going
over? Have we had success in decrease those amounts?
Ambassador Patterson. I think, all told, Congresswoman,
there are really just a handful of Americans. I think, frankly,
our law enforcement agencies and the communities that they work
with, I think that is the key in the United States, is to have
good relations in these communities, who then will alert law
enforcement to a young man, mostly young men, who are
susceptible to these blandishments.
And the use of the internet and the sophistication of these
messages is very alarming. But I think, as time goes on, we are
getting better and better about understanding the
countermessage and how the countermessage differs by culture
and by country.
Ms. Kelly. We don't talk much about the al-Nusra Front in
Syria. What is our strategy to deal with that group of
fighters?
Ambassador Patterson. The al-Nusra Front is an al-Qaeda
affiliate. They are a designated terrorist organization. They
have been successful on the battlefield in the north, and they
have absorbed some, what I would call, non-extremist fighters
because their own groups have been affected and because they,
essentially, have nowhere else to go.
So, our strategy is that they are a terrorist group. They
will not be part of any political settlement that is developed
over time.
Ms. Kelly. I yield back the balance of my time. Thank you.
Mr. Connolly. Would my friend yield?
Ms. Kelly. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. I thank my friend.
Ambassador Nuland, I want to go back to the understandings
with Russia. We had this meeting with 20 countries that the
Secretary pulled together. Russia was there. Russia has been
violating Turkish air space. Was there a discussion at that
meeting and an understanding that Russia will cease and desist
against our NATO ally?
Ambassador Nuland. The day of the Russian incursion into
Turkish air space, the Secretary called Foreign Minister Lavrov
immediately. As you know, the NATO Alliance also issued a
strong statement of support for----
Mr. Connolly. And did you get an assurance from the
Russians they would cease and desist, was my question.
Ambassador Nuland. My understanding is that the Turks have
now sought and gotten a reassurance from the Russians that they
will cease and desist.
Mr. Connolly. But not us in the Vienna meeting that we
called together?
Ambassador Nuland. Well, we have made clear that it is
unacceptable to be incurring NATO air space.
Mr. Connolly. And did we do that in Vienna? Did we get any
kind of assurance from the Russians?
Ambassador Nuland. Again, they have made clear to us that
they do not intend to do it again, but, obviously, we have to
watch they do rather than what they say.
Mr. Connolly. Do we have any understanding in terms of
rules of engagement with the Russians in terms of their
military activities in Syria? This hearing is about Russia's
escalation in Syria.
Ambassador Nuland. Congressman, in terms of direct
negotiations, as you know, the Department of Defense conducted
a very limited air de-confliction exercise with the Russians.
We have an agreement on safe flight, which we have now tested,
but we are not collaborating with them on where they can be and
where we can be.
Mr. Connolly. No, no. My question isn't collaboration. It
is rules of engagement to make sure that there is not an
inadvertent collision between our Air Force and theirs, our
counselors and theirs, and the like.
Ambassador Nuland. That was the goal of this agreement,
this Memorandum of Understanding, that we have now concluded,
that we will stay away from each other. We have an emergency
hotline. We have emergency communications----
Mr. Connolly. So, they are in place? Okay.
Ambassador Nuland [continuing]. To protect our pilots,
particularly because of the kind of flying that they do.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, and I thank my colleague for
yielding.
Chairman Royce. Now we go to Mr. Randy Weber of Texas.
Mr. Weber. Before I begin, Mr. Chairman, let me tell my
friend Gerry Connolly I am not going to yield to you. You have
gotten more time than all of us combined. Just kidding, Ger.
Ambassador Nuland, let me follow up with----
Mr. Connolly. Were you yielding?
Mr. Weber. No, no.
Ambassador Patterson, let me follow up with your exchange
with Congressman Keating when he said that some of the generals
have said the air war wouldn't do it at all, and you said you
had been involved in those conversations. Do you recall that
exchange earlier today?
Ambassador Patterson. Yes.
Mr. Weber. Is the President aware of those conversations?
Ambassador Patterson. The President and our senior
leadership meet very frequently on these issues, of course.
Mr. Weber. How long have those conversations been going on?
Ambassador Patterson. Quite a while, Mr. Weber.
Mr. Weber. A year? Two?
Ambassador Patterson. Easily. Easily.
Mr. Weber. Okay. Just curious.
Ambassador Nuland, you said that Russia was spending $2.5
million per day on their military excursion into the Ukraine. I
am sorry, we don't know what it is in the Ukraine, but into
Syria. How long can they sustain that?
Ambassador Nuland. What I said was $2 million to $4 million
a day, just to be clear.
Mr. Weber. Okay.
Ambassador Nuland. And it may well be more than that. You
know, in a country like Russia where there is only one prime
decisionmaker, if Russia chooses to make this a priority over--
--
Mr. Weber. Okay.
Ambassador Nuland [continuing]. The welfare of its own
people, it could sustain it for some time.
Mr. Weber. So, you have not calculated that? What is the
U.S.'s outlay of expense on a day? Do we know that?
Ambassador Patterson. I'm dated, Mr. Weber, but the last
time I asked, it was about $8 million a day.
Mr. Weber. So, four times, or if you use the two, two to
four times the amount Russia is using, but we are getting one-
eighth the amount of airstrikes? Is that what I am to
understand?
Ambassador Patterson. Mr. Weber, that would include Iraq,
the entire air campaign. But, again, we are not the Russians.
Mr. Weber. Okay.
Ambassador Patterson. And we have different standards.
Mr. Weber. All right. And then, you said earlier--it might
have been Ambassador Nuland--that the Gulf countries were not
taking any refugees, but they had been very generous with their
money. Was that you, Ambassador Patterson?
Ambassador Patterson. That's right.
Mr. Weber. Okay.
Ambassador Patterson. That's right, Mr. Weber. I have the
list of----
Mr. Weber. Okay. Well, I am fascinated by my colleague Mo
Brooks' idea of arming those in the Ukraine to maybe divert
some of Russia's attention to increase, maybe to help defend
Ukraine and to increase Russia's expense and cost, and maybe
deflect them some from Syria.
If the Gulf countries are, as one of you said--I think you
said it was you--are very generous with their money, would they
help in that regard to arm some of the Ukrainians against the
Russians? Has that question been raised to them?
Ambassador Patterson. As far as I know, that question has
never risen, Mr. Weber.
Mr. Weber. How about the question why won't they take
refugees?
Ambassador Patterson. Because they have very different
types of societies, and I know that----
Mr. Weber. But they do want their society to continue as
they know it, right? And if ISIL overruns their societies, it
will be gone?
Ambassador Patterson. Yes, and they have a very--we have a
very close degree of intelligence and military cooperation with
our GCC, Gulf Cooperation partners, GCC partners. On cyber, on
military, on intelligence, we have a very close relationship.
So, yes, we work closely in anti-ISIL activity.
Mr. Weber. But they could put up temporary camps if they
are concerned about their society, tent cities, if you will,
and they could actually take refugees and house them and feed
them probably with a lot more money than some of the European
nations, wouldn't you agree, if they were willing?
Ambassador Patterson. I am not sure that is true actually
because the level of social services and infrastructure is
vastly better in Europe. But, of course, we do want the Gulf to
play a more active role and we do encourage them and we do want
them to provide funding for these activities.
Mr. Weber. Okay. Now what happens--and Gerry Connolly asked
the question about what if there was a problem between the
United States aircraft and the Russian aircraft--in your
opinion, what is going to happen when the Russian aircraft
drops, the Russian military drops a bomb on some of our 50
advisors over there? What happens?
Ambassador Patterson. Well, we have these de-confliction
procedures in place, as Ambassador Nuland just outlined, these
de-confliction procedures that they were designed to avoid any
conflict between Russia and----
Mr. Weber. If that happens, would our pilots be authorized
to shoot that plane down that dropped the bomb?
Ambassador Patterson. I can't speculate on that.
Mr. Weber. Ambassador Nuland, do you have any knowledge?
Ambassador Nuland. Without getting into classified
information, I would simply say that where we anticipate these
special operators being, the Russians have been very far from
that territory because, as you know, these special operators
are operating against, would be operating against ISIL. And our
concern is that Russia is operating in support of Assad.
Mr. Weber. Well, let's keep our fingers crossed.
I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Dr. Ami Bera of California.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am going to play off some of the comments that my
colleague from Illinois, Ms. Kelly, talked about. Our goal is
to defeat and destroy ISIL, and it is clear that we don't have
the forces, but we have had some success in terms of the forces
on the ground.
I think Ms. Kelly pointed out that the anti-ISIL coalitions
killed about 10,000 ISIS fighters, and part of our challenge is
that they are being replaced. We can have success, but some of
it is stopping the replacement.
I think, Ambassador Patterson, you talked about doing what
we can at the borders certainly, doing what we can on tracking
the fighters that are leaving some of the North African
countries, some of the Middle Eastern countries, and even some
of the Western States.
I do think we are losing the propaganda war, though, right?
I think ISIL has shown to be able to use the internet very
efficiently, social media very efficiently. And maybe,
Ambassador Patterson, this is a question for you. Are we doing
enough to counter this propaganda war, to slow down their
ability to recruit?
Ambassador Patterson. This is a big challenge, but I think
we are getting better at it. For instance, we have a joint
center with the United Arab Emirates and it has to be in Arabic
and it has to be in an Arab country. They have begun to put out
products that are designed to discourage mostly young men from
joining ISIL.
We are working with a broad range, under General Allen's
coalition, we have a working group on messaging. We have now a
very large operation at the State Department and with the
intelligence community that works on designing the most
appropriate message for these individuals. So, I think we are
making progress.
We are also making progress--let me take Tunisia. Tunisia
has the most Jihadis per capita of any country in the world.
But in the past year we have worked intensively with them on
intelligence issues and countermessaging and training religious
leaders to counter that message.
So, again, I certainly don't want to overstate this, but I
think we have gotten better and are making at least some
marginal progress.
Mr. Bera. I think I would echo--the chairman has certainly
led us on a number of hearings here. We have to redouble our
efforts on the propaganda war, because if we can stop it on the
front end, we won't have to fight them on the battlefield. And
I do think we are losing that front-end propaganda war through
social media and the internet.
Ambassador Nuland, I would agree with you, very much so,
that Russia's involvement is very counterproductive. It is
exacerbating an already-challenging situation in Syria and
certainly is escalating the refugee crisis and does threaten to
wreak havoc in some of our allies, Jordan, Turkey. You are
seeing our European allies struggle with this refugee crisis.
I know there has been some discussion--and it is not easy--
about creating a safe zone within Syria and a no-fly zone
within Syria where some of the Syrians that are fleeing some of
the conflict zones can go. I would be curious about what it
would take to potentially create that zone, Ambassador
Patterson, or whoever.
Ambassador Patterson. It would take a massive commitment of
air power. It would take a massive commitment of air power, and
it would detract the air assets from the fight against ISIL.
There is no option, Congressman, that has been put on the table
so far within the administration that is considered viable
because of the enormous resources that it would require to
protect the population within it.
Mr. Bera. Okay. Great. Again, is that an option that is
being discussed? Again, not an easy option, nothing about Syria
is easy.
Ambassador Patterson. It is constantly being discussed and
it is constantly under review, but that is the current status
of it.
Mr. Bera. Okay. Great.
Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Bera.
We now go to Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, our chairman emeritus.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome, Ambassadors.
I continue to be extremely frustrated by the
administration's inability to implement or even articulate a
strategy in Syria or in the Middle East as a whole. Despite the
public facade, it does not appear that the President really
wants Assad removed from power or that we have any
understanding of the long-term tragic impact that Assad's
policies are having on the Syrian people, on the region, our
allies, on our national security, or else we know it and don't
wish to do anything about it.
Do we really need additional evidence to prove that the
current chaos is not working? The President seems to be running
out the clock until it is someone else's problem, and I don't
think history will look kindly on the choices that this
administration has made on the Syria issue.
Some questions for you, and I would like to get yes-and-no
answers, if I could. Do you believe that ISIL and Assad are
separate issues?
Ambassador Patterson. No, at this point----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you.
Ambassador Patterson [continuing]. Ms. Ros-Lehtinen, they
are linked.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And do you agree that Assad's atrocities
against his own people are a recruiting tool for ISIL?
Ambassador Patterson. Absolutely.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Is it possible to defeat ISIL while
Assad's massacres continue with Iran and Russia's help?
Ambassador Patterson. No, the two issues are linked.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Is it possible to negotiate a solution
with the opposition while they continue?
Ambassador Patterson. Possibly.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Are we pressuring Iran and Russia to stop
Assad's massacre?
Ambassador Patterson. Absolutely, on a daily basis.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Should we infer that the President agrees
more with Russia and Iran's goal of keeping Assad in power than
he would have us believe?
Ambassador Patterson. Certainly not. The President and
certainly the Secretary have said many times that Assad's
departure is absolutely critical to any future in Syria.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. What has the President and the White
House, through the Secretary of State, communicated to you
about the administration's desired end-state and national
security objectives in Syria, and is it possible to achieve
those goals when Russia and Iran's goals are the complete
opposite?
Ambassador Patterson. The Secretary--of course, we have
different goals in Syria--but I think the Secretary's goal is
to find sufficient common ground through a process of
negotiation and a political settlement, that we might be able
to find a way through this. He is not naive about this. This is
what the whole Vienna process and followup process is about.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And when you say common ground and a
political settlement, does that entail keeping Assad in power?
Ambassador Patterson. No, absolutely not, but it might
entail some negotiation on a timetable for his departure.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And we would be working with who to try
to achieve that settlement to have him go somewhere else?
Ambassador Patterson. We are working with--in the Vienna
process are 20 different countries. Obviously, our Gulf allies
and the Turks. The Turks are intimately involved with this, as
are some of our European allies. And we are constantly in touch
with the U.N. and members of the moderate opposition and armed
opposition within Syria and those civilian leaders in exile.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Those allies, do they see Assad's removal
from power as imperative to deal with this situation?
Ambassador Patterson. Certainly our European allies, our
Gulf allies, and Turkey do see that. They are absolutely
determined that he will not remain in power.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And to follow up on Ms. Frankel's
questions, there is a lot of talk in different communities that
we represent about whether the United States is doing enough to
protect Syrian civilians from the Assad regime. Is that still
one of the priorities of this administration, and how is that
priority manifested?
Ambassador Patterson. Certainly we try. We have provided
over $2 billion, $2.5 billion, for humanitarian assistance
inside Syria. So, we are certainly trying to feed and support
Syrian populations who are under great stress.
And we have certainly, as you mentioned, raised before, we
have certainly talked with the Russians about preventing Assad
from attacking his own people.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And the bombs that we have seen that have
been attacking some of the forces with whom we are dealing and
we are protecting and we are arming, and yet, some of those
airstrikes seem to be targeting the very folks who are supposed
to be the good guys in this battle. What are we doing to make
sure that that ends?
Ambassador Patterson. That is absolutely true,
Congresswoman. We mentioned, I think, that 85 to 90 percent of
the strikes were against anti-regime forces.
And on your second question, we can talk more about that in
a classified setting.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Just one last question; I know I am out
of time. There has been a lot of discussion in the open press
about like-minded factors like the al-Nusra Front being part of
this coalition that will, then, defeat another band of bad
guys. Are we in that coalition-building with folks who we would
normally see as our enemies and the enemies of our values?
Ambassador Patterson. Nusra Front is an al-Qaeda affiliate.
It is possible that some members of the opposition have been
forced to adhere, to join to al-Nusra because they had nowhere
else to go. The al-Nusra Front and its leadership are terrorist
groups.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And we will remain with that thinking and
not help those groups with their alliances with other----
Ambassador Patterson. No, we have designated Nusra.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Ileana.
We go now to David Cicilline of Rhode Island.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you to our witnesses for being here
and, of course, for your service.
But I have to tell you I remain very concerned that the
absence of a coherent strategy for success in Syria and Iraq to
defeat ISIL, and further complicated by Russian escalation and
really a failure to define what success is, continues to really
plague us in Syria. Of course, the best way to press the
administration and Congress to do this is to vigorously debate
an authorization for the use of military force, during which
the President would be required to articulate a strategy and to
persuade both the American people and Congress of the
likelihood of success of that strategy.
And I recognize this is complicated. There are not easy
answers. But I think it is compounded. Frankly, Ambassador
Patterson, in your written testimony you indicate that our
strategy in the Syrian conflict remains the same, essentially
using diplomacy and military action to achieve a political
transition. Of course, that is not a strategy; that is a goal.
And so, I think what we are really looking for and what we
need is a detailed plan of action with goals and a plan to
mobilize resources to achieve those goals. That is really a
strategy. I think that is really what we are missing and what I
think is critical.
But I want to ask some very specific questions. You said,
Ambassador Patterson, in your testimony that the coalition has
made progress in our military campaign against ISIL. But,
according to Al Arabiya, as of October of this year, ISIL
controls half of all the territory in Syria as opposed to July
2014, when they controlled about a third of Syrian territory.
So, first, is that correct, that ISIL, in fact, controls
more territory now than they did in the summer of 2014? And if
so, how is that progress?
Ambassador Patterson. I think they do, they may control
more land territory, but certainly there has been progress
against ISIL in Tikrit and Bayji, in the efforts in Ramadi.
Again, there has been considerable progress against the
leadership. The top of my head, I think 60 leaders of ISIL,
including some very important ones, have been taken off the
battlefield. The effort by Special Forces against Abu Sayyaf,
who was a leader of ISIL, and against his wife was an
intelligence bonanza. So, there has been progress, but, as the
President and everybody else has said, this is obviously going
to be a multi-year campaign that is going to require consider
resources to prosecute.
Mr. Cicilline. With respect to the moderate opposition,
there has been a lot of discussion about supporting the
moderate opposition and that appears to be at least a tactic in
our Syrian response. Who is the moderate opposition? The
President has just authorized another $100 million expenditure,
so now totaling $500 million. There are reports that there are
as many as 1,000 armed militia groups and that much of the
success of the larger groups, the FSA, comes about as a result
of working alongside some of the most hard-line groups. So, who
are we talking about when we are speaking about moderate
opposition and do they, in fact, include elements of al-Qaeda
and al-Nusra and other more extremist groups?
Ambassador Patterson. Well, let me take the civilian
moderate opposition, too, and that is the assistance figure
that you are referring to. That is groups within Syria and
groups that live in Turkey and Lebanon and other places.
What that project is designed to do is to keep these people
not only alive physically, but also keep them viable for a
future Syria. Because we have managed to, even areas under
control of ISIL--I won't mention them--but we have managed to
provide money to city councils, to health clinics, to teachers
and policemen. So, these people can still provide public
services and form the basis for a new Syria. That is a good
portion of that money goes into efforts like that.
There is also the opposition on the ground. I think they
have sort of gotten a bum rap in this hearing because I think
they are more extensive than is generally recognized,
particularly in the south. And, yes, of course, in the north,
some of these individuals have affiliated with Nusra because
there was nowhere else to go. But I think there is a wide range
of moderate commanders that we have worked with closely, and I
think they are viable and will be able to play a part in the
future of Syria.
Mr. Cicilline. Finally, the President, obviously, has just
announced 50 Special Forces will be dispatched to Syria to
advise and assist Kurdish forces in that region. Can you tell
me what the end-goal of this is? What is the objective? How can
we be sure that this limited deployment doesn't begin a very
slippery slope and a wider, deeper military engagement in the
Syrian civil war?
Finally, you mentioned the financial support of the Gulf
nations for the refugees. We have heard from a number of
refugee organizations that there is not sufficient financial
support from Gulf countries. I know you mentioned Qatar, but
are there other countries in the Gulf that are not doing as
much as they should? Because we are hearing a very different
representation from refugee organizations that are charged with
actually dealing with the crisis on the ground.
Ambassador Patterson. Let me provide you right after this
hearing with a list of support I have from the Gulf. I think
some of the traditional refugee agencies, there is not enough
money. There is simply not enough money for this enormous
humanitarian catastrophe. Let me stress that.
But I think the Gulf nations have both been generous with
the U.N. and often their money is put through local Red Cross
and Red Crescent societies, their local NGOs and PVOs. And so,
perhaps there is some concern about that, that they are not
going through the big international NGOs. But I will provide
you with that.
Mr. Cicilline. And what about the 50----
Ambassador Patterson. On the 50, we talked a lot about the
strategy of ground support and working with partners. These 50
Special Forces are to work with the Syrian Arab Coalition,
which has had considerable success in closing the border, and
to improve their capacity. I think, anything else, we will
provide it to you in a classified letter.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Cicilline.
We go now to Mr. Dana Rohrabacher of California.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much.
Let me just say that I am very frustrated by talk about
Russia. I spent my entire life trying to defeat the Soviet
Union, and I was very pleased to be part of the Reagan
administration that helped accomplish that goal of bringing
down a regime that wanted to impose an atheist dictatorship
throughout the world in order to promote their ideology.
And Russians expect to be treated as friends, the Russian
people, after the fall of communism. And what has risen instead
is a hostility that is just so overwhelming that it is
damaging, not only has been damaging Russia and their ability
to establish themselves in a new world role, because it is,
after all, a major power in the world and they have interests.
No matter if they are not communists at all, they are a major
power with interests, just as we are.
But the double standard that we have been judging Russia,
and even is present in the hearing today, is just overwhelming.
We sit here and say, ``Oh, well, Russia wants to keep Assad in
power, how horrible that is because Assad is a dictatorship,''
as if Saudi Arabia isn't a dictatorship and wouldn't murder
millions of people or thousands of people to stay in power.
What about the other Gulf states run by kingdoms who would
murder their people in great number? They are no different than
Assad. In fact, they might be better than Assad because some of
them are religiously-motivated to the point that it was sort of
like communism was a religious conviction; well, their form of
Islam sometimes puts them at odds with Sunnis or Shiites
killing each other.
The double standard that we have been judging Russia with,
and basing our policy on that double standard, has caused us
great harm. Great harm. Putin 5 years ago tried to work out a
compromise with us, and we turned him down, that would have
created at least some sort of semblance of stability in Syria.
And now, it has totally gone to hell, and we still can't get
ourselves to try to look at Putin as a possible partner in
cooperation to make things better.
I believe it is our hostility toward Russia that has
prevented us from creating a policy that will create a more
stable Middle East. And Gaddafi, we made an agreement with him
about Gaddafi. And what did we do? We broke that agreement, and
has that resulted in order to have the alternative, the non-
Gaddafi, non-Islamic alternatives into power, did that make it
any better there? No. Libya today, half of Libya is controlled
by people who want to murder us because they are radical
Muslims.
Had we been working with the Russians all along in good
faith, I believe this situation in the Middle East would have
been totally different and better, stayed more stable. And let
me just note that I can remember the charges, the monstrous
charges against us in Iraq, how horrible it was; our troops
were murdering people by the thousands. Most of those reports
were false, were wrong. They were lies by people who wanted to
achieve a political end by claiming that we were massacring
people intentionally in Iraq.
Well, I don't know, is it possible that some of these
reports that we are getting--yes, Assad is a murderous
dictator, but some of the magnitude of his oppression and his
murder of his own people might be exaggerated to achieve
certain political ends. I would think so.
We have a little time to answer. Let me give you a
question, so you can--please feel free to disagree with
everything that I say. I believe it, and I know you have your
beliefs, too, and they are honest disagreements.
But let me just ask, then, about, if, indeed, Assad is
removed and we get this third alternative, why won't it be just
the same as happened with Gaddafi, where the radical Islamists
who hate us now see a weaker adversary, and it will come in and
replace whatever that regime is very quickly with a regime that
will control all of Syria and they will be radicals that will
be our worst nightmare? Why wouldn't that happen in Syria the
way it happened in Libya?
Ambassador Patterson. I need to say something, Mr.
Rohrabacher.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Please feel free to retort what I said.
Ambassador Patterson. With respect, I can't let it go by,
the comparison of Bashar al-Assad with our Gulf allies. These
countries are not in our image, but there is no way that they
oppress their citizens or kill their citizens to the extent
that Bashar al-Assad is.
But let me----
Mr. Rohrabacher. You are saying they wouldn't do that? They
would not engage in use of the military to suppress their
people if their guest workers decided to rise up?
Ambassador Patterson. Yes, I am saying that, Mr.
Rohrabacher.
Mr. Rohrabacher. They wouldn't? That is very naive.
Ambassador Patterson. Saudi Arabia is a country I know
well, and they would not do that. That is not how it works
there.
But let me try to answer your question about Syria. There
is broad consensus in the international community that the
institutions in Syria would remain intact, the intelligence,
the military, the police, the civil service, the ministerial
structures, and that the goal is to remove Bashar al-Assad and
his closest advisors and have ths political process that would
lead to a new government. So, it is not to destroy the
institutional structure.
In Libya, I would argue there weren't any institutions.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. You have outlined it well.
Ambassador Patterson. It is a very different----
Mr. Rohrabacher. You have outlined it well.
Why do we have to go in and make that decision in Syria?
Why is it for the United States to step into this far-off land
rather than going to perfect--there are lots of places we could
go and perfect. Why is it for us to have to go in and do that
when we know that you have got these radical Islamists who are
just waiting on the sideline for some type of instability that
they could take advantage of?
Ambassador Patterson. Because our national security is at
stake in the region, and the security of our allies like Israel
and the GCC countries and Lebanon and Jordan, Turkey, is
ultimately affected by what happens in Syria.
Mr. Rohrabacher. That's right, and our policies are making
the instability worse. In fact, dealing with Putin instead of
trying to demonize him, perhaps we could have had more
stability there and our friends would be actually better off
than the current policy of, whatever we do, don't work with
Russia and get rid of Assad. Putin is also helping us, by the
way, with the General el-Sisi who we only give just lip service
to try to help the man who has a pivotal role in stability in
the Middle East.
Chairman Royce. We need to go to Grace Meng of New York.
The time has expired.
Ms. Meng. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses for being here and all that you do for our country.
My question is about growing concern of advanced Russian
arms entering Syria at unprecedented levels and the possibility
for advanced arms to pass to Syrian forces and even to groups
like Hezbollah, which is high. What is the U.S. prepared to do
to counter this? What have we done? What could we do more of to
ensure these Russian arms don't end up in the hands of
Hezbollah?
Ambassador Nuland. Well, we have the same concerns that you
do about the advanced weaponry flowing into Syria from Russia,
from Iran. We have raised these concerns regularly with the
Russians, including at the Presidential level, and we are
continuing to monitor what exactly happens with them. The
Russians, as you know, have now made a decision to put in
ground artillery, and that is exacerbating the conflict further
in Hama and in Homs.
Ms. Meng. My second question is, Russia has conducted a
number of airstrikes on rebel locations in the Syrian Golan,
some strikes which are only about 30 to 40 miles from the
Israeli border. Iran has also sent troop and military advisors
to shore up Assad's rule, including on the Golan Heights,
bringing Iran's influence directly to Israel's doorstep.
Jihadist groups, including ISIS and al-Nusra, also continue to
gain territory in northern and souther Syrian, including along
the Golan Heights.
In your opinion, how likely is it that fighting in Syria
could spill over into Israel and what are the major concerns
from the Israelis? And what can the U.S. do to help?
Ambassador Patterson. Congresswoman, nothing is more
important to us as a national strategic interest than Israel's
security. And all these elements that you have raised, the
Russian strikes, the pressure on Nusra in the Golan Heights,
the Iranian presence, we are in constant contact with the
Israeli Government and are working very collaboratively on
this.
I would say the Israelis can pretty much take care of this
problem, and they have shown that in a number of ways that we
can perhaps discuss later. But we have lots of collaboration on
this issue.
And on a broader issue, the Prime Minister, of course, will
be here. We have given millions of dollars, billions of
dollars, including Iron Dome, over the past 3 years. We will be
discussing ways that we can enhance Israel's security
generally, but these are concerns that we share with Israel and
we meet with them and address them in all kinds of ways.
Ms. Meng. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. McCaul [presiding]. Thank you.
My question, first on Syria and, then, Iran. I have been
briefed on the target packages in Syria. I think as you
indicated, let me say, first of all, when you don't have a
strategy and you fail to have a strategy, you end up with a
power vacuum. And now, we have Russia filling that power
vacuum, not unlike the terrorists do. And now, it has really
created a complicated situation, from my perspective.
When I look at the target packages of Russian strikes, as
you mentioned, 90 percent are anti-Assad; only 10 percent are
even remotely targeted toward ISIS. It raises a question of,
why is Russia there? What is their intent?
I have talked to our partners in the Middle East. Some say
that Russia has told them it is to defeat ISIS, and then,
others tell me that the only reason they are there is to
support the Assad regime.
Very briefly, what do you believe is Russia's intent in the
region?
Ambassador Patterson. Well, I think their main intent--they
have several intents--but their main intent was to shore up
Bashar al-Assad. He was losing ground, significant ground, when
they decided to come in. They also want to protect their
interests in Tartus. They want to reassert themselves, as
Ambassador Nuland said. But their primary interest was to shore
up Bashar al-Assad.
Mr. McCaul. I tend to agree with that, and here is the
problem that this now presents: You know, 50 Special Forces
guys, they are our best, but that is not going to win the day.
And I would argue they are in harm's way right now.
If there was a strategy, it was the Sunni fighting the
Sunni extremists. When I talk to nations like Turkey and Jordan
and the Gulf states, they are willing to put a ground force in
there to defeat ISIS, but they would never do so if it
emboldened and empowered Assad. And that was kind of part of
the agreement.
Now that the Russians are in there backing Assad, it
doesn't look like he is going anywhere anytime soon. So, where
do we get our ground force now?
Ambassador Patterson. Ambassador Nuland can speak more
about this. We have been working very closely on an enhanced
effort with the Turks to close the border. As I mentioned, the
Syrian Air Coalition, which will be supported by our Special
Forces, and, frankly, Mr. McCaul, we have had lots of
discussions with our Gulf allies and with Jordan about the
possibility of introducing ground troops. I think they have
probably told you that, too. So, that is the status of that at
this point. We work very closely with the Jordanians about the
issues in southern Syria.
Mr. McCaul. Jordan has been one of our best friends in the
region. But, again, it is going to be difficult to get a Sunni
ground force now that Assad is not part of the--it is going to
be difficult to get Assad out now that the Russians are in
there.
Ambassador Patterson. Let me stress that that is our goal,
to get Assad out. We don't think the Russians are going to have
such an easy walk through Syria with the opposition of the
entire Sunni world. So, there may be a political opening here
that we can exploit to move him out.
Mr. McCaul. I think if you could reach a political
reconciliation, and perhaps even partition the Alawite from the
rest of the country, that is a possibility. Right now, it is
about de-confliction with the Russians, so we don't kill each
other over there.
Do you foresee any remote possibility of a joint strategy
to defeat ISIS with the Russians?
Ambassador Nuland. The only way we would end up in a joint
strategy is if the Russians agreed to the general premise that
we have to have a ceasefire, we have to have a transitional
government, and we have to have a decision on getting rid of
Assad. That is what the Secretary has been working on. In the
meantime, we are working on ISIS and they are working in a
different part of this area to defend Assad. So, I don't see
working together militarily unless and until it is all efforts
on a transition, and that would allow us, in turn, to focus
good Syrian forces on----
Mr. McCaul. Of course. And I would be very careful in
trusting them. But I will tell you, based on the Boston bombing
experience, I learned that we have a common enemy, and that is
the Jihadists. The Chechen rebels, we know there are thousands
of them joining ISIS. I predict that Russia is going to have a
homeland security problem of their own, and as that becomes
more of a problem for them, their desire to move away from
protecting the regime to attacking ISIS, hopefully, will shift.
Ambassador Nuland. I think that is what is so frustrating
to us, is that we ought to share a goal of defeating ISIS and
defeating those who come from Russia to join ISIS, but that is
not what the Russian military is currently focused on.
Mr. McCaul. My last question is with respect to Iran. We
have reached this agreement, which I disagreed with, but,
nevertheless, it is moving forward. Since that time, Iran has
taken several provocative actions, including ballistic missile
tests, the jailing of Americans on frivolous charges, and
support for terrorist activities via the IRGC, the Iranian
Revolutionary Guard Corps.
The Quds Force is the terrorist arm of Iran. I sent a
letter to the President of the United States requesting that
the IRGC be placed on the foreign terrorist organization list
because they are the terror arm of Iran. This would not lift
the sanctions. It would keep the sanctions in place on the very
terrorist activities that Iran wants to take the $100 billion
and shift them toward these activities.
What is your response to whether or not designating the
IRGC as an FTO, whether that is a good decision?
Ambassador Patterson. I am virtually certain they are
already subject to sanctions, aren't they, Mr. McCaul? Yes, the
IRGC----
Mr. McCaul. Well, they are not designated as a foreign
terrorist organization, which would make a difference.
Ambassador Patterson. I can't answer that question, Mr.
McCaul. I will have to get back to you. I would not think they
would meet the legal criteria, but I don't really know. We will
get back to you.
Mr. McCaul. I would think that IRGC, with the Quds Force
being the main sponsor of terror within Iran, would qualify to
be a foreign terrorist organization, though.
Ambassador Nuland?
Ambassador Nuland. Again, I defer to Anne on the questions
involving Iran.
Mr. McCaul. Well, I look forward to the President's
response. To date, I have not received one at this time.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. It is always good to have you here. We hear
folks say, ``Where's your strategy?'' That implies that the
United States is in control of events, that we own them, that
the outcome is determined by what goes on here in Washington.
That is a very dangerous viewpoint.
We can be a force for good, but to control the outcome, I
would ask anybody to put forward a strategy that would lead us
to peace, stability, and democracy in Iraq and Syria with
modest American casualties and modest American cost. George W.
Bush had a strategy to achieve that for Iraq. It failed.
In the future, those who say, ``Where's your strategy?''
are really saying, ``Why can't you control the world at no
cost?'' And that is a silly question.
We are told by the gentlelady from Florida that the evils
of Assad deliver recruits to ISIS. That is correct. But we
should point out that the actions of Maliki and many who are
still in the Baghdad regime do just as much to help ISIS
recruit. Just because the government in Baghdad was installed
by us doesn't mean it is part of the solution; it is part of
the problem. And we ought to be looking very carefully at our
aid to Baghdad when The Wall Street Journal can put on the
front page how so many 100 dollar bills, amounting to tens of
billions of dollars, are shipped from Washington and
disappearing in Iraq, except they are turning up with ISIS.
Ambassador Patterson, I have one little bit of advice for
you, but, also, it will help the other bureaus next to you. And
that is you ought to hire a couple of folks who are experts in
Islamic theology, the Hadith, Islamic jurisprudence. You cannot
understand and you cannot argue and you cannot persuade if you
do not understand the mindset of both our friends and enemies,
both of whom are drawing.
If you need Congress to say not everybody has to pass the
Foreign Service Exam--one or two experts--because the Foreign
Service Exam does not ask the difference between a good Hadith
and a bad Hadith. I know. So, you need some experts in this,
both to talk to our friends and understand our enemies.
As to chemical weapons, the administration achieved a major
victory in getting all chemical weapons out, or virtually all
out of Syria. Now chlorine remains. Hell, chlorine is next to
every pool in my district. You can't prohibit chlorine. It is
unfortunate that chlorine has been used illegally as a weapon.
But those chemicals that are illegal per se appear to have been
removed from Syria. I won't say you had a great plan or a great
strategy, but you did have a great result on that issue.
The solution to the refugee crisis is peace in Syria, not
to cancel Syria and move its population to Europe. We had a
policy that many of us pushed here in Congress to arm the
reasonable elements in Syria. That policy has basically failed.
It has failed for a couple of reasons. First, you did it years
after we started pushing for it. But, second, it is still
subject to the incredible and ridiculous condition that those
we arm have to convince us that they do not intend to fight
Assad. Any reasonable patriotic Syrian intends to fight Assad.
So, no wonder we only find 50 people and we only have five on
the battlefield. How do you find somebody who is reasonable who
doesn't hate Assad?
And I will point out that, while ISIS has the bad taste to
put its murders right there on television, beheadings, it is
the Shiite Alliance of Iran and Assad that pose the greater
threat to the United States. They have killed far more innocent
people and have killed far more Americans.
Now, turning to Russia, Russia is not in a terribly strong
position, $45-a-barrel oil. They cannot waste resources on
peripheral matters. The Ukraine is of vital national interest
to Russia. If it fails to protect Russian-speaking persons,
Putin is gone. And if the Ukraine is successful, it becomes a
model inspiring all Russians to change and follow that model,
given the very close history between the Ukraine and Russia.
Syrian, contrast, is not at the center of Russia's
universe. There are substantial costs to what Russia is doing.
Syria and Assad are very close to the center of Iran's national
security. They dream of a Shiite control from Mashhad in
eastern Iran to Latakia on the Mediterranean.
Assad has been their longest ally. So, one would raise the
question, not why is Iran doing what they are doing, but why is
Russia? And then, we look at the timing. Russia deployed
forces, at substantial long-term risk and cost to Russia, a
couple of days after it became certain to those who are
observing things, especially here in Congress, that Iran would
get its hands on the $130 billion. First, they had to sign the
agreement. Until that, they might not get their money.
Then, you had to look around here and make sure Congress
wasn't going to blow up the agreement. Well, it was pretty
apparent that we were not going to blow up the agreement a few
weeks after it was signed. And it was pretty much like a day or
two after a lot of us concluded that Congress was not going to
prevent this agreement from going into effect for the first
couple of years, that Iran was going to get its hands on the
money, that Russia started effort.
So, the question is, if Iran is giving the money to Assad,
so he can give money to Russia, or if Iran is sending the money
directly to Russia, would we know about it? So, I will ask both
of you, since one focuses on Iran and the Middle East and one
on Europe, if there was a transfer of $1 billion from Tehran to
Moscow, either through Damascus or otherwise, would we know
about it and would it be public?
Ambassador Nuland. Congressman, I don't think at this stage
we have seen any evidence of payments to Russia. On the
contrary, we see Russia hemorrhaging money on its latest
adventure in Syria.
Mr. Sherman. But if there was a transfer--and, obviously,
Iran doesn't quite have its hands on the money yet; so Putin is
going to have to wait a little while--but if there was a
transfer of $1 billion this winter, are you confident that you
would know about it?
Ambassador Patterson. Let me answer that as not confident,
but I think the chances are pretty good.
Mr. Sherman. Pretty good you would know? Well, okay.
And, Ambassador Nuland?
Ambassador Nuland. Well, if it was in any dollar-
denominated form, we would likely know. But if they wanted to
do a bushel of Iranian currency or rubles, maybe not.
Mr. Sherman. Or euros.
Ambassador Nuland. Euros I think we would know, yes.
Mr. Sherman. You would know about a transfer of $1 billion?
So, let me, then, ask: Obviously, North Korea was paid $1
billion, $\1/2\ billion, for Al Kibar and the tremendous aid
that they provided to a Syrian or a Syrian/Iranian nuclear
program. Did we know about that? Or did the Israelis bring to
us the fact that Al Kibar was a nuclear site many years after
North Korea received payment?
Ambassador Patterson. I don't know the answer to that, Mr.
Sherman. I know that we have extremely close cooperation with
the Israelis. They have sources that we don't have. I just
don't know the answer.
Mr. Sherman. Well, Israel spotted the location; nobody
spotted the money. And so, the confidence that bad guys can't
move money without us knowing or that Russia is financing this
without being paid by Iran is untested.
I yield back.
Mr. Perry [presiding]. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
The Chair recognizes itself for questions.
Thank you, Ambassadors, for being here.
The use of DoD of these 50 Special Operators, lo, the other
folks that aren't characterized as boots on the ground, is an
extension of diplomacy through means of exacting the policy
that we would like to see happen in the Middle East or
anywhere. It is just an extension. I think if you would kind of
see it in those terms, it is cross listed.
With that in mind, because it keeps on being stated that
this is not a combat mission, so is there anywhere in the mix
that State Department is in the chain of command and
decisionmaking at all for what these Special Operators or
people that wear a military uniform or are paid by the
Department of Defense acting in Syria and Iraq in this
operation, is there any State Department involvement in the
decisionmaking process about what they do, where they go, and
how they conduct their business?
Ambassador Patterson. Yes, absolutely, Mr. Chairman. First
of all, the State Department, through the Secretary, through
General Allen who was coming to the State Department,
participate in all these discussions and they work closely with
the Turkish Government to work on the effort to close the
border. And these Special Forces Advisors are critical to that
effort. So, yes, we have been deeply involved in that.
Mr. Perry. You are involved in the chain of command? So, do
you do----
Ambassador Patterson. Currently not, sir. They are not the
chain of command, but the overall policy process, and
particularly there have been State Department representatives,
General Allen, now Brett McGurk, and others, on these teams,
Ambassador Nuland, who have discussed these efforts at great
length with the Turks.
Mr. Perry. To come to some conclusion, and then, the
military command makes the decisions and issues the orders
commensurate with what you have come up with?
Ambassador Patterson. Commensurate with what the President
of the United States comes up with and instructs them to do.
But, of course, these Special Forces Advisors are under the
command of General Lloyd Austin.
Mr. Perry. Okay. So, what is their mission? These 50, up to
50, is what I hear, up to 50 Special Ops, what is their
mission?
Ambassador Nuland. Congressman, with respect, I think that
is a question that we are going to defer to DoD and defer in a
classified session probably.
Mr. Perry. I mean, you have had the discussions, right? You
just said you had the discussions, but you can't tell me the
mission right now and that is classified. Yet, in everything I
read, it is to advise and assist. I expected you to say,
``advise and assist.'' Is that not their mission?
Ambassador Patterson. Yes, it is to advise and assist, but
what we can't sit here and tell you, Mr. Chairman, is where
these fellows are going to be deployed, exactly whom they are
going to be working with, exactly how many are going to be on
the ground.
Mr. Perry. Okay. I didn't ask you any of that, but I
appreciate it. All right.
Ambassador Patterson. But advise and assist.
Mr. Perry. So, advise and assist to what end? What is the
goal?
Ambassador Patterson. The goal is to enhance our efforts to
defeat ISIL, and we would be happy to give you a broader
briefing on this.
Mr. Perry. I mean, I think I understand it, but I want to
make sure----
Ambassador Patterson. To close the border. To close the
border, sir. To close the border, so ISIL can't get recruits
and ISIL can't export refined products, and to put pressure on
Raqqah, which is basically ISIL headquarters.
Mr. Perry. This goes to a larger strategy. So, if you are
telling me it is to achieve, the goal is to close the border
and somehow at some point defeat ISIS--I don't want to put
words in your mouth, but that is what I see; that is what I
hear. Close the border. Defeat ISIS.
All right. We have got 50 guys that are going. Does that
just strengthen Assad? Right? So, he has got ISIS and he has
got local Sunni insurgents that are fighting him. And we take
ISIS--let's just say in a perfect world everything in the
strategy that we have, if you want to call it that, that we
with these 50 guys defeat ISIS. Doesn't that strengthen Assad?
Ambassador Patterson. You can't solve the problem of ISIL
separate from the problem of Assad.
Mr. Perry. I understand that, but----
Ambassador Patterson. Okay.
Mr. Perry. Okay. But tell me what happens if--let's just
say the perfect thing happens, that you get what you want and
our 50 operators, in conjunction with the Kurds and whoever
they are working with, assisting and advising, defeat ISIS. Is
Assad strengthened or he is weakened? He has Russia there right
behind him right now attacking the very people that we have
trained and are supporting.
Ambassador Patterson. You have to do both.
Mr. Perry. But we are not doing both. We are doing one.
Right?
Ambassador Patterson. We fighting ISIL and we are trying to
get a political settlement to get President Assad----
Mr. Perry. Okay. So, you don't want to answer that. But I
would say that it does empower and increase the power of Assad.
It does that.
And so, with all due respect to the gentleman that was just
sitting here when he says there is no strategy, and you people
that say that there is no strategy, and that the strategy
assumes that we can control everything from the United States,
that is absurd. We had a strategy in World War II. We couldn't
control the Emperor of Japan or the Fuhrer or Stalin, but we
had a strategy, and sometimes we had to deviate and adapt, but
we had a strategy. I would say this is not a strategy, but that
is my contention.
Now I am going to take some liberties here because
everybody else seems to have done that. The President has said,
his White House Press Secretary said that this is not a combat
mission, right? Is Syria a combat zone? I mean, they are
dropping bombs and they are shooting each other. Is it a combat
zone or isn't it?
Ambassador Patterson. An extremely complex battlefield, and
what the President said is what you just quoted back to me, Mr.
Chairman, that it was an advise-and-assist movement.
Mr. Perry. Right. So, they are not to patrol or travel with
opposition groups. But it also says that it could change as the
situation dictates. Now I expect to tell me, because I am going
to ask you, what would change, what changes would dictate, what
situation would dictate them changing that not patrolling or
traveling with? But you are going to tell me that that is a
classified setting.
Ambassador Patterson. Oh, I am not going to tell you that.
I am going to tell you that I don't know and that is up to the
President of the United States and the situation. Of course, he
always reserves the right to change the role of American
forces.
Mr. Perry. Let me ask you this: If this isn't a combat zone
and these forces are not on a combat mission, how is it that in
May Delta Force Commandos entered Syria aboard helicopters and
Ospreys and killed an Islamic State leader and about a dozen
militant fighters, and one of our soldiers was killed just
about a week and a half ago? If that is not a combat, what is
that?
Ambassador Patterson. That is, that was a--Sergeant Wheeler
grew up 20 miles from where I am from--that was a mission to
save Kurdish hostages and other hostages. They rescued----
Ambassador Patterson. I know that, but you understand, when
we imperil--these young men and women raised their hand and
said they are going to defend the Constitution against all
enemies, foreign and domestic, and pledge their lives, and it
is with the proviso that the Commander-in-Chief and that the
administration and the powers who be are going to sacrifice
their lives for nothing. And these people are going into
combat. We are saying it is not combat, but, indeed, it is
combat.
Ambassador Patterson. Mr. Chairman, of course it is combat.
These people go into combat because the President of the United
States orders them into combat.
Mr. Perry. That's right, they go into combat. Somebody
loses their life and they don't come home with a Purple Heart
because they weren't in combat. They don't come back with the
correct SGLI because they weren't in combat. Do you understand
the ramifications of pledging your life and pledging their
lives? It is important.
Just a couple of other things. Because I reject the whole
situation of the gentleman next to me who said there was no
strategy, that those of us that said there was no strategy
didn't have a strategy, that is absurd. There isn't a strategy.
This is all tactics. And that George W. Bush didn't have a
strategy, you might not have agreed with it, and I might not
have agreed with it at times, but there was a strategy.
And I would also reject that the war in Iraq destabilized
the area. Up until the President left Iraq, it was pretty
stable. It was pretty stable. It wasn't perfect, but it wasn't
what it is now.
With that, I will recognize Mr. Trott. Thank you.
Mr. Trott. I want to thank the chair and, also, thank both
of you for being here today and for everything you do for our
country.
Ambassador Patterson, would you say our policy in the last
4 years has been a success in Syria?
Ambassador Patterson. I would say we have not succeeded in
removing Bashar al-Assad from power, and I would say that ISIL
is not defeated, but it will be a long, hard struggle to defeat
ISIL.
Mr. Trott. And do you think that insouciance on the part of
the administration has contributed to our failure or not really
impacted it? I mean, has the inability to make a decision a few
years back complicated where we are today?
Ambassador Patterson. I don't want to speculate on that,
Mr. Trott. I don't know and I wasn't around when those
decisions were made, and I don't want to speculate. We are
where we are now.
Mr. Trott. Right. So, let's look forward. The policy going
forward is we are going to have 50 Special Forces. We are going
to continue with the airstrikes, and we have heard a lot of
criticism of our policy there. Last week, you know, one day
Russia attacked 94 targets; we attacked one.
We are going to start and have been calling out Russia for
violating international law with respect to the rules of
engagement. We are going to ask Assad to stop dropping barrel
bombs on his citizens. We are going to have meetings about a
transitional government. Iran will be at the table. Opposition
groups may or may not be.
And this strategy, as best I can discern this morning, is
going to work because this is too complex for Russia. They are
going to lose interest. They are going to run out of money, and
it is just too difficult. Is that a fair statement of our
strategy going forward? And if it isn't, please enlighten me as
to how you believe the strategy is different than what I just
described.
Ambassador Patterson. I think our strategy is--no, I don't
think that is a fair characterization of our strategy.
Mr. Trott. I mean, I have heard a number of times today
Russia really isn't going to be in it for the long haul. They
don't have the money. They have other problems. This is not a
strategic interest that they want to put resources behind.
So, it seems to me that the gamble we are taking going
forward is our strategy is going to succeed because Russia is
going to lose interest. Tell me what I missed.
Ambassador Patterson. Well, no, our strategy is to mobilize
the rest of the international community, including our Gulf
allies and Turkey, to work toward a political solution and to
work hard to defeat ISIL. I think the contributions on the
defeat of ISIL and the efforts we are taking, which aren't just
the 50 Special Forces, but also the strengthening of our
position at Incirlik and the steps we are taking in Iraq will
all accelerate the defeat the ISIL. So, that is a key element
of this that has sort of been, in my view, underplayed in this
hearing.
Mr. Trott. Ambassador Patterson, you said earlier we are
talking to the Russians. So, I have two questions. Are they
listening? I know we have the MOU that was entered into last
month. So, that is perhaps evidence that they are listening.
But are they really listening to what our objectives and goals
are? And what evidence do you have that the fact that we are
taking to the Russians is moving them around on what our
different goals are in Syria?
Ambassador Nuland. Congressman, as we have said throughout
the morning, the conversations we have been having with them
have not affected their military choices. They have not changed
their pattern of bombing. They have also not taken us up on our
insistence that a minimum price for their support for Assad
ought to be to get him to stop barrel-bombing.
So, on the military side, I would say that they are not
listening. They also are not listening to the Gulf Arabs. They
are not listening to the Europeans. They are not listening to
the vast majority of innocent, peaceful Sunnis who are greatly
concerned about the collateral damage from their dumb bombs.
That said, we do have them in this political process that
Secretary Kerry is leading. In that process, they are in the
minority in terms of their perception of how long Assad should
stay. So, the question is whether continuing to participate in
that will bring the force of the majority to cause them to
reevaluate their view.
Mr. Trott. Ambassador Nuland, you said a few minutes ago
that it will be difficult to get--and if I am putting words in
your mouth incorrectly, please tell me--but, basically, I think
you said that it will be difficult to get to a transitional
government if Russia never gets on the same page with respect
to our goals in Syria, and if that is a fair statement or if
they never listen to us with respect to their military
operations. So, assuming for the moment they never listen, we
never get on the same page, what do we do then?
Ambassador Nuland. I don't think I quite characterized it
the way you did. One thing that the Russians have said is that
the Syria people should be in charge of their own future. So,
the other piece of this that I think we have underplayed this
morning, although I would defer to Assistant Secretary
Patterson, is where the Syrian representatives, whether they
are regime folk other than Assad or whether they are extremes
of the opposition, want to take this, given the fact that the
country is being torn apart by what is happening now.
Mr. Trott. But, just looking down the road, if Russia
doesn't want to ever move toward a transitional government,
what do we do then?
Ambassador Nuland. Again, I think we can't project a
straight line from here to there. We are increasing our support
for the moderate opposition. We are raising the cost for
hitting the wrong folk. We are trying to mobilize the rest of
the international community to lean on the Russians. We will
see. This thing is costing them. It is also costing them at
home.
Mr. Trott. Right. And I will yield back. But I think it is
a mess. When we had good options, we didn't make a decision
several years ago. And I think what someone said earlier today
is exactly correct, which is we are just trying to run out the
clock. And so, the next administration will inherent a
situation in Syria that has Russia just as engaged as it is
today and our options will be even more limited.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Perry. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Yoho.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate you both being here.
I am amazed at the level of what appears to me--I have only
been here for 3 years in Congress--but it appears to be a high
level of incompetence, lack of strategy, lack of planning, and
it is almost laughable, other than there has been over 250,000
Syrians slaughtered, the billions of dollars it has cost us,
the risk to our military.
I look at this stuff, and I just want to go through a
timeline since my time in Congress. Obama, August 2013, this
administration was going to attack Syria and do no-fly zones.
We sat at the White House. There was no strategy. They didn't
have an estimate of the cost. Mr. McDonough, the Chief of
Staff, said it would be over $1 billion a month. I asked him
how long it was going to take. He said, estimated 10 years at
$1 billion a month.
And we had just shut down. There was no authorization to go
over there. We are attacking a sovereign nation without an
AUMF.
President Obama went on to say there was a red line if
Syria uses chemical weapons. They used it. There was no follow-
through. They failed to act.
The President and John Kerry both said that Assad must go.
Then, they denied it, said they didn't say that; the world said
that.
John Kerry said there was no diplomatic solution to the
chemical weapons problem in Syria. Yet, 2 weeks later after he
said that, Russia jumped in there, showed leadership, and
within 2 weeks there was an agreement to get rid of the
chemical weapons. And I find it interesting that we didn't
think that could happen. Yet, Russia brokered it, and we wound
up paying for it.
The President said no boots on the ground multiple times.
``No boots on the ground.'' ``No boots on the ground.'' And
then, we went with a $500 million to train, equip, and arm
5,000 to 6,000 vetted Free Syrian Rebel Fighters, whatever that
is. And we find out a year later that is a complete failure.
They have trained possibly 40 to 50, but only 5 made it to the
field, at the cost of $50 million. That is $10 million a
fighter. It has got to be laughable other than it is reality
and it is just bad form.
I guess my question is, why hasn't the President worked to
create the safe zones when especially the chairman of this
committee, Chairman Royce, and Ranking Member Engel asked for
that 4 years ago? Why has that not happened?
Ambassador Patterson. Because it is hugely difficult,
complex, and----
Mr. Yoho. Okay, I am going to stop you there because you
said that earlier today.
Ambassador Patterson. Okay.
Mr. Yoho. It is hugely complicated, difficult, expensive--
--
Ambassador Patterson. And resource-intensive.
Mr. Yoho. Resource-intensive.
Ambassador Patterson. Let me answer----
Mr. Yoho. I am going to stop you there because I want to
add this. This is what I wanted you to bring out. It is
complicated, extensive, very costly. How costly is it to have 4
million displaced refugees that have gone around the world that
have disrupted the whole world as far as refugees just leaving
there, 7.5 million displaced in Syria? That is pretty costly,
too, isn't it? Isn't that disruptive?
Ambassador Patterson. That is costly and we are trying to
contribute to alleviate that problem.
But let me talk in more detail about some of these safe
zones/air exclusion zones. The Department of Defense has not
proposed an option that does not have a very significant
contribution/investment of U.S. air power. That air power would
be diverted from the fight against ISIL. The fight against
ISIL, which is an extraordinary virulent terrorist group, is a
threat to us and our allies and the neighbors. So, that is the
first priority.
It is also extremely difficult to patrol and to protect
these safe zones on the ground, and that would require a very
significant investment of ground forces of some sort. But the
primary reason is the investment of air power.
Mr. Yoho. If we are going to attack this, we need to attack
it. And then, the lack of diplomatic efforts or even a hint of
that, over the last 3 years I have not seen it until Russia
steps in there. And then, Russia puts in 2,000 troops, brings
in the tanks, brings in all this armament. And we respond with
50 ground troops when the President said no American troops on
the ground. This is an escalation. This is the beginning of an
escalation of troops that are going to happen.
And my question to both of you is, why should I, or anybody
on this committee or anybody in Congress, support anything this
administration attempts with such a poor strategy of winning
this. You know, the President doesn't even come out and
acknowledge who we are fighting, ISIL, radical Islamic
Jihadists. They won't even acknowledge that. Yet, we are going
to kind of go at this and kind of do little efforts to try to
defeat ISIL. I think it is a joke.
Again, my question is, why should I support anything this
administration does in the Middle East, Syria, the Middle East,
or even in the Ukraine, with the lack of strategy that I see?
And you were talking about how we have to protect Israel.
But, yet, we have the Iran nuclear deal that does anything but
protect Israel. Why should I support this, anything they are
doing?
Ambassador Patterson. Well, I guess the short answer,
Congressman, is that ISIL is a threat to us and to our European
allies and to the neighbors in the region. And we are already
seeing incursions by ISIL, pressure against Jordan and pressure
against Saudi Arabia. I think that is the short answer. You
have asked a much broader question, I think, but I think that
is the short answer to your question.
Mr. Yoho. Well, if we are going to attack them, if we are
going to do this, let's do it right and let's get a strategy,
and let's make it count, instead of just kind of playing around
with it. And I don't mean playing around with it because we
have got troops on the ground, and I am sure if they are on the
ground, they don't think they are playing.
I yield back.
Mr. Perry. The Chair thanks the gentleman from Florida.
Without objection, I am pleased to recognize Mr. Jeff
Fortenberry of Nebraska, a former member of this committee, who
has remained engaged on these issues, and particularly the
plight of Christians and other religious minorities in this
region of the world.
Mr. Fortenberry.
Mr. Fortenberry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Ambassadors, welcome. I am sorry I didn't have the
benefit of hearing the earlier conversation, but I do want to
divert to the question that the chairman just laid out.
Before I do so, Ambassador Patterson, we met a number of
years ago when you were in the Consulate at Peshawar, Pakistan.
That was a few days before there was an assassination or a
kidnapping attempt upon you. And then, from there, as I recall,
you went on to become Ambassador in Pakistan as well as Egypt.
So, I just want to thank you for your many years of dedicated
service in very difficult areas.
I don't think we have had any interaction, Ambassador
Nuland, but I appreciate both of your willingness to testify
today.
One of the grave concerns in the Middle East is this, and
let me divert for a moment by telling you a story. I happened
to be in an audience with Pope Francis a little while back, and
he was presented a small Christian crucifix. It was worn by a
young Syrian man who was captured by the Jihadists, and he was
told to convert and he refused, and he chose his own ancient
faith tradition, Christianity. And he was beheaded.
His mother was able to recover his body and found the cross
and fled and made her way to Austria, where she settled as a
refugee. And through that means, one of the persons that I was
with in this audience was able to present that to Pope Francis.
One of the more dramatic parts of this crisis that seems to
come and go in regards to our attention is this deliberate,
systematic attack on Christians and other faith traditions,
including Yazidis and other religious minorities. And by the
way, I have the largest Yazidi refugee population in America
where I live in Lincoln, Nebraska.
Is this genocide?
Ambassador Patterson. I don't know the answer to that. I
think that is a legal term. I think there will be some
announcements on that very shortly.
Mr. Fortenberry. Well, I would appreciate both of your
willingness to engage robustly on this topic. The reason is we
have, as the chairman alluded to, introduced a resolution that
does call this genocide. And while there are certain
international legal implications from that, nonetheless,
elevating the plight of Christians and other religious
minorities in their own ancient homeland, including Syria which
is approximately, Christians are about 10 percent of the
population, raises the international consciousness of this and
provides a gateway for further strategy around defense and
security measures, as well as, once all of this, hopefully, in
the future stabilizes, reintegration of those populations back
into their rightful homelands.
And this is a very important, I think, gateway to use this
resolution or the resolution is an important gateway for not
only the discussion to elevate consciousness, but, again, a
larger platform as to how to stabilize these areas and demand
that the rich diversity of religious tradition that has existed
in some of these areas be allowed to not only return, but
flourish, as a part of any political or security settlement
moving forward.
I think there are significant problems with this,
obviously, in Iraq as well. We have been able to form a new
burgeoning relationship with the Kurds who have been very
respectful of religious plurality and have undertaken waves of
immigration or refugee populations and absorbed that, as well
as the Jordanians and the Lebanese. This is a very important
components as we move forward an think through a strategy that
actually brings about some stability and maybe a political
settlement moving forward.
In this regard, there is another problem, however, that I
would like to point out. It is my understanding that we have
only admitted 53 Christians as refugees from the conflict in
Syria. So, that is disproportionate, obviously, to the
population size. Can you give any perspective on that, please?
Ambassador Patterson. My colleague Anne Richard was here
with Mr. Rodriquez a few weeks ago to talk about refugee
admission policy. And the numbers, I think we have admitted
about, as of today, a little over 2,000 Syrians and we are
planning to admit some more, of course.
They have to meet very strict vetting requirements and
research into their particular circumstances and background. I
don't have an answer why the Christians are underrepresented.
Mr. Fortenberry. Yes, I think one of the challenges is that
Christians are generally not in refugee camps. So, they will be
spread out through the population, whether it is in the
basement of a relative or in some church basement or in some
other circumstance versus cordoned into some definable entity
like refugee camp. I think it is part of the problem. But,
clearly, this segment of Syria's population is under grave
stress, as are others.
Ambassador Patterson. Mr. Fortenberry, we entirely agree
that these communities are under enormous stress. We have been
in close contact with them through their religious leaders,
both in country and their religious leaders here in the U.S.
And we are very mindful of the points you make, that the most
desirable outcome for them after thousands of years is that
they be reintegrated into these countries and not dispersed.
And so, we try to work with these communities. We try to
sustain them. But I will take your point back about the refugee
admissions and get you an answer.
Mr. Fortenberry. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for
accommodating me today, and a pleasure to speak with you both.
Thank you.
Mr. Perry. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
The Chair also recognizes Mr. Engel.
Mr. Engel. Thank you very much. I know you have been here
for a while. I was over at the White House with a series of
appointments. But I did want to try to come here, not so much
to ask questions, but to publicly compliment both of you. You
are two of the most capable people I have had the pleasure of
dealing with and meeting, hard-working and smart and tenacious,
and all the nice things I can say about both of you. So, I want
to just thank both of you for your service to our country. It
really means a great deal when we can have people of your
caliber and intellect and hard work and work ethic working for
the United States of America. So, I just wanted to thank you.
I have treasured the times through the years that I have
had the opportunity to speak with both of you in person, on the
telephone, and everything else. So, just thank you.
I am sure everything has been covered, and I will read the
script very, very carefully.
But neither one of you has ever said no to me when I needed
to meet with you or ask you something. And so, just a very
great, bipartisan thank you to both of you.
Mr. Perry. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
The Chair would also like to thank the Ambassadors for
being here. We know that you are sent here on a tough mission,
and please don't take any of the remarks from the dias here as
personal. We have a charge of oversight and to get the answers
on behalf of our constituents. As you can tell, many of us on
both sides of the aisle are very frustrated with the
circumstances.
I do have one question before you pack it all up that I
think a lot of people watch what is happening and they don't
know the answer to this. Ambassador Patterson, you said--I
think you were asked earlier about the refugee flow into Europe
and why some of the Arab countries weren't doing more, except
for paying to help ameliorate that. I think the sense was, why
aren't they taking? Why aren't they taking some of or many of
these refugees? I think your answer was they are very different
societies and they don't accept, and so on and so forth.
With all due respect, it seems to me that Europe is a very
different society than much of Arabia. Are we doing nothing? Do
we have no plan? Do we have no interest in urging and
pressuring and cajoling our Arab partners, so to speak, in the
region bordering Syria particularly to take any of these
refugees or do anything more than have them move lock stock and
barrel across seas, dangerous journeys across land and
mountains and cold, and everything a cultural difference for
them into Europe? Is there no other effort in that regard?
Ambassador Patterson. Well, certainly, Mr. Chairman, there
are efforts to encourage these countries to take in more
refugees. It is not that hundreds of thousands of Syrians don't
live in these countries. I think the issue for these countries
is that a number of them have tiny domestic populations, and a
population of foreigners, guest workers that are in some cases
8-to-10 times the local population. So, they are very reluctant
to take in additional----
Mr. Perry. But isn't that a similar circumstance in many of
the European countries, the smaller ones, that the same exact
circumstance is present at that moment? They are small
populations currently, and they are being overrun. Their
services are being overrun by people of a completely different
culture and----
Ambassador Patterson. Yes. No, no, but, again, we have
encouraged the Gulf countries to take in more refugees. And
again, we have encouraged them to give generously to the U.N.--
--
Mr. Perry. Is there any plan for more than encouragement,
like some subtle pressure maybe, diplomatic pressure, economic
pressure, pressure to help alleviate the situation? It seems
fantastic to many of us that they are happy to help watch this
inflow of humanity into Europe and take almost virtually none
of it in themselves.
Ambassador Patterson. Well, again----
Mr. Perry. And I know some of the countries in the region
have, but some have not, and some of the larger ones have not.
Ambassador Patterson. Jordan and Lebanon and Turkey have
taken millions of these refugees.
Mr. Perry. Right, right. But there are other ones that
border that have not taken.
Ambassador Patterson. Yes. And the other thing, I think the
phenomenon we are seeing at this time now is that most of them
prefer to join family members who have gone to these other
countries. I actually do not think there has been such a draw
for these refugees to resettle in the Gulf. Again, there are
hundreds of thousands of Syrians----
Mr. Perry. Well, if they are not welcomed in the Gulf and
they are welcomed in Europe, after leaving a war--you know,
once you decide to leave everything, I would imagine you would
go where you feel more welcomed. But, if you are not welcomed
at all in the neighboring countries, you are going to choose
the best of your options, I would imagine.
And so, that is just a thought. And I think that a lot of
Americans ask that question. So, I appreciate your answer. I
would hope that the administration would do more, as much as it
could to encourage our partners and allies in the region to do
more than what they are doing in regard to physically taking
those refugees.
And I thank you.
At this time, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:49 p.m., the meeting was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
