- IRAN'S NONCOMPLIANCE WITH ITS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

IRAN'S NONCOMPLIANCE WITH ITS
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY
AGENCY OBLIGATIONS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON

THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 24, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-23

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

_______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
93-913 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

______

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
TOM EMMER, Minnesota

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa

ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida, Chairman
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         GRACE MENG, New York
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Mr. William H. Tobey, senior fellow, Belfer Center for Science
and International Affairs, John F. Kennedy School of
Government, Harvard University.................................     7
Ms. Rebeccah L. Heinrichs, fellow, George C. Marshall Institute..    13
Mr. David Albright, founder and president, Institute for Science
and International Security.....................................    20

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Mr. William H. Tobey: Prepared statement.........................     8
Ms. Rebeccah L. Heinrichs: Prepared statement....................    15
Mr. David Albright: Prepared statement...........................    22

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    52
Hearing minutes..................................................    53
The Honorable Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Florida, and chairman, Subcommittee on the
Middle East and North Africa: Statement from Michael Rubin,
Ph.D...........................................................    54
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in Congress
from the Commonwealth of Virginia: Prepared statement..........    60

IRAN'S NONCOMPLIANCE WITH ITS

INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY

AGENCY OBLIGATIONS

----------

TUESDAY, MARCH 24, 2015

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2 o'clock p.m.,
in room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ileana Ros-
Lehtinen (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. The subcommittee will come to order.
After recognizing myself and Ranking Member Ted Deutch for 5
minutes each for our opening statements, I will be glad to
recognize other members seeking recognition for 1 minute. We
will then hear from our witnesses. Thank you, ladies and
gentlemen, for being here today. Without objection, the
witnesses' prepared statements will be made a part of the
record and members may have 5 days to insert statements and
questions for the record, subject to the length limitation in
the rules.
Before we begin, I would like to see unanimous consent to
enter the testimony of AEI's Dr. Mike Rubin for the record. Dr.
Rubin was originally slated to testify at this hearing before
it had to be postponed due to inclement weather earlier this
month and is not unable to join us today and we thank him for
his contributions to this hearing. And hearing no objections,
his statement will be made a part of the record.
The chair now recognizes herself for 5 minutes. This week
marks the end of the second extension of the Joint Plan of
Action and though no final deal has been made as the
negotiations continue, it is important to take stock of where
we stand today versus where we stood on November 24, 2013 when
the JPOA was formally announced. While Iran may have complied
with some cosmetic aspects of the JPOA, reducing enrichment
stockpiles, turning off some centrifuges, the fact remains that
Iran's nuclear infrastructure remains entirely intact.
Let us pretend for a moment that Iran hasn't already
violated the terms of the JPOA, a notion that is as
preposterous as Iran's claim to its right of enrichment. The
role of monitoring Iran's nuclear program and verifying its
adherence to the agreement falls on the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the IAEA, and our Intelligence Community.
Neither option inspires much confidence considering we failed
to detect Iran's covert activity before and we failed to detect
nuclear activity in Syria and North Korea in the past.
History has shown us that our intelligence assessments are
not always perfect, so we cannot allow Iran to even possess the
capability to get a bomb because we very likely would miss it
if Iran makes that mad dash.
Just last year, the Defense Department put out its own
assessment that we do, in fact, lack the capability to detect
covert nuclear sites in Iran and wouldn't be able to detect a
move toward breakout. And it was before this subcommittee that
General Hayden, former Director of the NSA and the CIA, echoed
that sentiment saying that as long as Iran continues to block
access to its facilities we wouldn't be able to detect its
development of a bomb. He then stated that if he were advising
the President, unless Iran came clean about its past
weaponization and PMD activities, he would be compelled to say
that the deal could not be adequately verified. So then that
leaves the lion's share to the IAEA.
The IAEA has a long history in Iran, but not nearly as long
as Iran's history of subterfuge and covert work on a nuclear
weapons program. As a signatory to the NPT and the Safeguard
Agreement with the IAEA since 1974, Iran was required to make
accurate and complete declarations of all of its nuclear
material and nuclear-related activities to the IAEA. We know
that Iran was in violation of this for decades and being in
violation had forfeited any claim it had to enriching uranium.
Since 2003, we know that Iran has done everything it can to
deceive, block, and prevent the IAEA from gaining the access it
needs to verify its nuclear program. Iran has taken advantage
of several rounds of negotiations to stall for time and has
exploited loopholes and ambiguities to make advances in its
nuclear program. And this latest attempt by the P5+1 is no
different. Since November 24, 2013, as part of the JPOA, the
IAEA has been working to get unresolved issues regarding Iran's
past, its work on nuclear weapons development, and other
possible military dimensions (PMD) of Tehran's nuclear program.
Yet, even as the negotiations continue, the IAEA reports
that Iran has been unwilling to cooperate and is hindering its
inquiries. There are still a dozen outstanding questions that
the IAEA has about Iran's PMD, possible military dimension,
that Iran refuses to provide answers for, giving us more reason
to suspect that Iran is pursuing a nuclear program for other
than peaceful purposes.
The JPOA sets a bar lower than had previously been
established through a series of six U.N. Security Council
resolutions. For a nation that has operated a covert nuclear
program for decades and which continues to stonewall the most
serious inquiries from the IAEA, we should have every reason to
suspect that its activities extend further than what has been
declared to date.
Just a few weeks ago, it was reported that there may indeed
be other covert sites that Iran has not previously declared and
this is why this nuclear deal is setting up to be a bad and
dangerous deal because it relies on something we cannot
guarantee. The only way that we can ensure that Iran is in
compliance with the IAEA obligations and is not paving the way
toward a nuclear weapon is to fully dismantle its
infrastructure because as long as that infrastructure is
intact, Iran will always be able to make the decision to go for
the bomb and the IAEA or our Intelligence Community does not
have the ability, despite what President Obama guarantees, to
detect it in time. Shame on us.
And with that, I am glad to yield for his opening statement
to my good friend from Florida, the ranking member, Mr. Deutch.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Madam Chairman. We are now a week
away from the deadline to reach a political framework agreement
in the negotiations between Iran and the P5+1 over Iran's
illicit nuclear program. For all the talk about various
elements of a potential deal, including future verification and
monitoring, it has been easy to lose sight of a very clear and
very current indicator of Iran's willingness to comply with
international obligations. That is, its repeated stonewalling
and noncompliance with the International Atomic Energy Agency.
The IAEA first found Iran to be in noncompliance with its
obligations as a member of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
in 2005. Between 2005 and 2010, the IAEA issued 30 reports
detailing concerns about Iran's activities, ultimately leading
to referral to the Security Council and successive rounds of
sanctions, including U.N. Security Council resolutions
demanding that Iran stop enrichment.
Running parallel to the current P5+1 negotiations, the
IAEA, arguably the agency that will be charged with carrying
out future monitoring and verification of a nuclear deal, has
been engaged in a new round of discussions with Iran. On
November 11, 2013, the IAEA and Iran signed a joint statement
on a framework for cooperation. In the framework for
cooperation, the IAEA and Iran agreed to cooperate further with
respect to verification activities to resolve all present and
past issues.
In its latest report, on February 19, 2015, the IAEA
confirmed that it has only been able to make progress on 1 out
of 12 key issues. The report states and I quote,

``Iran has not provided any explanations that enable
the Agency to clarify the two outstanding practical
measures nor has it proposed any new practical measures
in the next step of the framework for cooperation.''

As it has for years, Iran has been slow walking investigations
and inspections, refusing to cooperate on providing past
activities and refusing access to various suspect sites. And
this is simply to carry out its obligations as a member of the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. There are many of us who fear
that this is an unfortunate foreshadowing of the way in which
Iran will respond to its obligations should there be a
permanent nuclear deal that is reached.
Now if Iran wants to show the world that it can act in good
faith or that we should have any belief at all that this regime
could be trusted in the future, it would start by cooperating
with IAEA. If Iran at the end of any nuclear deal wants to be
treated like any other NPT country, it could start by acting
like one now.
Extremely concerning throughout this whole process is the
refusal to allow IAEA inspectors to certain suspect sites,
notably Parchin. With respect to Parchin, as previously
reported by the IAEA, the activities that have taken place at
this location since February 2012 are likely to have undermined
the Agency's ability to conduct effective verification. It
remains important for Iran to provide answers to the Agency's
questions and access to the particular location at this site.
But most concerning is Iran's refusal to cooperate on the
possible military dimensions of its program. How can we
construct a viable verification regime going forward if we
don't know fully what the Iranians have done in the past with
respect to weaponization? Just this week, speaking at a
conference, IAEA Director General Amano stated and I quote,

``We are also implementing the Joint Plan of Action and
we can also say the implementation is good. But with
respect to the clarification of issues with possible
military dimensions, the progress is limited and this
is the area where more cooperation from Iran is
needed.''

Amano said the Agency still was not able to conclude whether
all nuclear material in Iran was being used for peaceful
purposes, saying,

``We continue to verify the nondivergence of nuclear
material declared by Iran, but we are still not in a
position to conclude that all nuclear material in Iran
is peaceful in purpose.''

Given Iran's intransigence, the international community is
left with little choice but to believe that it has something to
hide. And I for one would not be comfortable with any nuclear
agreement that doesn't force Iran to come clean on its past
activities.
As former IAEA official Olli Heinonen wrote earlier this
month,

``The IAEA can only return to routine inspections when
the IAEA is certain that all nuclear material and
activities are being used exclusively for peaceful
purposes.''

And I frankly don't know how we can ever be certain of this
when we don't know everything that Iran has done.
Furthermore, as I mentioned at the outset, it will be the
IAEA who will be charged with carrying out verification and
monitoring should a deal be reached. It is the IAEA that wants
to first observe a violation and then what happens? Do the
Iranians stonewall as the international community tries to get
additional information? Do they have the opportunity to dispute
the IAEA's findings? How long will it take for the IAEA to
confirm its finding and report to the P5+1? Who is responsible
for determining the penalties if a violation occurs? These are
all outstanding questions that will need to be answered before
any reasonable country should enter into any agreement with
Iran.
Lastly, let me just say I frankly am unclear as to how we
can reasonably conclude any permanent agreement with Iran on
its nuclear activities if the IAEA is unable to finish its
parallel investigation.
I thank the witnesses for being here today and I appreciate
their insight and I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Mr. Deutch, for that
opening statement.
Mr. Issa of California is recognized.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Madam Chair. This is an important
hearing. I want to hear some of the specifics about the
breakout time, the technical problems, and to the greatest
extent possible, some of the areas in which the proposed
agreement falls short from an inspection standpoint. I also
look forward to hearing Mr. Tobey who has vast background and
knowledge and history of where we failed before. We failed with
India. We failed with Pakistan. We failed with North Korea. The
difference in all of those is expansive view of the world and
terrorism that clearly is coming from Iran. If they get a nuke,
we will never hear or see the last of it in the region.
Having said that, I want to echo the statements of both the
chairman and ranking member. When they talk about a country
that cannot be trusted, Iran comes to the top of the list.
Since 1979, consistently, year after year, decade after decade,
what Iran says and Iran does are different. And therefore,
until or unless there is an inspection regime that is
verifiable and has been consistently verified before a deal,
any expectation that once sanctions are lifted that Iran will
suddenly be a new and different Iran are, in fact, sillier than
the many turnarounds we saw in Groundhog Day those many years
ago. The fact is history does repeat itself. Iran will not keep
its promises. And Madam Chair, I want to thank you for this
important hearing.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Mr. Issa. Mr. Boyle
of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Boyle. Thank you and I am reminded of the saying that
the best way to predict future behavior is to look at past
behavior. So I am especially interested in this subject matter.
I have already read the three witnesses' testimonies and I
think that judging Iran's experience with respect to the IAEA
is a great way to project future behavior.
I also just want to add following on the last comments that
were made by Mr. Issa, it is actually remarkable when you look
at humankind over the last 65 years that nuclear weaponization
has been contained to the extent that it has. The challenge of
Iran reaching a nuclear capability is would that be the
catalyst to touch off Saudi Arabia and every other regional
player also deciding that they would suddenly be interested in
this capability.
So with only a minute, I will save the rest of my comments
for question time. I would just say I thank the chair and the
ranking member for having this incredibly important hearing.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, sir. Mr. DeSantis of Florida.
Mr. DeSantis. Thank you, Madam Chairman. I think a lot of
Americans are wondering what is going on with these
negotiations. Iran does cheat. Can we trust them? And then lo
and behold, a couple of days ago, you have the Supreme Leader,
the only decision maker that really matters chanting ``Death to
America.'' So is he saying ``Death to America'' because he
means it? If so, why would we be negotiating? If he doesn't
mean it, how do we trust what he says? It is interesting how
that was dismissed by the White House as oh, just mere domestic
political rhetoric. Don't worry about that. But when the Prime
Minister of Israel says something in the heat of the campaign
and then explains, no, you have got to hold him to that. You
are going to take him to the United Nations now. We are going
to turn our back on Israel.
The national intelligence estimate has removed Iran and
Hezbollah as terrorist threats in their recent worldwide threat
assessment. Gulf States are responding to the potential for
this deal in a way that they clearly don't have confidence in.
The Socialist President of France is stronger on Iran than the
U.S. administration is right now.
I look forward to the testimony, but I think I speak for a
lot of my constituents that we are concerned about this deal.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Mr. DeSantis. From
Florida also, Mr. Clawson.
Mr. Clawson. Thank you for coming. Years ago, there was a
movie called Animal House and the characters went on a road
trip. You all probably remember the movie. And the character
that needed to supply the vehicle was named Flounder. And it
was his older brother's shiny black Lincoln Mercury. And so his
crazy fraternity brothers wanted to use that car for their road
trip. Now he knew he shouldn't have given him the keys.
Everybody watching the movie knew he shouldn't give him the
keys, that it was going to be a bad outcome. We all knew it.
And yet, he gave the keys to his brother's car and of course,
they took the car and trashed the car. And at some point
afterwards they said ``Flounder, you messed up'' or something
to that effect. ``You trusted us.''
We all know if we give the keys, the nuclear keys to Iran,
that we are going to look back and say we really messed this
up. We trusted them. And so I echo what has already been said
here today. I don't know what reason we would have to trust and
we all know if we give the nuclear keys to these folks that we
are going to regret it. Thank you for coming today.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Clawson. Ms.
Frankel.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I may be a little
repetitive, but there are three points that I am interested in.
First of all, thank you all for being here.
Number one is how confident are you that we would be able
to verify a complete Iranian compliance with an interim
agreement? Number two, what lessons should we learn from our
history with North Korea? And finally, do you have an opinion
as to whether a comprehensive agreement should require Iran to
come clean on its entire nuclear program including
weaponization? And I waive the rest of my time, Madam Chair.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Those were excellent questions. Thank you
so much, Ms. Frankel.
And now we will turn to our witnesses. Thank you very much
for being here with us. We are pleased to welcome Mr. William
Tobey. He is a senior fellow at the Harvard Kennedy School's
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs.
Previously, he was Deputy Administrator for the Defense Nuclear
Non-Proliferation at the National Nuclear Security
Administration and has served in the National Security Council
staff. Welcome, Mr. Tobey.
Second, we welcome Ms. Rebeccah Heinrichs. She is a fellow
at the George C. Marshall Institute where she has concentrated
her research in the areas of nuclear deterrence and missile
defense. She has also held fellowships from The Heritage
Foundation, the Foundation for Defense of Democracies, and has
previous work as a congressional staffer. Do we pronounce the S
in the last name?
Ms. Heinrichs. Yes.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you. And last, but certainly not
least, we welcome back Mr. David Albright, founder and
president of the Institute for Science and International
Security. He has authored numerous assessments on covert
nuclear weapons programs throughout the world, as well as
regular publications on scientific research.
We welcome all of you. Your prepared remarks will be made a
part of the record. And Mr. Tobey, you will be recognized after
that great intro from Mr. Issa, Mr. Historian.

STATEMENT OF MR. WILLIAM H. TOBEY, SENIOR FELLOW, BELFER CENTER
FOR SCIENCE AND INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS, JOHN F. KENNEDY SCHOOL
OF GOVERNMENT, HARVARD UNIVERSITY

Mr. Tobey. Thank you, Chairman Ros-Lehtinen, Ranking Member
Deutch, and members of the committee. It is a pleasure to be
here to speak about a matter of surpassing importance.
Preventing Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon is vital to
U.S. national security interest. The committee has asked to
focus today on Iran's non-compliance with its safeguards
obligations and from the opening statements, it is already
clear that the committee has a profound understanding of those
issues. So I will confine my remarks to just three points.
First, in 2005, the International Atomic Energy Agency's
Board of Governors found that Iran had violated its safeguards
obligations by failing in a number of instances over an
extended period of time to make necessary declarations.
Second, since 2011, the International Atomic Energy
Agency's Secretariat has expressed serious concerns about the
possible military dimensions to Iran's nuclear program which
Tehran refuses to clarify despite being required to do so under
the Joint Plan of Action agreement. And here I would note that
many of the members referred to the so-called possible military
dimensions and I think that gets to the heart of the important
issues on the Iran agreement.
Third, in August 2014, less than 6 months ago, the United
States Department of State sanctioned an Iranian Government
organization for ongoing nuclear weapons development work.
In sum, Iran has violated its safeguards obligations in the
past. It is charged by the United States Government with doing
so in the present. And evinces little reason to believe that it
will not continue to do so in the future. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Tobey follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Mr. Tobey. Ms.
Heinrichs.

STATEMENT OF MS. REBECCAH L. HEINRICHS, FELLOW, GEORGE C.

MARSHALL INSTITUTE

Ms. Heinrichs. Madam Chairman, Ranking Member Deutch,
members of the committee, thank you for the invitation to
participate in this hearing.
I have spent the last 10 years in various capacities from
working for the Congress to working as a researcher in think
tanks studying specifically how the U.S. can deter the most
catastrophic kinds of attack with an emphasis in ballistic
missile defense which is critical should deterrence fail.
Arms control is just one tool for deterring the spread of
strategic weapons, but for it to be effective as President
Obama said in his 2009 Prague speech, ``Rules must be binding.
Violations must be punished. Words must mean something.''
Administration officials have said that Iran cannot be
permitted to achieve a nuclear weapons capability which if it
did, would be in violation of the NPT as well as several
Security Council resolutions, but to allow Iran to maintain its
ability to produce a nuclear weapon while also relieving
sanctions would signal to foes that violations, if persistent
enough, could end in reward.
It is important to keep at the front of our mind the
context of which the P5+1 has attempted to secure a diplomatic
solution. Iran views the U.S. and Israel as its principal
enemies and over the past three decades Iran has very
intentionally created a network of terrorist surrogates, able
to target U.S. interests and Israel. The regime does not view
the P5+1 talks as an opportunity to reconcile with the West. To
the contrary, Iran has failed to instill confidence in the most
optimistic of U.S. diplomats that it is sincere about
maintaining a peaceful nuclear program.
At the recent APEC conference, Ambassador Rice said ``The
administration holds a distrust and verify policy toward Iran''
an important twist on President Reagan's policy toward the
former Soviet Union, ``Trust, but verify.''
But Iran to this day stonewalls the IAEA's efforts to
verify the Iranians' claim that the nuclear program is
exclusively for peaceful purposes, making verification nearly
impossible.
In 2011, in November, the IAEA laid out possible military
dimensions of the program. The Agency concluded that Iran had
been undergoing a structured program that included possible
weaponization activities until the end of 2003, but then went
on to cite activities related to the development of a nuclear
explosive device that continued after 2003 and noted that these
particular activities could remain ongoing.
And just last month, the IAEA report confirmed again that
Iran still has not provided any explanation that enable the
Agency to clarify the outstanding practical measures.
But even if the Agency were permitted unfettered access to
Iran's scientists, documents, and facilities, and able to get
to the bottom of Iran's weaponization activities, by all
accounts the negotiations do not include Iran's missile
program. Iran wants more than a nuclear weapon. Iran wants to
be able to credibly threaten its adversaries with a nuclear
armed missile and also with a variety of conventionally armed
missiles. The DNI assessed that Iran would likely choose a
ballistic missile as its preferred method of delivering a
nuclear weapon, if one is ever fielded.
Missiles are a cost effective way for a country like Iran
to pose an asymmetric threat to much more militarily
sophisticated countries like the U.S., therefore, Iran is
motivated to keep and improve his arsenal and has defied U.N.
Resolution 1929 in order to do it. For example, it is improving
its accuracy of missiles to threaten ships in the Persian Gulf
and the Strait of Hormuz and is on a determined course to
achieve an intercontinental ballistic missile capable to
threaten the U.S. homeland.
Under Secretary of State Wendy Sherman, seeming to back
away from her previous commitments to include Iran's missile
program before this committee, said that a comprehensive
agreement, although it is important to address that Resolution
1929 is ``not about ballistic missiles per se'' but about
nuclear arms missiles. But a ballistic missile can carry
conventional or a non-conventional warhead including those that
are chemical, biological, and nuclear.
In closing, Iran continues to support terrorism and there
is no evidence that it has made the political decision to move
away from achieving a nuclear weapons capability. Getting to
the bottom of what the IAEA identified as the possible military
dimensions of Iran's nuclear program ought to be a necessary
condition to moving forward with any kind of real negotiations.
But even if this is accomplished, any deal focused on Iran's
nuclear program must include its missile program. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Heinrichs follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much. Mr. Albright.

STATEMENT OF MR. DAVID ALBRIGHT, FOUNDER AND PRESIDENT,
INSTITUTE FOR SCIENCE AND INTERNATIONAL SECURITY

Mr. Albright. Thank you, Madam Chairman, Ranking Member
Deutch and other members. Thank you for inviting me to testify
today.
Adequate verification is critical to a long term nuclear
deal with Iran. Robust measures are needed to ensure declared
nuclear sites engage in only peaceful activities and more
importantly to ensure the absence of undeclared nuclear
material and facilities in Iran. Although the interim deal
under the JPA strengthen the monitoring of declared nuclear
facilities, it did little to increase the IAEA's ability to
detect and find covert sites and activities. The IAEA has
regularly reported in its quarterly safeguards report on Iran
that it is not in the position to provide credible assurance
that all nuclear material in Iran is used for peaceful
activities.
Whether this situation changes will largely depend on the
ability of the United States and its partners to create a long-
term agreement that establishes legally binding conditions on
Iran that go beyond those in the comprehensive safeguards
agreement and the additional protocol. A critical question will
be whether the agreement establishes a verification regime
adequate to promptly catch Iran in cheating.
There are many reasons why an agreement must require
extraordinary verification arrangements as has been pointed out
today so far by I guess every speaker. The most critical ones
are Iran's well documented violations of its safeguards
agreement, its actions inconsistent with that agreement and a
peaceful nuclear program and Iran's long history of non-
cooperation with the IAEA.
Let me just list a few additional examples. Iran has built
several nuclear facilities in secret. It has been pointed out
that Iran has violated its comprehensive safeguards agreement
prior to 2004 on multiple occasions. Iran has depended
extensively on illegal overseas procurements of a range of
goods for its nuclear programs in violation of national laws
and U.N. Security Council resolutions. At least one illegal
procurement for the Arak reactor complex was attempted after
the JPOA went into effect. Although this is not a violation of
the JPOA, it does violate U.N. Security Council Resolutions.
Iran has not allowed the IAEA to visit the site at Parchin
which has been mentioned already or other sites associated with
past work on nuclear weapons research and development and other
military nuclear activities. Iran has delayed inspectors'
access to sites and extensively modified buildings or the sites
themselves in apparent efforts to thwart IAEA verification
methods. And of course, Iran has stonewalled the IAEA in
resolving the inspectors' concerns about the possible military
dimensions of Iran's nuclear programs.
This record demonstrates why Iran has a significant
confidence deficit with much of the international community. As
a result, verification conditions in a long-term deal will need
to be rigorous, unprecedented, and long lasting. These
extraordinary conditions need to remain in place for at least
20 years. This time frame should be sufficient for the IAEA to
achieve full confidence in the absence of undeclared Iranian
nuclear materials and facilities and in a peaceful nature of
Iran's nuclear programs.
To that end, several measures are needed to ensure adequate
verification and a long-term deal. I agree with others, other
members, or with members and with my panel that Iran must
address the IAEA's concerns about Iran's past and possibly
ongoing nuclear weapons research and development. An agreement
that sidesteps the military nuclear issues would risk being
unverifiable. Moreover, the world would not be so concerned if
Iran had never conducted weaponization activities aimed at
building a nuclear weapon. If no concrete progress on this
issue is forthcoming by July 1st, a deal should not be signed.
If Iran in good faith asks to delay demonstrating concrete
progress until after a deal is signed, it should not receive
any sanctions relief until it fulfills its commitment along
with providing a road map on resolving the rest of the IAEA's
concerns.
Visits to Parchin and related sites and access to key
individuals should be part of Iran's demonstration of concrete
progress.
United Nations Security Council sanctions on proliferation-
sensitive goods such as dual use high tech goods should be
maintained during the duration of the deal. Authorized nuclear
programs could be exempted from these sanctions via specially
monitored procurement channel. Often overlooked, these
sanctions are critical to building an adequate verification
regime. These sanctions are a fundamental part of ensuring that
Iran is not secretly establishing the wherewithal to build
secret nuclear sites, make secret advances in its advanced
centrifuge or other nuclear programs or surge in capability if
it left the agreement.
And finally, a deal must include legally binding provisions
that allow the IAEA to conduct snap inspections or anywhere
anytime inspections. These provisions need to also require
broader Iranian declarations about nuclear activities than
those required in additional protocol. These conditions should
also last for at least 20 years.
So thank you very much for the opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Albright follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much. Excellent panelists
and I would like to ask unanimous consent that our subcommittee
recognize our special guest who is with us, Mr. Trent Franks,
for a statement he would like to make.
Mr. Franks. Thank you kindly, Madam Chair. I appreciate
your holding this hearing so very much and as it happens Ms.
Heinrichs was the military legislative assistant in our office
and she taught us essentially everything we know about missile
defense. And we are just extremely proud of the direction that
she has gone, that she is able to teach other Members of
Congress and I think she is a force that is important to the
world and I really appreciate you being able to hear her
testimony today. I don't want to embarrass her. She didn't know
I was doing this, but we are very impressed with all the great
things she is doing. And with that, I am just grateful for the
opportunity and I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Well, thank you so much and I think that
that was an accurate assessment of her capabilities and she
made a most excellent presentation. So trained by the best. I
don't know which way that training went. I think knowing you,
Trent, it went toward you. But thank you so much and I am so
pleased with the testimony today and with the members present
and this is an extremely important topic.
The administration's argument is that this deal will allow
us to have the mechanisms in place to monitor and verify Iran's
compliance with any final agreement, to hold Iran accountable,
and to prevent it from getting a bomb, a wonderful desire,
wonderful outcomes. But as most folks pointed out, every
indication from past history suggests otherwise, that Iran's
continued stonewalling of the IAEA will continue and even
during the implementation of the JPOA this stalling and this
stonewalling was taking place. So it gives us further cause to
be less than optimistic.
As the ranking member pointed out earlier this week, Olli
Heinonen, the former Deputy Director General of the IAEA who we
have had testify before us and Ray Takeyh, and former NSA and
CIA Director General Michael Hayden, stated in an op ed in the
Washington Post that even if the nuclear deal manages to push
Iran's nuclear breakout time to 1 year, that is the stated
goal, this might not be sufficient to detect and reverse the
Iranian violations.
So I wanted to ask the panelists what are the difficulties
in achieving a verification regime that would be capable of
detecting, of testing, of acting to stop Iran from possible
breakout for both the IAEA and their standards and the U.S.
Intelligence Community? What difficulties do we have in getting
such a structure in place?
We will begin with Mr. Tobey.
Mr. Tobey. Thank you, Madam Chair. The difficulties are
considerable and they are made worse by what at least has been
reported about the shape of the deal. You referenced creating a
1-year breakout time. That, of course, deals only with declared
sites. So that would ensure or would aim to ensure that the
declared sites were not used to make nuclear weapons. But the
problem is that I think most analysts believe that were Iran to
move in the direction of nuclear weapons, they would use
undeclared sites, covert sites. And the burdens that are placed
on any verification program for detecting covert sites are made
much more difficult by the allowance of some enrichment work. I
know that that has been bitterly disputed as to whether or not
Iran should or should not be allowed to have any enrichment
capability. But I think it is indisputable that if they have
some capability it would be more difficult to verify that that
capability isn't being diverted to covert sites.
So that is why it is so centrally important to get to the
bottom of the so-called possible military dimensions that all
of you have referenced, all of us have referenced. All of us in
this room understand the importance of that issue. And I think
it has to be gotten to the bottom of in order to ensure that
future activity----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Absolutely.
Mr. Tobey. It is not about the past. It is about the
future.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Absolutely. Ms. Heinrichs?
Ms. Heinrichs. I agree with what my colleague just said. I
will also just like to point out that because the nuclear
program is so inextricably tied to their missile program, the
missile component is something that hasn't been discussed as
what it should be. But missile detection is much easier to do
than to detect the weaponization elements of the nuclear
program.
And so we can already see what they are doing with their
missile program. So Mr. Tobey is correct. It is almost
impossible to get to the bottom of the verification if they
don't even disclose what they have done in the past. And we
need to do that first. But I would suggest that an easier,
possibly an easier way to actually see what they are doing is
just look to see their massive missile program.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Very good point. Mr. Albright?
Mr. Albright. The administration's goal of having a 1-year
breakout criteria makes sense. I mean you need something to
drive in negotiations.
As Mr. Tobey pointed out and it is easier to apply to
declared facilities and where the difficulty is, of course, is
if Iran is going to try to do covertly. And I would say may do
a hybrid or using declared and undeclared facilities. So there
are many paths to the bomb.
But I think the verification, if done rigorously, can
actually lead to a situation where you could do this in a year.
But it certainly would, from my point of view would need to
include coming clean on PMD. You would have to be able to make
sure Iran isn't smuggling goods in for a covert site, so you
would need the U.N. Security Council sanctions to remain in
place for the duration of the deal. If it has to empower or
give more tools to the inspectors, they are going to have to be
able to go, in a sense, very quick notice to sites where there
are suspicions. They are going to have to have access. And so
you are going to have to wire all this in an agreement. And if
it isn't wired in an agreement, then I think it will be very
hard to satisfy the 1-year criteria for undeclared sites.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. True. Now as we know, Iran impedes any
and all IAEA inspections that it can that may be related in any
way to its suspect activities including the PMD. And we were
talking about the snap inspections, the any time, anywhere
inspections. Many people believe that we need that in order for
this deal to be credible.
How likely is it that the Iran deal will include these
inspection parameters that they will have this snap, any time,
anywhere inspections? Will we insist on it? Will the IAEA
insist on it? The Intelligence Community, will they be
satisfied with what is in the deal to detect Iran's
noncompliance if these snap inspections were not guaranteed in
any final agreement?
Mr. Tobey. With respect to the any time, anywhere
inspections, I don't know whether or not those will be a part
of the agreement. But I would point out that there are other
elements that may be as or more important. It is an important
deterrent to have the ability for inspectors to go any place
any time. But it is not how you generally detect a covert
operation or a covert nuclear capability. That is done by
talking to people, by examining records, by much broader
declarations as Mr. Albright already referenced, by the sort of
patient and careful work that would lead inspectors to
understand that covert activity is underway. And it is only at
the last moment that one would actually take the final step to
go and visit a site.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. They have to do their homework before to
be able to have that snap inspection.
Mr. Tobey. Absolutely. So all of that work is at least as
important as the ability to go any time any where.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you. I believe the only real way to
prevent Iran's breakout is to dismantle its nuclear
infrastructure. As long as we are only getting access to what
Iran wants us to see, there is no way to know, as you pointed
out, the real extent of Iran's nuclear program. And the current
JPOA is limited to only declared sites, as you pointed out. It
is the undeclared sites that should really worry us.
Mr. Tobey, you stated that by doing this it actually
facilitates Iran's ability to cheat. If you could explain that.
Mr. Tobey. I am sorry, by doing----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. The current JPOA is limited to only
declared nuclear facilities and by doing this, we are actually
perpetuating that
Mr. Tobey. Exactly. The focus of the talks has been
creating this 1 year breakout time. So we have gone from a
situation where the President's originally-stated goal was
preventing Iran from getting a nuclear weapon. In other words,
changing their strategic calculus. Now our goal is putting a 1-
year speed bump between Iran and a nuclear weapon.
Unfortunately, that applies only to declared sites. And the
only way to get at undeclared sites is a two-fold operation
which Mr. Albright has already referenced. One is to get to the
bottom of these so-called possible military dimensions and the
second is to be able to understand and monitor all of the
equipment and materials that Iran is either importing or
creating itself that would be applicable to making nuclear
weapons. So without those two elements any agreement would not
be verifiable.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And Mr. Albright, getting back to the
snap inspections that you were talking about, how can the IAEA
monitor and verify any Iranian activity at sites that are
actually undeclared? If you could push that button.
Mr. Albright. You asked would this be an agreement. I mean
I think there is worry that it won't be. There is certainly
indications that the administration is making compromises and
the Iranians have been very tough on this. This was told to me
by one of the negotiators well over a year ago that the
Revolutionary Guard had sent a signal through the Iranian
negotiators that there was no way the IAEA would be allowed to
visit military or Revolutionary Guard sites. And so that was
stated as one of the essentially two major redlines. And of
course, that is unacceptable, but will the U.S. push hard
enough to overcome this redline and get to an ability to have
anywhere any time inspections.
Now of course, we will see, but I do worry about it and I
think that without those I would expect they wouldn't get the
broader declarations too, that there is a real risk that you
won't have the package of measures needed to do adequate
verification.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. It would be interesting to see. And one
last question and I thank the members for allowing me all this
time and you will have that time as well.
Ms. Heinrichs, you have done extensive work on Iran's
ballistic missile program and as you pointed out in your
testimony, written and verbal, several U.N. Security Council
resolutions explicitly seek to curb Iran's missile program. But
how closely related are Iran's progress on its ballistic
missile program and its nuclear program? And do you think that
the negotiations will include or should have included other
aspects of Iran's dangerous activities including its support
for terror, its ballistic missile program?
We had a full committee hearing last week and I think Mr.
Blinken, we asked him is Iran the foremost state sponsor of
terrorism and he said it is among the top. I can't even imagine
except for North Korea who is in that league. But if you could
tell us about the ballistic missile program and other aspects
of Iran's dangerous behavior?
Ms. Heinrichs. Thank you for the question. I think it is
possibly one of the most important questions. Iran's nuclear
program is inextricably tied to its ballistic missile program.
They go hand in glove. So if we simply pause their enrichment
capability, for instance, they have already mastered the
ability to enrich, and they are very patient, so they can go
ahead and take a pause on that. And then continue the more
difficult aspects of their program which is their delivery
system, their ballistic missile system.
So ballistic missiles, they are relatively cheap, if you
are going to try to pose an asymmetric threat to a country that
is much more militarily sophisticated than Iran, like the
United States. And that is exactly what the Iranians have been
working on doing. They have just successfully orbited their
fourth satellite which is that technology is directly
transferrable to an ICBM capability and the Intelligence
Community still assesses that Iran will be able to test an ICBM
capability which would give them an ability to coerce the
United States' homeland by this year.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Mr. Deutch is recognized.
Mr. Deutch. Thanks, Madam Chairman. Mr. Albright, during
these negotiations we have been told that the goal ultimately
is to cut off the four pathways to a nuclear bomb for Iran:
Fordow, Natanz, Arak, and covert program. Are those the only
four?
Mr. Albright. That covers it. I think there is always more,
but that is the main pathways that the administration needs to
worry about.
Mr. Deutch. And the access, the unprecedented access that
we are told we received during this JPOA, during the interim
deal, does not include any where, any time inspections?
Mr. Albright. No.
Mr. Deutch. What do we have now?
Mr. Albright. Well, there is better monitoring at declared
sites and there is some more openness at parts of the
centrifuge manufacturing complex. But in general, no. The
measures that were put forth as part of the JPOA were never
intended to be able to increase the IAEA's ability to detect
covert sites.
Mr. Deutch. So what is it going forward? You said we need
any where any time inspections and that those need to be in
place for at least 20 years. Is that, given the reports in the
news, would that be 10 years beyond the deal or would that be--
would that require a deal that is 20 years long?
Mr. Albright. It could be done independently of the limits
on the nuclear program. I mean one would assume that when it is
on the Arak reactor are indefinite. They won't be reversible,
so once they are put in place there will just be limits on the
ability to make weapon-grade plutonium.
On the centrifuge number, those could be lifted after some
period of time. These inspection arrangements, these broader
verification requirements must continue past that, I would
argue. You are going to need them for a long time. In a sense,
Iran has been in noncompliance for 20 years. I mean it has
severe lack of credibility and 10 years is just not enough.
Mr. Deutch. What does that mean, they have been in
noncompliance? Take a step back. We are all steeped in this. We
have been focused on this for a long time. For people who are
tuning in to these talks because it is the very end and there
is a lot of talk to understand about striking a deal with Iran
and stopping it from acquiring nuclear weapons. Why are we
concerned? What have they done wrong all this period? And
weaponization and creation of a bomb, but they tell us they
want to have a peaceful nuclear program. For people who haven't
paid attention, explain to them why this matters so much.
Mr. Albright. It is a little bit like someone who breaks
the law. Iran has been deceiving the IAEA, the international
community, for 20 years or so. And its intention was to put
together in secret nuclear capabilities and part of that
capability appears to have been oriented to getting nuclear
weapons. So in a sense you have a situation where they have
been caught and convicted. That is in the sense what the U.N.
Security Council resolutions signify and that they are on
probation. And we need time in order to verify that they are
reformed. And in that period you need to limit their ability,
in a sense their freedoms to move on nuclear programs.
Mr. Deutch. And they have not verified anything to date. A
lot of believe we shouldn't, we can't make a deal, shouldn't
consider making a deal if they are not willing to come clean on
the past military dimensions of the program. Would it make
sense for us to do that?
Mr. Albright. Obviously, the administration is thinking
about not doing that. I think that is pretty clear. Or doing it
in a much more limited way than maybe we have discussed today.
Now I think one of the problems of doing that is if I can
go back to the days of the agreed framework, people were really
scared of war with North Korea in '94. And a decision was made
to call off the inspectors and a deal was made that essentially
hobbled the inspectors. They were brought forth to do
monitoring and I at the time supported the agreed framework,
but I understood its weakness.
In this case, there is a risk that if you don't get the
IAEA's strengthened, it doesn't go into this deal knowing what
Iran has done in the past, you are hobbling them and
undermining their ability to verify. But in this case, unlike
the North Korean case, the IAEA is going to be called upon to
be the lead investigator in a sense to determine whether Iran
is complying.
Mr. Deutch. Right, so that is what I want to understand. So
the IAEA--Iran has completely stonewalled. They have not been
forthcoming. They have not granted the access to the IAEA. They
have not answered the questions posed by the IAEA which stem
from the fact that we know that as you point out, we know what
Iran was trying to do to develop nuclear weapons. They were
caught. They were convicted, but we are now at the point where
they are not complying with what the world has expected them to
comply with, right?
Mr. Albright. That is right.
Mr. Deutch. So the question is going into a deal, if there
is one, regardless of what the deal looks like, if it is the
IAEA that is ultimately the entity that is going to monitor and
verify whether the terms of a deal are being lived up to by the
Iranians, how, number one, how can that happen? How do we trust
that that can work given 20 years of experience that we have
had with Iran's interaction with the IAEA?
Mr. Albright. I would agree that it can't work. I mean it
is really--I mean no one is looking for Iran to have a mea
culpa. It would be nice and it would be very helpful, but there
are ways to do this sort of thing. But Iran can't continue to--
it essentially almost abused the IAEA. They issue reports. One
came out a couple of weeks ago which just belittles the IAEA.
And also in that report, they argue strongly that the IAEA's
verification as it exists today should be weakened. So you have
a situation that is unacceptable and Iran does need to face up
and make changes in how it views verification and how it treats
the IAEA and how it satisfies the IAEA's condition.
And I would say that it may be that in the way the
administration is negotiating this is that you can't force Iran
to do this before the deal is signed, but you certainly can say
no sanctions relief until they at least make concrete progress
on addressing the IAEA's concerns.
Mr. Deutch. Right. So the question is if you--if there is a
deal that is reached, the moment that a deal is struck if there
is sanctions relief of any kind and according to the reports in
the press which is what we have to go by on the current
negotiations, according to the reports in the press, Iran's
sticking point is that they want massive sanctions relief or
total sanctions relief at the outset. If you provide any sort
of significant sanctions relief the day the agreement is
signed, you will have rewarded Iran for 20 years of bad
behavior, flouting international norms, and ignoring the
demands of the IAEA. Isn't that right?
Mr. Albright. Yes, I agree.
Mr. Deutch. And finally, if the goal is a year's breakout
time and we have just gone through all these concerns about the
IAEA, is a year enough time? Is that goal enough for the IAEA
to detect a potential breakout, to verify it, and then take
action to stop it, particularly given that there are other
countries Iran may argue the other countries, the P5+1, the
U.N. may be brought in, is a year breakout time realistic if
the IAEA is the entity that is tasked with enforcing it?
Mr. Albright. At declared sites, I think it is. And again,
I think some of this depends on the U.S. being willing to take
military action if it believes there has been a violation and
it is confirmed. And the idea with the year is that there would
be enough time to gather international support to avoid that.
But in the end, some of this is going to rest on the U.S. being
willing to do that.
Now in the covert sites, if the verification is not
improved from what would be traditional IAEA safeguards and
additional protocol, then it is going to be tough. I mean you
could easily have had a situation with Iran where you do spend
a year arguing in the United States, internationally, on what
has happened, is it really a violation? You may have trouble
pulling together a coalition and the U.S. may be put in a
position of having to decide does it take military action when
there is deep opposition to that military action? But if the
verification arrangements are done properly, then I think a
year can be enough. But it is going to require a very intrusive
verification system and it is unclear if that can be
accomplished.
Mr. Deutch. Madam Chairman, I appreciate the indulgence.
Anything short of that then, anything short of unprecedented
any where any time inspections demanded by the world of Iran
which Iran should comply with given their history and given
what else would be included in this deal, anything short of
that makes that 1-year breakout time which has been the goal we
have been told of these entire negotiations significantly
perhaps dramatically less than 1 year leaving us with a
dramatically reduced period of time in which to respond.
Mr. Albright. Could be, but the one thing I would say any
where any time is not unprecedented. That language is adopted
from what South Africa said it would do after it decided to
come clean about its past nuclear weapons program which also
was a big fight. South Africa refused to do that initially
despite the evidence, but under pressure decided to come clean
and accepted this idea of anywhere any time inspection. So I
think it is not unprecedented. But I do think that there is a
lot of parts to verification. And so I wouldn't want to say
that if you don't get one exactly as you need it, that the
thing falls apart. You have to look at it system wide. But
without any time any where inspections, the job gets much
harder.
Mr. Deutch. I appreciate that, Madam Chairman, thank you
and I thank the other witnesses for your testimony. I didn't
want to exclude you, but I am out of time. Thank you.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Mr. Deutch. Mr.
DeSantis of Florida.
Mr. DeSantis. Mr. Tobey, are you comfortable with the
enrichment ability that is contemplated under this deal? It had
always been that they were not going to be able to enrich. Now
they have a substantial number of centrifuges. Are you
comfortable with that?
Mr. Tobey. The original idea to ban all enrichment was to
keep Iran from gaining the technical capacity to understand
that, so they couldn't mount a covert effort. Unfortunately,
that horse is out of the barn. So the original rationale for
that, I think, is diminished. At the same time, zero is a lot
easier to verify than some higher number which would allow the
technology and equipment perhaps to be diverted.
So while I think it is not an ideal situation, the only
terms under which I would be comfortable is if we had two
additional verification provisions. One would be to get to the
bottom of the possible military dimensions as we have talked
about and the second would be to have firm control over the
materials and equipment that Iran either produces or imports as
Mr. Albright has described. So this would be an ongoing
monitoring situation.
And so by allowing some level of enrichment, I think it
demands a much more rigorous verification system.
Mr. DeSantis. The 10-year sunset that is reported, is that
adequate?
Mr. Tobey. It doesn't strike me as adequate. This issue was
reported by the IAEA Board of Governors to the U.N. Security
Council 10 years ago. I am dumbfounded that we might have an
agreement that would be shorter than the time it has taken to
negotiate it.
Mr. DeSantis. Ms. Heinrichs, do you agree with that? Ten
years to just simply walk away after 10 years and trust that
they are going to behave. Does that bother you?
Ms. Heinrichs. No, I don't think that we should trust them
now. I think 10 years is not adequate because what we really
want is for them to make the political decision to move away
from a nuclear weapons capability and they have not done that.
Mr. DeSantis. In terms of the military sites, because it
seems to me that if you are not having any type of inspection
of those sites, if there are secret sites, we have no reason to
take Iran at its word, it seems to me that they could abide by
the deal in the sense of allowing full inspections and yet they
could still end up developing a nuclear weapon, correct?
Mr. Tobey. One thing that I would point out is that
Secretary Kerry, I think reasonably, said it is unacceptable
for Iran to be 2 months away, to have a 2-month breakout. If it
is unacceptable today, I don't understand why it becomes any
more acceptable 10 or 15 years from now and at least what has
been reported was that the broad restrictions in the Iranian
program would fall away after 10 or 15 years which would enable
them to move right back to that 2-month breakout period.
Mr. DeSantis. Even if the inspections were allowed to go to
these sites, if the military sites are not included, then they
could conceivably keep the deal with respect to those
inspections, but still develop a capacity. Is that inaccurate?
Mr. Albright. It is a fear. I mean if the IAEA can't do its
job and get to the bottom of what has happened, the PMD issues,
namely, and then be able to continue verifying no activity at
those sites and among those people and potentially other sites,
then it would be an agreement where Iran could just wait it
out.
But the idea is that you try to at least have restrictions
on the program for a generation. That was the goal. Looking
back a year, the goal was to have restrictions, pretty strict
restrictions on the whole program for a year, intrusive
verification, and then over that period of time you would then
develop confidence that they wouldn't try to get weapons in the
future.
Mr. DeSantis. Or give time to have a change in the regime
or change in the nature of the regime.
Mr. Albright. That is right. And so if you shorten that,
and it is just 10 years, then of course, you have to worry
more. Now I would say be careful. We don't know the details.
The administration is going out of its way to confuse us, I
will admit, when they talk about using double digits or they
use terms like at least 10 years. They talk about phasing on
the enrichment programs. So I think the situation is very
confused. But I do think it is very logical to demand that the
verification conditions either be permanent or last at least a
generation. And I think that has be a very clear message that
the administration hears.
Mr. DeSantis. Look, I am mindful about kind of jumping on
some of these reports. At the same time, you do look at the
behavior of the Gulf States and what they see. Their behavior
is not very comforting in terms of this being a deal that they
have confidence in, and obviously they fear an Iranian bomb
very much.
Look, my bottom line is we have seen different examples of
this where North Korea, obviously, didn't work. I think Gaddafi
feared he was going to be removed from power. He really was
worried about the threat of military force. And I just wonder
whether Iran really believes that that credible threat is on
the table. And if they don't, then man, I think that they have
every incentive to want to cheat this deal. I am over my time
and I will yield back. I am good. Thank you.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Mr. DeSantis. And
thank you, Mr. Boyle, from Pennsylvania. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Boyle. As you might remember from my brief opening
remarks, consistent with what I think pretty much everyone who
has spoken on both sides of the aisle here, I come to this
whole issue as someone who is highly skeptical that we could
reach an agreement that reasonable people would have full
confidence in.
That said, it is worth remembering, I think it was Ms.
Heinrichs who quoted President Reagan, ``Trust, but verify.''
He quoted the Russian proverb, ``Doverai no proveryai.'' The
reason why we remember that is because it was said at a signing
ceremony with Mikhail Gorbachev. And so those agreements that
after the failure at Reykjavik, when the agreements were signed
in '87 and '88, they were criticized at the time by some as
naive and going too far. And I would say that history proved
them--proved President Reagan pretty well in terms of reaching
those agreements.
So toward that end, while I am highly skeptical given
Iran's repeated history of bad faith behavior with the IAEA and
with the international community and being with one of the
largest, if not the largest, exporters of terror in the world,
all of that having been said, if by some grace of God a new
leadership were to come in Tehran, actual, real, Western-
oriented, moderate, who wanted Iran to rejoin the international
world, and give up this path that they have been on over the
last three and a half decades, what would a real agreement look
like that each of you would say that is something that is worth
signing? That is something that we could place trust in and
actually have real confidence that it was actually an agreement
worth signing?
Mr. Tobey. In terms of a technical model, it has already
been referenced, the South Africa example is probably a good
one. I would also look for markers of a strategic decision just
as you described, that Iran had decided to forego pursuing
nuclear weapons in favor of a better relationship with other
nations.
Frankly, I do come back again to this possible military
dimensions issue. If they are not willing to come clean on
that, it not only makes verification more difficult, but it is
a marker of Iranian intent because they clearly want to hide
something in order to preserve it.
And so I would say that an agreement that looked like it
was going to be useful and that is what I think all of us here
seek. I mean the reason we have criticisms about what may be
taking place is because we want a better deal, not because we
don't want a deal. It would be to get to the bottom of that
issue.
Ms. Heinrichs. I appreciate the question. I would agree
that we have to get to the bottom of the possible military
dimensions, but again, I think it is a bit of a litmus test to
look at their missile program. There is no reason that the
Iranians need to be as dedicated to their massive ballistic
missile arsenal that they have if they don't intend to use it
for coercion. And who are they trying to coerce? It is the
United States. It is the United States' influence in the
region. And so I think unless we see a political decision or a
strategic decision of the Iranians to move away from this
ballistic missile capability, which I believe is inextricably
tied to their nuclear program, and then allow complete
unfettered access of the IAEA to its nuclear program to show
that they are actually coming clean, essentially, the South
Africa example being a good one, then we should not trust them
enough to secure a diplomatic solution to this problem.
Mr. Albright. I think one of the worries that was alluded
to earlier that they will just wait it out. They did some of
that during the time of the suspension from '03 to '06 and
President Rouhani bragged about how they were able to advance
while waiting it out. So I think one of the concerns now is
that the pattern of the Iranians appears to be to basically say
that yes, we will give up the IR1s which are pretty decrepit
machines, but we want to be able to advance our centrifuges and
build advanced ones and keep that program alive.
And I think that this deal is going to be much less
worthwhile if Iran succeeds in being able to do centrifuge R&D
on a substantial basis and I think there is a real worry that
that could happen. And clearly, it is where I think the
Iranians are building their narrative. And the U.S. has
invested a lot into capping and reducing the IR1 program which
may be the thing that Rouhani cares least about at this point
in time. Certainly, the nuclear people probably don't care
about.
Some other things that are very important is and I think
the administration has made progress is in getting rid of the
stocks of well-enriched uranium in Iran. They can't stay there.
Whether they are in hexafluoride form or oxide, they should
leave the country. So I think they have made good progress on
getting that established, but whether Iran will go along or not
is still an open question, but if there are very minimal stocks
in Iran, then that would be--that would build confidence in
this deal.
Another thing is that Fordow would be shut down and not
involved in any enrichment, that Iran should not have deeply
buried sites that contain any gas centrifusion enrichment
capability. That is critical, too. Again, I am not sure the
administration is going to get that or is even seeking that at
this point in time.
So I think that there are many ways you could put together
an agreement and I think the administration has thought through
all of them and so now the question will be are they going to
come up with an agreement with enough of those in there that
one can have confidence in.
Mr. Boyle. Well, I thank you, all three of you and I see I
have hit my time limit. But I would just ask in closing and
maybe a quick response, South Africa has been referenced a
number of times. I think though not on the nuclear part, but in
terms of a country that was clearly engaging in terrorism and
then actually decided they wanted to rejoin the international
world and that was more important to them under the end of
Muammar Gaddafi. That is actually an example of a country that
remarkably changed its behavior.
I was wondering if we know of any others that we can point
to as a potential model to hope and work toward Iran joining?
Mr. Boyle. There has been other victories, less well known,
but Taiwan had a nuclear weapons program and the U.S.
intervened politically to end it. And it was done very quietly.
So I think there are other victories. Same in South Korea. It
was a little tougher there, but--so I think there is ways to do
this, but again, I think it depends on the U.S. exerting its
influence and the country changing its attitude toward some of
these issues.
Mr. Tobey raised this issue of----
Mr. Boyle. And every one of the examples cited it was
ultimately initiated by a decision made in that capital to
completely change and which direction it was going and change
its priorities and then behavior changes followed that.
Mr. Albright. But under a lot of pressure. Those cases
involved tremendous amounts of pressure, even South Africa.
There were cases, I was told, meetings with nuclear officials
in South Africa with U.S. officials where a South African
official was fist pounding essentially on the table denying
they had a nuclear weapons program just a week or two before de
Klerk admitted, yes, we did have one. So I think that pressure
matters. And in South Africa, congressional pressure mattered.
If you look back in history, you will see that the U.S.
Congress played a very important role.
Ms. Heinrichs. I would just add that it was under enormous
political pressure, but it was also in the case of Libya and
then as the Intelligence Community has said that they believe
that some of the weaponization activities did cease around the
2003 time line, about the time that Libya then voluntarily gave
up their WMD program, but it was under the fear of a credible
threat of military invasion. It was when the United States went
into Iraq. So I think that that is important to keep in mind
that without the credible threat of force, that some of these
things might not have happened.
Mr. Boyle. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much and unfortunately
that credible show of force is lacking in Iran. The
negotiations look to be we are playing a very weak hand and I
don't think that pressure is being applied to Iran and Congress
has been muted and the sanctions are being lifted and we are in
pretty bad shape. But you were wonderful panelists so we thank
you very much for being here with us. And with that, the
subcommittee is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 3:48 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Record
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Material submitted for the record by the Honorable Ileana Ros-Lehtinen,
a Representative in Congress from the State of Florida, and chairman,
Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
