- WOMEN AND TECHNOLOGY:. INCREASING OPPORTUNITY AND. DRIVING INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

WOMEN AND TECHNOLOGY:
INCREASING OPPORTUNITY AND
DRIVING INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 17, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-121

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
97-633PDF                    WASHINGTON : 2015

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York

TOM EMMER, MinnesotaUntil 5/18/
15 deg.
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York
As
of 5/19/15 deg.

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Ms. Geena Davis, founder and chair, Geena Davis Institute on
Gender in Media (special envoy for women and girls,
International Telecommunication Union).........................     4
Ms. Sonia Jorge, executive director, Alliance for Affordable
Internet.......................................................     6
Ms. Joyce Warner, senior vice president and chief of staff,
International Research and Exchanges Board.....................    16

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Ms. Sonia Jorge: Prepared statement..............................     9
Ms. Joyce Warner: Prepared statement.............................    18

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    44
Hearing minutes..................................................    45
Ms. Geena Davis: Prepared statement..............................    47
The Honorable Alan S. Lowenthal, a Representative in Congress
from the State of California: Prepared statement...............    51

WOMEN AND TECHNOLOGY:.
INCREASING OPPORTUNITY AND.
DRIVING INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

----------

TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 2015

House of Representatives,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:12 a.m., in
room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed Royce
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Chairman Royce. We will ask all of the members to take
their seats. This hearing is called ``Women and Technology:
Increasing Opportunity and Driving International Development.''
And around the world, women and girls are, frankly, the hardest
hit by poverty. I think people realize that, but at the same
time, empowering women can be the best way to lift them and
their families out of that poverty. As our guest, Geena Davis,
has said, ``believing in yourself is the greatest gift.''
Today, few tools have the potential to empower women and
girls like the Internet. Whether it is access to online
education, or whether it is job opportunities, or expanding
that social network, the Internet can dramatically increase a
woman's access to information, dramatically increase her
opportunity for her and her family.
A recent survey in four developing countries found that of
those women who reported using the Internet, 75 percent said
they used the Internet ``to further their education.'' Many
women surveyed also noted that the Internet and other mobile
applications dramatically reduced the time and dramatically
reduced the cost associated with tasks like learning about
health concerns, arranging transportation, borrowing and saving
money. Just ask the female fisherman in Kenya who now uses a
popular mobile service to store and transfer money using just
her cell phone that protects her business savings, protects her
from theft. It enables her to spend her money as she chooses.
Frankly, it empowers her.
Yet, while we take the Internet for granted here, more than
4 billion people, two-thirds of the world's population, lack
access to that Internet. And women are more likely to be
offline than men. Across the developing world, that is 200
million fewer women than men that have access to the Internet.
And the disparity is particularly great in Asia and in the
Middle East, and in sub-Saharan Africa, where women are half as
likely as men to be online.
This means women are being excluded from one of the most
powerful drivers of personal and economic opportunity of all
time. And this is a problem for more than just those women who
are left out. It means that families, communities, states,
institutions, are all held back as well.
Study after study has shown that women spend more of their
income on their families and communities, prioritizing things
like what, food, medicine, education, that then improves the
outcomes for their children. And in terms of broader economic
growth, that means that it reduces the disparity in women's
online access, and--what would the GDP boost be if we were able
to do this to the portions of the world that do not have that
kind of access? It would be $4 billion to $5 billion.
So it seems clear that failing to include women in the
technology revolution is a big mistake. Likewise, failing to
consider technology in our aid and in our diplomacy remains
another costly oversight. The Internet is fast becoming as
essential to a country's economic growth as electricity was, as
ports are, as the rule of law is, and that is why the committee
is developing legislation to ensure Internet access is a
priority in U.S. development projects. For one, our aid
agencies could better coordinate to lay fiberoptic cable under
roads being constructed in the developing world. That is kind
of a no-brainer.
In addition to having equal access to technology, it is
important for women to have equal access to creating that
technology. Globally, there are fewer women than men in
science, in technology, in engineering, in math, in these STEM
careers. However, there are some countries that have succeeded
in having at least 50 percent of their STEM degrees awarded to
women. Countries like the United Arab Emirates, Bulgaria, Oman,
are pushing in that direction. They have 50 percent. We need to
address what is holding women back from entering the sciences
in so many other countries, including ours, I will add.
The Internet has changed the way that we buy, that we sell,
that we educate, that we socialize. It has transacted more
international commerce than any other marketplace, with
trillions of dollars pumped across the net daily. It is a
tremendous opportunity, but it is only an opportunity for those
who have access to it. This hearing will help us understand
what is needed so that more, especially women, more people can
take advantage of this revolutionary technology, and in the
process, bring a better life for their families and communities
and more opportunity and hope.
So I now turn to the ranking member, Mr. Eliot Engel of New
York, for his opening comments.
Mr. Engel. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
calling this hearing. Let me welcome. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman--that is better--for calling this
hearing. Let me welcome our witnesses to the Foreign Affairs
Committee. Thank you for your hard work, and shining a light on
what I view as an intersection of two issues critical to our
foreign policy: The challenges facing women and girls as the
growing reach of modern technology. I am looking forward to a
good discussion. I would like to note that for the second time
this month, our committee has a panel made up entirely of
women. Two weeks ago, Assistant Secretary Patterson and
Assistant Secretary Nuland were here testifying on the crisis
in Syria, and today we have this distinguished group.
It is amazing the way technology has changed the way we
access numbers, respond to crises, or simply communicate with
one another. Today, a coffee planter in East Africa with a
smartphone can know what his produce is worth in London. A
doctor anywhere in the world can pull up a patient's medical
record with the push of a button. Classrooms with broadband
access have a gateway to an incredible wealth of knowledge,
information, and face-to-face connections with people a world
away.
Of course, technology can also be exploited for nefarious
purposes. We know that ISIS has taken advantage of everyday
encryption technology, and even video games to communicate and
orchestrate attacks like the one in Paris. These abuses
underscore why we need a full understanding of the way
technology is growing and changing the global landscape, but
they should not blind us to the fact that technology has
brought massive benefits to billions of people around the
world.
At the same time, it is important to recognize that those
benefits have not been evenly distributed. When we focus on
access to technology, we see that women and girls are at a
tremendous disadvantage, just as they are in so many other
areas. Women in developing countries are 23 percent less likely
than men to be online. In South Asia, the Middle East, and
North Africa, the gap is nearly 35 percent. And in sub-Saharan
Africa, it jumps to 45 percent.
Those are really shocking statistics. Some of this
disparity is due to structural economic inequality. The cost of
technology can be prohibitive in places where women are not
full participants in their economies. Some of these problems
stem from other norms and ideas about women and girls that keep
them as second-class citizens. For example, across much of the
developing world, Internet cafes are the easiest way to get
online. The constraints of childcare and responsibilities at
home make this a difficult option for some women. Access to
mobile technology could help break down these barriers but,
around the world, 200 million fewer women than men own mobile
phones today.
It is unbelievable. But beyond these practical limitations
in many countries, Internet cafes, and the Internet in general,
are considered inappropriate for women and girls. Even in some
of the most remote areas, Internet cafes are packed with boys
and young men, but women and girls are left out. In Azerbaijan,
only 14 percent of women have ever been online, 14 percent;
while 70 percent of men have access to the Internet.
In India and Egypt, 1 in 5 women reported believing that
the Internet is inappropriate for them. Can you imagine that?
Their reasons for not getting online range from concerns that
their families would disapprove to not knowing how the Internet
could benefit their lives. The reality, of course, is that
access to technology could not only improve the lives of
individual women, but could help to lift entire communities and
entire countries. We know that keeping women and girls on the
sidelines of society is a major drag on growth and prosperity.
When women become full economic and political participants, the
results are huge in terms of driving economic progress,
improving health and education, and raising standards of
living. Getting more technology in the hands of more women is a
critical way to tap that potential.
According to a recent study sponsored by Intel, getting an
additional 150 million women online would add $13 billion to
$18 billion to the combined annual GDPs of 144 developing
countries. They would help countries become stronger, more
stable partners on the world stage, and add fuel to the global
economy. So the question isn't why should we break down the
gender divide when it comes to technology, but how do we break
down that divide?
What education and training efforts will best provide women
with the knowledge they need to use technology for their
benefit? What kind of partnerships will help make technology
more accessible and affordable? How do we address the out-of-
date taboo that technology is somehow inappropriate for women
and girls? It is unbelievable. I hope our witnesses can offer
their guidance in these areas, because I honestly believe that
expanding access to technology could help solve so many
problems.
I thank you, again, for all you do, all of you. I look
forward to your testimony and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Engel. This morning we are
joined by a distinguished panel. We have Ms. Geena Davis. In
addition to acting in multiple critically-acclaimed movies, she
is the founder and chair of the Geena Davis Institute on Gender
in Media. She also currently serves as the special envoy for
women and girls at the International Telecommunications Union
at the United Nations.
We have Ms. Sonia Jorge, she is executive director of the
Alliance for Affordable Internet. She has over 20 years of
experience in information and communication technologies in
both the private and the nonprofit sector.
And we have Ms. Joyce Warner, and she is senior vice
president and chief of staff at the International Research and
Exchanges Board. She had a long career of serving in various
international organizations with a focus on women's health, and
women's development.
So, without objection, the witnesses' full prepared
statements will be made a part of the record. Members here will
have 5 calendar days to submit any statements or questions that
you might have, or extraneous material that you want in the
record of today's hearing. And so I would suggest that the
witnesses would like to summarize their remarks. We will begin
with Ms. Davis. Thank you very much, again, for your testimony
today.

STATEMENT OF MS. GEENA DAVIS, FOUNDER AND CHAIR, GEENA DAVIS
INSTITUTE ON GENDER IN MEDIA (SPECIAL ENVOY FOR WOMEN AND
GIRLS, INTERNATIONAL TELECOMMUNICATION UNION)

Ms. Davis. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Royce, very much,
and Ranking Member Engel and committee members. It is a great
honor to be invited to testify here at this hearing on ``Women
and Technology: Increasing Opportunity and Driving
International Development.''
The efforts of the committee to ensure that women and girls
are included and have the same opportunities as men and boys
around the world are so appreciated, especially when it comes
to the Internet. I have spent most of my adult life advocating
for women and girls as a trustee for the Women's Sports
Foundation, as chair of the California Commission on the Status
of Women and Girls, as an official partner with U.N. Women,
and, as the chairman mentioned, ITU's Special Envoy for Women
and Girls and ICTs.
The empowerment of women and girls is an issue I am
extremely passionate about, and it is why I founded my research
institute, which studies gender in children's media to help
women and girls to be seen, and heard, and valued across the
globe. Technology is having a huge impact on my community, the
entertainment industry, in terms of how content creators are
using digital platforms to not only serve as the gateway for
delivering movies and television programming, but also for the
creation of new ways of building global communities.
And the Internet is having a profound impact on how the
world engages with media, and can provide endless opportunities
to empower women and girls, and to help create a systemic
cultural shift by improving how they are portrayed and
represented. These are the tools that will ultimately raise the
value of women and girls in society.
My institute has sponsored the largest body of research
ever done on gender images in children's media, covering over a
20-year span, and we worked side by side with the leading
content creators to dramatically improve how women and girls
are represented in media targeting children 11 and under. Our
study of the careers of female characters in family films and
in prime time in children's TV, conducted by Dr. Stacy Smith of
the Annenberg School for Communication and Journalism, shows
that women are missing from critical occupational sectors, such
as the STEM fields.
Out of nearly 6,000 speaking characters in family films,
males held 84 percent of all STEM jobs. This calculates to a
ratio of five male STEM characters for every one female STEM
character. No female leads or co-leads were shown with STEM
careers. Looking across the categories of computer science and
engineering, the ratio of males to females in these areas was
14.25 to 1. And in television, characters with STEM jobs were
79 percent male, and 21 percent female.
The vast gender inequality in media aimed at children is
extremely significant as television and movie images wield
enormous influence on how cultures perceive the value of women
and girls, and in establishing societal norms. Improving these
perceptions can be the real game-changer in achieving greater
empowerment and participation of girls and women in the
technology sector.
My institute's tag line is: ``If they see it, they can be
it.'' Technology has tremendous potential to transform women's
and girls' lives, whether through STEM career choices, or by
access to services such as e-health, e-education, e-commerce,
e-banking, and other applications that can help women and girls
address their day-to-day challenges. We need to vastly improve
the gender divide. As the chairman pointed out, there were 200
million fewer women online than men at the end of 2013. We need
to bridge the opportunities gap. Women earned only 18 percent
of U.S. computer science degrees. Women make up less than 20
percent of the U.S. ITC workforce, and only 30 percent of the
European ICT workforce. This cannot stand, given the predicted
skills shortfall in the ICT sector of at least 2 million jobs
globally by 2020.
Encouraging women and girls to pursue careers in tech is
critical to closing the economic gender gap. Studies from the
ITU have demonstrated that companies that have a gender balance
of women working in high-level positions on corporate boards
have shown improved financial results. Women and girls will
seek the skills to pursue these career opportunities if they
can see other women in these roles and be inspired by them. The
lack of real-world female role models in tech careers means
that it is imperative for fictional female characters in STEM
fields to be shown in entertainment media aimed at children.
Technology, and particularly broadband, will be absolutely
crucial for achieving all 17 of the U.N. sustainable
development goals, and all three pillars of sustainable
development: Economic development, social inclusion, and
environmental protection. They need technology as key
catalysts.
We have the opportunity to ensure that women and girls are
fully included in the expansion of the digital world, and that
their voices and presence are shaping the agenda of meeting
SDG-5, which addresses gender equality.
Access to digital technology will be key to meeting this
goal by providing women with the means to educate themselves
and their children, to improve their own health and the health
of their families and communities, to start their own
businesses, to keep themselves safe, and to innovate to shape
the future that they want.
Because I am privileged to live in this country as the
mother of three children, I can encourage them to engage in any
type of interest that they may want to pursue. I want to see a
world where all children have the same possibilities and
opportunities; a world where women and girls are valued equally
to men and boys, and have the freedom to pursue and achieve
their dreams.
Chairman Royce and Ranking Member Engel, once again, thank
you very much for this opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Davis appears in the
appendix.]
Chairman Royce. Thank you. Ms. Jorge.

STATEMENT OF MS. SONIA JORGE, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, ALLIANCE FOR
AFFORDABLE INTERNET

Ms. Jorge. Thank you, Chairman Royce, Ranking Member Engel,
distinguished members of the committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to submit a statement to the committee on
opportunities for driving international development through
increasing women's access to technology.
This issue is critical if we are to achieve the United
Nation's Sustainable Development Goals, agreed in September of
this year. The United States can and should play a leading role
in driving this agenda forward. The Alliance for Affordable
Internet, A4AI, is the world's broadest technology sector
alliance working to reduce the cost of broadband in developing
countries, and through high-level advocacy and direct in-
country engagement. The over 80 members or organizations of the
alliance identify, research, and advocate for the policy and
regulatory reforms needed to bring prices down and increase
access to the Internet.
The incredible growth of ICTs over the past decade has
transformed Internet access into a force that is critical for
sustainable global development. Indeed, President Obama
declared earlier this year: ``The Internet is not a luxury. It
is a necessity.'' Research has shown the benefits of broadband
penetration. Investing in increasing broadband penetration in
developing countries could lead to a return on investment of up
to $21 for each $1 spent. Of course, the benefits of
connectivity go far beyond the economic, bringing better health
care to rural, conflict-affected, and other underserved areas,
helping farmers cope with climate change, and connecting
millions of children and young people to free online courses
and learning materials. E-governance and social media are
enabling citizens to participate more actively in civic life,
while also streamlining delivery of public services, a move
that, in Africa alone, could result in technology-related
productivity gains of $10 billion to $25 billion annually by
2025.
Today, over 60 percent of the world's population,
equivalent to 4.3 billion people, as was already said, remain
offline, and these billions of people excluded from the life-
changing possibilities of the Internet are predominantly
female, and nearly all in the developing world. Mobile
broadband, the primary means by which most citizens in the
developing world access the Internet, has been critical for
expanding Internet access. Mobile broadband across the
developed world is widely spread with penetration rates
reaching nearly 90 percent. Yet, this rate dropped to about 17
percent in Africa. This digital divide exacerbates existing
economic and social inequalities, and stifles development
across the globe by keeping women and other marginalized
populations, those who arguably stand the most to benefit from
an online connection, from accessing the empowering potential
of the Web.
While an entry-level broadband connection costs about 1
percent of monthly incomes across the developed world, it costs
about 10 percent for most in developing countries, and can
reach over 100 percent of their incomes in many countries.
High prices hit certain groups harder. Excuse me, high
prices hit certain groups harder than others, and income
inequalities mask the true scale of the problem in many
countries. For billions living in poverty, earning less than $2
a day, the cost of a basic broadband connection is prohibitive.
Women are nearly 50 percent less likely to access the Internet
than men in the same community. The Web Foundation study found
that women are 30 to 50 percent less likely than men to use the
Internet to increase their income, or to participate in public
life. We need to change that. We need to change the gender gap.
We need to work together to change the conditions in which
women can have access to the Internet.
Skills and relevance are also another barrier important to
address. To boost economic growth, empower democratic
governance, and advance global development, cannot be
overlooked as a key component of U.S. foreign policy, and there
is a huge potential for the Internet to have a role in that
space. Here are some concrete actions that the U.S. Government
can support and invest in: Support policy reform, based on
inclusive multi-stakeholder processes that will lead to market
growth and lower costs; coordinate broadband expansion
strategies with development in the energy sector; invest in
International Telecommunications Union, a U.N. agency, that
does efforts to expand collection of gender indicators and
support national statistics agencies to do the same; support
the development of inclusive and holistic national ICT and
broadband plans, that address all aspects of the access and use
ecosystem; recognize barriers faced by women, and ensure
privacy and safety online; education programs and consumer
campaigns to increase awareness of the utility of the Internet,
as well as training on basic skills and safety online will be
critical to ensuring women can access and fully utilize a safe
and open Web without any fear of retaliation. Incorporate
digital skills education into education programs from primary
school onwards. And finally, develop and support programs that
provide public access and to target underserved populations.
I look forward to our discussion here today and your
questions. And I thank you again for this opportunity.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Jorge follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Chairman Royce. Thank you, Ms. Jorge. Ms. Warner.

STATEMENT OF MS. JOYCE WARNER, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
OF STAFF, INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH AND EXCHANGES BOARD

Ms. Warner. Thank you, Chairman Royce, Ranking Member
Engel, and distinguished members of the committee. On behalf of
IREX, I am very honored to have the opportunity today to
discuss our experience and the important relationship between
women and information and communication technology in the
developing world. I want to also thank my colleagues for their
compelling remarks this morning. And I will try to--you may
find some overlap because I think we have some similar
recommendations.
Since 1968, IREX has worked in over 125 countries to build
just, prosperous, and inclusive societies, and we use
technology across much of our programming. Our work is
supported by the generosity of the American people through the
U.S. Department of State, the U.S. Agency for International
Development, as well as private donors, including the Bill &
Melinda Gates Foundation and the Carnegie Corporation of New
York. Our approach is to focus holistically on both IT access,
but also broadening digital literacy. I know we talked a lot
this morning about why the issue is important, including
improving GDP, and we have also talked about the alarming
disparity for women and girls, the overall less access to the
Internet, less mobile ownership. I want to highlight also,
though, that less training and exposure even where access is
available, is an important factor creating the digital divide.
And according to the 2015 World Wide Web Foundation report,
women are 1.6 times more likely to report a pure lack of skills
as a barrier to Internet use. And I think we would all agree
that nations cannot develop and grow unless they engage their
full human resource potential, and closing the gender digital
divide will be key to achieving this.
So I would like to share a few things of what we have
learned at IREX. First, women and girls need safe public access
points. We know that girls and women often choose public
libraries because they are perceived as safe, reliable, and
affordable. And we have partnered with the Gates Foundation in
11 countries to turn public institutions, like libraries, into
Internet access points. And we are pairing that with providing
access and training librarians to support them.
Second, it is really important to introduce girls to
technology as early as possible, and definitely no later than
their adolescence. The after-school tech clubs IREX has created
in eight countries have helped girls gain digital skills with
positive results into young adulthood, including increased
confidence and employability. By supporting girls early on with
digital literacy skills, we can help stem a lifetime of gender
disparity.
Third, we need to invest and support infomediaries, and by
this, we mean trusted community members, teachers, librarians,
other adults who can help coach and train both younger and
older women to use technology effectively and positively.
Infomediaries can also help them filter the massive amounts of
information that is available. In addition to working with
librarians, we have partnered with the State Department to
expand the use of technology by master teachers from across the
developing world, the overwhelming majority of whom have had no
prior training in using instructional technology in the
classroom. The goal is to make technology a regular part of
learning and not only a special subject or an elective.
And finally, we have learned that women also need to find
relevant and valuable information to them, and that is both
available in their local language, but in addition, it is
information they can use in their everyday lives.
In partnerships with USAID and a local Jordanian research
organization, we have just recently launched a gender
clearinghouse. This is the first of its kind in Jordan, and it
is allowing women to access information on their human rights.
The core of what we need to achieve gender parity in
technology around the globe exists today, and so we have a few
recommendations. First, we need to expand the notion of
literacy to include digital literacy. ICT needs to be included
in formal education. It is not a side subject. So while we used
to have the three Rs, I think now we need literacy, numeracy,
and digital literacy. We need them all working together, and we
need to introduce that as early as possible.
Second, we should prioritize investments in community
institutions like schools and libraries where we can build on
existing infrastructure for public access. For example, there
are 320,000 libraries in the world, and 70 percent of them are
in developing countries. Imagine if each was connected to the
Internet, and staffed with a skilled infomediary to support
Internet access by women and girls.
Third, we need to balance the overall expanding of IT
access with better digital literacy and skills, and ongoing
coaching, so that women and girls can use this technology to
better their economic, family, and life outcomes, so as to not
inadvertently, without those skills, expand the divide rather
than shrink it.
And finally, we should look across all of the work we are
doing in the U.S. Government and among our development
partners, and make sure that everything we do is taking the
gender digital divide into account. Whether we are working on
health, or food security, or environmental issues, are we
looking at everything, and making sure that we are addressing
this wherever it is possible?
And increasing mobile subscriptions alone will not actually
purely equalize this gender divide. Governments, international
agencies, nonprofits, and private enterprises need to work
together. And I thank the committee for this opportunity.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Warner follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Chairman Royce. I thank you, Ms. Warner. We thank all of
our witnesses here.
Let me start with a question that goes to this issue of how
media itself portrays women working in the STEM fields. And my
first thought here would be, because the studies that you have
focused on here in industrialized nations, because that is
rebroadcast out around the world, both are lesser
representation on screen and off screen, probably impacts the
number of women and girls interested in STEM in the developing
world. And that is the essence of my question there.
Ms. Davis. Absolutely. You are right. Eighty percent of the
media consumed globally is made in the United States. My
institute has also researched--done the first global gender-in-
film study, and it is--the representations are no better in
foreign films as far as women in these fields. And the
importance of it is, I can't overemphasize how powerful media
images are. And they can be in both a positive and a negative
way. For example, there being far too much stereotyping and
hyper-sexualization of female characters. That is obviously
negative. But if you show female characters doing
nontraditional and important things, the message comes across
clearly.
The most interesting example I have of that is in our study
of the careers of television female characters. One of the most
well-represented professions was women in forensic science.
There are so many female forensic scientists on TV because of
the CSI shows and everything, that I don't have to work to get
more representation there. And in real life, the numbers of
women wanting to pursue this career has absolutely skyrocketed.
I think about 75 percent of people wanting to study this field
are female, and colleges are scrambling to keep up with the
demand for the courses. So it just shows what I mentioned
earlier, the words we live by is, ``If girls can see it, they
can be it.'' Because we fail to have enough real-life female
role models in these fields, in the STEM fields and ICT, we
need them on screen so that girls can see that, and we need
them in great numbers as well. We have to have boys and girls
see that women are good at science and good at engineering and
math, and that that is viable for them.
Chairman Royce. I have another question here, and it goes
to the use of technology.
Some years ago, I passed an Anti-Stalking Act here, but as
technology changes, we are now seeing it is not just the phone.
It is access to the Internet as an area where what you might
think might make women feel more secure, you also have the
online stalking, the online hacking that threatens their
security. So have you seen any evidence for the panel here, any
evidence on balance that technology is decreasing the overall
amount of harassment of women, or is technology just a neutral
tool when addressing this cultural issue at the end of the day?
What is your perception on that issue, and how can we impact
it?
Ms. Jorge. Thank you. So I am sure that everyone has
something to share on that. I think one of the most important
things to recognize, and a study by my colleagues at the Web
Foundation just found this clearly through very in-depth
research in 10 countries across the developing world, is that
the realities and the inequalities that exist offline are
normally transferred to the online world, including the
challenges, the difficulties, the norms, tend to be duplicated
online. And what we are doing the way we work, is to ensure
that, first of all, that is not the case. And that the kind of
policies, the kind of programs, the kinds of projects to
empower women, not just through access, but the way they adopt,
the way they use technology, first of all, are safe, but also
are informed by policies that will protect women to do that
safely, but always giving them the voice that they need, as
women, to express freely and in an open way. And that is very
important.
So it is important that we have the right programs in place
to not only support, to protect women, but it is not just about
the online world. That is just a replication of the huge
inequalities that around the world we need to deal with as well
as in the offline world. So it leads us to think about are
there disparities that we know exist, that Geena already
mentioned, that Joyce mentioned in terms of education, in terms
of the STEM fields, in terms of a woman's ability to have
access to information, to understand their rights.
In many countries in the developing world, the ability of
women to understand and to use and act on their rights is very
limited. And one thing that the online world and access to
technology can do is allow women much faster and good access to
information that they otherwise wouldn't have.
And so in that way, we can use online platforms and the Web
and technology to not only increase women's ability to have
more access to information, understand their rights, act on
their rights, and have more support to have their own agency as
women in their own societies.
Chairman Royce. Technology is going to be empowering. Mr.
Sires. I am out of time, we will go to Mr. Sires.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for being
here. This is a very important issue for empowering women in
many of these countries. I was just wondering, when you talk
about this stigma that in some of these countries have, women
using the Internet, and getting good at it, would you call it
jealousy, just from the male role in some of these countries,
or what is actually the stigma that you are talking about?
Anyone?
Ms. Warner. I would mention, you know, stigma may be one
element of it, but I think part of what we found effective is
making sure that men, whether they are in a teaching role,
whether they are in a family role, whether they are in a policy
or employer role, understand the value broadly of the Internet
for women. And so we have done some work with a partner in
Nepal and India, in very rural areas, and looking at rural
community centers, and women who did not normally leave the
house. Once men were understanding more about how this might
contribute economically, more financial transaction management
for women, then I think once that was expressed and they
understood that, then they were able to embrace the
participation of women in technology more.
Mr. Sires. Ms. Davis.
Ms. Davis. I think a tremendous amount is attributable to
unconscious gender bias. If everyone is raised in a culture
that doesn't show that women take up half the space in the
world, that doesn't show that women do half of the interesting
things, men and women internalize an unconscious bias that most
of us don't realize the extent of how much we have that. And so
that needs to be overcome through education and through seeing
women involved in this. But it is something that is inhibiting
progress in so many sectors of society, and particularly in
this one. So people just aren't aware of the unconscious bias
they have against women in these kinds of positions.
Mr. Sires. Yes. Ms. Jorge.
Ms. Jorge. Thank you. I totally agree with my colleague
witnesses. I would like to say that, you know, if you look at
some of the recommendations that many of us have already made
at this table, they very much lead to exactly that question.
How do we change that? And how do we, through education,
through targeted programs and projects that are addressing some
of those inequalities, change that, those ideas, but also that
reality, and allow women to express and to have new
opportunities that they otherwise wouldn't have? And technology
can have a role in that. So I would say that by bringing access
that is meaningful, that is relevant to women's lives, that is
relevant for them as economic agents, as social agents, as
creators, as Geena mentioned, is extremely important. And women
need to be supported to have those opportunities.
Often, as we know, and in this country, we are very
fortunate, but we are not at all at the point where we are
supposed to be yet. Many programs, as you know, also in this
country have supported women from embarking on STEM fields. And
that is something that is also very needed everywhere; not just
through the profession, but especially through cultural and
social environments as well where some of these differences,
the lack of role models, the lack of opportunities, have really
kept women back. And we have a responsibility, not just as
gender advocates, as I assume we all are, and I assume all of
you are in this committee, to create opportunities for many
more women to have those opportunities in their lives, being
social agents, economic agents, as creators, whatever those
women decide for their own lives. And that is really important.
It is also their choice.
We are here to create and we want to create opportunities
for women to be able to act on the choice that they have with
technology, however they would like to use it. But we need to
make it relevant. We need to make it informed. We need to make
the technology useful and meaningful. If we don't do that, we
fail at what we are doing.
Mr. Sires. Well, thank you. I always get jealous in my
office when I have a staffer come in and teaches me how to work
my computer, or work my phone. And to me, that is a jealousy
factor that is not just in my office, but I think in some of
these countries also, when they see a woman being so good at
some of these gadgets. But I thank you very much for being
here, and thank you for all of your information that you have
given us. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Ileana Ros-Lehtinen.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you.
Mr. Sires. Former prosecutor from Florida.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Be afraid. Thank you so much, ladies.
Thank you for your testimony, and I apologize that I came late.
So Ms. Davis, I wanted to ask you if you could give all of
us late arrivals an overview about what your very interesting
institute is doing. How do you gauge success? What are the
metrics that you use to know that you are doing what you seek
to achieve? So I apologize, but I am so interested in your
work.
Ms. Davis. Thank you. Yes, so I have been doing this about
10 years. My institute has sponsored the largest amount of
research ever done on gender depictions in children's media.
And the reason I wanted the data was I wanted to be able to go
directly to my colleagues in the industry. So rather than
taking on the mantle of educating the public, because I have
access to the creators of children's media, I can just go
directly to them with this information. And it has proven to be
invaluable.
So many creators were simply not aware of how bereft of
female presence the movies and television they made for kids
was. In the area of television, we looked at all of the
different sectors, prime time, and daytime, and reality, but
children's programs has the worst ratio of male to female
characters. And that is true in family film ratings, also have
about the same ratio of male to female characters. And so they
are shocked. They are absolutely shocked. And I think we can
attribute that to everyone having the same unconscious gender
bias. We were all raised on the same ratio of male to female
characters.
In film, the ratio of male to female has been exactly the
same since 1946. So it is in all of us, this idea that women do
not take up half the space in the world, and that they do not
do half of the interesting things. And as we mentioned earlier,
80 percent of the media consumed globally is created in the
United States. So we are, in fact, responsible for exporting a
very negative impression of women around the world.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And in the 10 years, excuse me, that you
have had the institute and you presented this, have you seen a
marked improvement? I know I have got three granddaughters, 6,
3, and 1----
Ms. Davis. Right.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen [continuing]. And sometimes I am just
appalled by the shows that they watch.
Ms. Davis. Right.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And they are supposedly on, you know,
great kids-oriented stations.
Ms. Davis. Right.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And it is just such a lopsided view of
women's roles in the world.
Ms. Davis. It really is. And the remarkable thing is how
unconscious so much--people literally didn't think about this
until we had the numbers. In fact, before I had the numbers and
I spoke to people in my industry, very often they would say,
oh, no, no, no, no, that has been fixed. That has all been
fixed. And they would name a movie with one female character--
--
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And then whip up another princess.
Ms. Davis [continuing]. As proof that gender and equality
had been fixed. So they were not aware that the populations
were so bereft of female presence. And, so, there is definitely
a shift in their consciousness, and we untapped a tremendous
desire to do right by women and girls, but now they understand
in what ways they need to do that. And we haven't been able to
measure yet an increase in the percentage of female characters.
As of 2014, it is still exactly the same. But I feel very
confident predicting that within 5 years, the needle will move
for the first time in nearly seven decades.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And the filmmakers and the TV show
makers, they will realize that they have got a wonderful
audience there. I mean, it will be good for their intake and
box-office hits----
Ms. Davis. Absolutely.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen [continuing]. And the ratings for TV
shows, because parents are very well aware, not just moms, dads
too----
Ms. Davis. Right.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen [continuing]. They are very aware of the
gender disparities that their kids are subjected to.
Ms. Davis. Right.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. So thank you for what you are doing, and
thank you for the excellent research that backs up what you are
saying. And I think that you will be seeing the fruit of your
labors coming up in the coming years. I congratulate all three
of you. Thank you so much for having this hearing, Mr. Royce. I
am sorry that I came late. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Eliot Engel of New York.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Davis, thank you,
again, for being here, and thank you to all of the witnesses.
Ms. Davis, in 2012, you were appointed by the ITU as a special
envoy to promote technology among women and girls, and you have
done incredible work on gender in the media with your
institute. How women and girls are depicted in the media, and
entertainment industry, affects, of course, how they perceive
their ability, talents, and their future prospects in life. So
it is incredible work that you do.
We have seen some progress on gender equality in the U.S.
in the media. We have seen you as the role of the first female
President on TV. I must say for the record, I would like to see
a female President. No names mentioned. But obviously, there is
more to do.
Can you comment on the fact that it is important for women
and girls to access information and communication technologies
to end gender inequality and to empower them; but, it also
seems to me that we need to encourage men and boys as well to
change their perceptions of women's roles. So if you could
comment on that, that would be great.
Ms. Davis. Absolutely. Thank you very much. We find that
the more hours of television a boy watches, the more sexist his
views become. And that a girl's perceptions of what she can be
in life goes down the more media she consumes. So it is a very
negative and important message that comes through for children.
We always emphasize that it is equally important for boys to
see women and girls engaged in unstereotyped activities, to be
engaged in the STEM fields.
My theory of everything, and why I am focused on what kids
see first, is that we are, in effect, creating a problem that
we have to try to solve later on. We are instilling gender bias
in boys and girls from the very first entertainments that they
consume, and the first popular culture they are exposed to.
So that is why I am so focused on what boys and girls see
in the beginning. And it will change everything, I think, if we
can have kids grow up free of these biases, that we would be
looking at a different world when that happens. And that is why
it is important around the world that we spread this message,
and we show women and girls taking up the space that is
rightfully theirs.
Mr. Engel. You know, it is amazing because I even see it in
my own kids who are now in their 20s and 30s, that some of the
perceptions or things, not only in this issue, but in many
issues that I sort of grew up with and saw around me, that they
are--it is incredulous to them that such things can even exist,
because they were raised in a different world----
Ms. Davis. Right.
Mr. Engel [continuing]. And so it is really important that
we change those perceptions. Thank you.
Ms. Davis. Thank you.
Mr. Engel. Ms. Warner, our committee has held a few
hearings that focus on women's and girls' access to education,
and if you look at these global reports, they indicate that the
gender gap in primary education is closing, but women and girls
continue, obviously, to lag behind in education rates in parts
of sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East and South Asia, and the
result of that is that 600 million women around the world are
illiterate, which is nearly twice the number of men.
So how do we go from promoting access to education to
promoting digital literacy? Can we do both at the same time?
And how important is it to introduce young girls to information
and communication technologies at an early stage? Obviously, it
is important.
Ms. Warner. Thank you. I would make a couple of points.
First, I think that there is no going back on the technology.
So we have to find a way to integrate it. And one of the ways
we found to be effective is to look at what are teachers using
around instructional technology, and how are they engaging
students across the subjects, so that it is not just about
teaching it as a separate subject.
The second point I would make is that as we look at long-
term engagement for women, and we have done a lot to increase
access to primary education, that I think we are starting to
see the challenges of not investing in secondary education that
is stopping things at primary. And so to the extent we can both
advocate for, and even with limited resources, invest in seeing
that more women receive secondary education, and I should say
quality secondary education, because I think, as we all know,
just being in the classroom may or may not lead to educational
outcomes.
The World Wide Web Foundation has found that women who have
had some secondary education are actually six times more likely
to be online than women who have not had any secondary
education. So I think the combination of not making it just a
separate subject--now, that is to say, that we also agree we
should expand the number of women in technology fields, in STEM
fields, and make that investment. But, in addition to doing
that, we need to make technology just not seem like something
separate to daily life.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. I see my time has expired. Thank you,
thank you, all three of you, for your great testimony. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Ted Yoho of Florida.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
panelists being here. And, you know, there is a paradigm shift
going on. I am a veterinarian by trade, and I graduated in
1983. And up to the 1970s, it was a male-dominated field. And
when I went to vet school, it was about 65 percent male and 35
percent female. Now it is about 10 percent male, 90 percent
female, and it has changed. And I think a lot of professions
have done that. And, I think, in large part, you know, what
they see on television. So I commend you for doing that. And,
of course, your role in ``The Long Kiss Good Night,'' you know,
being a housewife that was a chef. I still remember that chefs
do those things, you know. And that was a great movie, and I am
sure that has inspired a lot of people.
Ms. Davis. Hopefully not to become assassins.
Mr. Yoho. A great movie. Anyway, what I have seen is, you
know, when we look around, and when we have 60 percent or
greater of the world's population as was mentioned, off the
Internet, 4.3 billion offline, and primarily women, what
experiences do you find with the illiteracy rate being that
high in relationship to using the Internet?
If you want to--start with you, Ms. Jorge. What do you see
with that? I mean, is it hard to get people to transition over
that, and what are you finding as far as problems?
Ms. Jorge. Yes, it is, indeed, and education is a key
variable that determines how women not only engage with
technology, but use it in a way that is meaningful. So not just
for receivers of information, a one-channel way of receiving
information, but actually acting on the information that they
can receive, that they can use, that they can learn from. And,
in fact, you know, a recent study showed exactly that, and
proved that, again, education, if you don't have that variable
there, if it is not addressed, it really limits the way women
can engage with information and technology.
So, and that is why it is so important, and that for us,
and for IREX, and so many, you know, colleagues like, you know,
Geena's institute, to really focus on the education piece,
because it is a key ingredient to make sure that when women
have access, they can not only engage with that technology much
more meaningfully, but they can also use that access in ways
that will be more productive.
Mr. Yoho. Let me ask you this: How much are you using the
Internet for education,you know, like a classroom to bring the
world experts to teach if--any of you have experience with
that? And what are you seeing? Is it more productive than
having in-room classrooms, or as an assistant to a person in a
classroom? Anybody?
Ms. Jorge. With the caveat that I am not an education
specialist, I am, you know, an expert in policy and regulation.
I have to say that from my experience, also as a mother, and
doing a lot of research, and reviewing a lot of really good
research by many of our partners, it is important to have both.
Mr. Yoho. Okay.
Ms. Jorge. There is never just one kind of curriculum that
should just be focusing on technology or not. It is the
combination, and using technology in a way that is useful for
implementing the curriculum, for bringing skills up, et cetera.
It is not that the technology is a silver bullet, but the
technology is an extremely useful element for education to
improve the quality----
Mr. Yoho. It is a tool.
Ms. Jorge. Exactly. But in developing countries, what is
interesting, and it is important for us to highlight here,
because we are focusing on international development questions.
When there is very little education, or no access to education
at all, it is extremely important that the Internet has become
one platform to have access to information and educational
tools that otherwise wouldn't be there.
So the gaps and the realities of those environments are
also quite different than, say, the environments that you would
have here as privileged where our children go to schools where
my children, all of them have access to either a Chromebook, or
an iPad, or what have you.
Mr. Yoho. Right.
Ms. Jorge. Those are, you know, exceptions when you
consider the entire world, and especially the developing world
that we are focusing on, and the situation of women and girls
in the developing world.
Mr. Yoho. All right, let me go to Ms. Warner, because I saw
her reaching for the button. Let me get a response from her.
Ms. Warner. Thanks. I would say that technology, all by
itself, is neutral. So really what is key from an educational
setting is making sure that folks know how to effectively use
the technology in a learning context. So that may be to either
supplement with newer information in the STEM fields. We use it
a lot with English language learning, so native speakers'
voices can be brought in around the world.
Mr. Yoho. Right.
Ms. Warner. But I think the second issue is using it as a
type of learning method. Does it engage more for project-based
learning? Does it teach some of the critical skills, more than
the rote learning that we want to see that are 21st century
skills that so many employers around the world are seeing
lacking?
Mr. Yoho. Ms. Davis, do you have anything to add to that?
Ms. Davis. No. No, you know, I agree with what they said. I
am not an expert in that field, but it makes a lot of sense.
Mr. Yoho. All right. Well, I appreciate it. I am out of
time, and thank you for being here. And keep up the good work.
Ms. Davis. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Bill Keating of Massachusetts.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is great to
welcome a graduate of Wareham High School, in Massachusetts,
Ms. Davis. And it is a pleasure to be here. I am in the next
town over in Bourne, and I am sure we are all proud of your
success and the work you are doing in this regard.
I wanted to touch base on something I think is just as
important too, and that is how important your work is for males
and young men. I mean, a mother is a child's first teacher, and
particularly in other countries in the world as well as
domestically. Empowering mothers to have this information, to
have this access, we have found with investments in USAID, that
money is better served empowering women and mothers, because it
goes better to the health of the children, the welfare of the
child, but also the education of that child. So can you speak a
little bit about how empowering this is for mothers--how it is
for young boys having a mother that is more in a position of
having these resources?
Ms. Davis. Well, it is incredibly important. And like you
said, the value of having a mother who is educated is not only
important in their self-esteem, in their presence, but also,
the more a mother is empowered, a woman will invest 90 percent
of her income back into the community and to her family and to
everyone's health and well-being. And so it is an incredibly
powerful tool that we have to empower the mothers and the women
in developing countries to have this knowledge, have access--
the more access to the knowledge that will empower them, the
better.
Mr. Keating. Yeah. I don't know if any of the other
witnesses wanted to touch base on that?
Ms. Jorge. Actually, I guess I could just share a story
that one of our colleagues who is here in the room shared that
I think is quite telling of that, and it is a story based on a
case in Madagascar where women have put together a project to
allow women to report gender-based violence using information
and communications technology and using their mobile phones.
And not only was it important for women, through the project to
learn about their rights and report cases of domestic abuse,
but their sons and their daughters became much more aware of
the issues that their mothers were being faced with and the
rights that their mothers had as mothers, and would remind them
to report those cases of domestic abuse when they took place.
Because they had the ability to have a tool that would allow
them, and they would remind their mothers, you have the right
to report and to not have to accept what is happening to you.
And so that is a very powerful example of how not only the
children, sons and daughters, can learn about the rights of
their mothers, but their rights as children as well and see the
potential that some of these new tools can provide to them as
they engage as people in their own lives.
Mr. Keating. Are you aware of any concerns to the--you
know, this is an enormously powerful tool to mobilize people
around a common cause, particularly internationally, but are
you--not every country in this world, unfortunately, has the
greatest of missions and purposes right now, and there are very
oppressive governments and terrorist groups that are out there.
Do you come across any concerns that in the hands of some
of these countries or groups with deep packet technology, that
they can identify who is using these kinds of technological
tools and target them? And if that is the case, is there
something we can do about that?
Ms. Warner. Yes. I think that this is a concern, that some
governments can use this as a way to oppress, to easily
identify activists and others who may be trying to produce a
counternarrative. I think one of the things we have found that
is really important is in working with activists or journalists
or others, is to make sure that our work includes really good
skill building in digital security, that this is an important
element for individuals to know.
And just to add to that, there was a question about general
harassment of women, not targeting of activists and others
before. And I think in Iraq one of the cell phone companies has
developed a special plan with, like, a bye-bye button to block
callers who are harassing. So I think to the ability we can
engage the mobile companies to understand what types of
services would be female friendly, that that will both help
them gain more customers, but also make the service have a more
positive value.
Mr. Keating. Okay. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Matt Salmon of Arizona.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First and foremost, I want to go on the record agreeing
wholeheartedly with Mr. Engel that Carly Fiorina could make a
great President of the United States. Just having a little fun.
Chairman Royce. I would just point out that Geena Davis
played one.
Mr. Salmon. And since Ted Yoho opened up the door on
movies, I have two daughters. My oldest is 35, the other one is
30. I think they get really angry for me telling their age, but
they are both very well educated, very successful, and they
would both be very thrilled to drive a convertible with Brad
Pitt in the back.
So, anyway, you have done some phenomenal work, Ms. Davis,
raising the profile. Every father that has daughters wants
exactly the same opportunities for his daughters that he does
for his sons. I have two daughters and two sons, and I want the
same thing for all of them. You said that in--maybe confronting
is the wrong idea or wrong thought, but you have addressed with
some of the leaders in Hollywood the disparity, and you have
said that they have kind of referred by citing anecdotes of
individual movies or productions. Are you making some headway,
do you think, with them in general, and what are some of the
things that we could do to maybe aid in that effort?
Ms. Davis. Right. Thank you. Yes, definitely we are making
great strides. I am really heartened by the response to the
research. It was before we had the research that I found that
people were, even creators of content, were unaware of how few
female characters they were including in their products, but
once they know or once they can engage with the research, they
are very motivated to want to make change.
We did a survey of everyone who has heard my presentation
in Hollywood in our industry, and 68 percent said what they
learned had changed two or more of their projects, and 41
percent said it had changed four or more of their projects. So
we are very excited about that. There is lots of movies and TV
shows that have come out that we know that we have impacted.
And it is something that is very simple. For example, we were
at an animation studio, and I mentioned that in some G-rated
films, crowd scenes are made up of only 17 percent female
characters, and--you know, which makes no sense in the 21st
century that we would be showing kids that much imbalance.
And at the meeting, the head of the studio said, hey,
guys--because it was 99 percent men around the table--could we
just stop doing that? Could we just agree right here that we
are going to make crowds 50 percent? And they all said, of
course, because it was so unconscious. So I think a tremendous
amount of our work is done simply by awareness. And as you
suggested, it is not a confrontational way that I approach the
studios at all, it is as a colleague in a very private and
supportive environment, and we partner with them basically to
bring it to the front of their minds, and it seems to be
working, so I am very optimistic.
Mr. Salmon. I think diplomacy is something we all need a
little bit more of, and congratulations on that.
Ms. Davis. Thank you.
Mr. Salmon. Ms. Jorge, as access to the Internet increases
around the globe, how can we leverage distance learning to help
empower women and girls in the goal of increasing educational
opportunities? Can we do more to encourage the development of
country-specific distance learning in both basic education as
well as university instruction? What specific steps would you
recommend?
Ms. Jorge. Yes, absolutely. Thank you for the question. As
I said, you know, those specific target programs to help women
and girls have access to education would be very important. It
is also very important that education integrating technology
starts very early on, and it is not just left at the primary
level, as Joyce already made the case, but should continue and
be very clearly expanded.
I think actually the work of IREX and Joyce's, you know,
team in education is actually quite relevant for your question,
especially we are partners in some of the work that we do, and
one of the reasons why is because we believe in the power of
libraries and public access in developing countries to be not
only centers of knowledge, centers of education, but also
centers for people to have access to these opportunities that
they otherwise wouldn't be able to have on their own.
Because access is so important, the reality is, as you
probably understand, it is very difficult, as it is now and
especially despite the growth in the sector, to make sure that
all populations are covered with the right type of coverage
that Internet requires. And so because of that and because
clearly competition and markets by themselves have not been
able to ensure that everyone has access to a connection, let
alone being able to have the income to afford a connection when
that might be possible, it is very important that public access
is there and it is strengthened to be way to not only bring
education opportunities, but to strengthen the kind of
education programs and projects that are out there.
And I would say--I would really love Joyce to add to that,
because IREX has done some really fantastic work in that area
integrating the education field and needs with libraries as a
platform to improve education.
Ms. Warner. Thank you. I did mention that. I did want to
actually add one thing that we are just starting to do now with
Course Talk, which is kind of the Yelp of MOOCs, I don't know
if they would say that is their official term, but that is how
I describe them, and USAID, and that is, we are trying to look
at what MOOCs are looking like in the developing world. This is
research that is just starting.
We are also partnering with the University of Washington
Tascha Institute on this. And one of the things we are trying
to figure out, and we have three countries we are looking at
right now, Colombia, Philippines, and South Africa, is how are
people engaging with MOOCs, how could they be used for
development. Most people are showing that people who take MOOCs
are trying to advance their careers, their employability. So
what factors increase that, what are the challenges, what are
some of the gender issues there. And I think the research is
ongoing right now, so maybe it is more of a preview that this
is something we are concerned about.
I think that when you look at engaging women and really all
learners online, the ability to combine blended learning can
also be very effective. So what does that mean? Maybe folks are
online and they are remote from the main educational
institution providing it, but there is an infrastructure in
place for them to meet together in their village, the same
people who maybe are learning together, and how do you blend
that in person with the online learning.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you. We go now to Lois Frankel of
Florida.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you, Mr. Royce. And thank you so much
for this hearing. I consider myself pretty well informed on
women's issues, but I have to say, this is very shocking to me,
and I thank all of you for being here, because I know I often--
every day I say to myself, how did we live without the
Internet? It is really something.
And, you know, even my own--my mother is 90 years old, and
she loves her pink iPad. I mean, she is on that iPad all day.
And, you know, my niece has this little 2-year-old, I don't
think he is even 2 years old, and we go out and he grabs the
phone and he is playing games. So it is just--it is--I will say
it is pervasive, but--so, anyway, I have a few questions.
I just want to say to Ms. Davis, I am a great fan. I am
glad to see you are alive and well. I have been worried about
you. I know you went over the cliff--I see you go over the
cliff and then I think you just went blind and died on Grey's
Anatomy. Did you live or did you die?
Ms. Davis. Well, I didn't die. I only was--I had a----
Ms. Frankel. Oh, you had the brain tumor.
Ms. Davis [continuing]. A brain tumor and then I went
blind, but I didn't die, no.
Ms. Frankel. Okay. That is good. I couldn't remember. Well,
I knew you had the brain tumor, and anyway, I was worried about
you. But I am glad you are doing well.
And so my first question is to you, which is how do you
fight--with what you are doing with the media, where does the
box office come in and how do you, you know, get around the
fact that I am sure everybody--they look at the bottom line and
making money?
Ms. Davis. Yeah. Absolutely. So research shows that films
about women or directed by women, are equally successful once
you adjust for the budget, but it is something that people are
hesitant to embrace. There is this belief in Hollywood that
women will watch men, but men won't watch women, so our hands
are tied. That is why I don't talk to them about making more
female stars, I say whatever you are already making, add more
women to the population. And the interesting thing is, there is
a test called the Bechdel Test, which has a very low threshold;
it is, are there at least two women who talk to each other
about something other than men, and you would be amazed how
many films do not pass this test. However, a study has shown
that films that do pass that test make more money.
So there is definitely evidence that adding more female
characters is not only a good idea for our population, but is a
profitable idea as well.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you for that. Now, I have heard a couple
of ideas for solutions, because I try to write them down. One,
of course, is the whole media thing, Ms. Davis, that you talked
about. But I heard you say expanding literacy to digital
literacy, build on existing infrastructure, expand coaching
opportunities.
So my question is this, have you done an analysis at all of
what, for example, USAID is doing? Is there a list of
recommendations of how we--you know, the Congress can engage
either with budgetary items or policy?
Ms. Jorge. Yes. Thank you for the question. That is
extremely relevant and exactly the reason why we are here.
USAID has done some really fantastic work in supporting many of
the programs that many of us are actually working on, both not
through just NGOs, but also the private sector or private
sector organizations, in trying to come up with better
solutions to address this problem. Including addressing the
kinds of systemic problems around the gender income gap and
other kinds of inequalities that exist in society in general.
But coming back specifically to ICTs and technology and
access to the Internet, what can be done, what can be done
better, and what can USAID and other agencies of the U.S.
Government do to support that? A few things: One, give high
priority to establishing time-bound targets for gender equity
in ICT, access and use. There was an attempt to do that by the
Broadband Commission at the U.N. level, a group that I was--you
know, I was honored to be part of, in fact, inspired by a
request by Geena here a few years ago. I am afraid to say that
we haven't done much headway into that, and the reality is that
the gap still exists and we don't see very clear gender equity
in ICT access and use, but neither do we see it in the kind of
policymaking that needs to be supported at the international
level to ensure that not only gender analysis and gender
considerations are included, but that policy is developed to
address the gaps that exist.
And so we have not made enough progress, and we need to,
and it would be very important for the U.S. to have an
important role to ensure that that moves and that we can
actually move the needle and ensure that policies are focusing
on women.
Affordability is an issue. The fact and the reason why I
mentioned income gap is that women across the world earn on
average from 30 to 50 percent less than men. And by default,
they are given a lot less opportunity, just from an income
perspective, to be able to access, to purchase, to afford the
kind of access that the Internet requires, and so that is a
huge problem that needs to be addressed. And by reducing costs
and reducing prices to the end users is very critical to make
sure that the reality of women's lives, that we hope continues
to improve, is recognized when developing policy. If you are
developing policy for the average person that doesn't exist,
obviously a large group of the population is going to be left
out of the impact of that potential policy, especially if they
start from a different point.
It is also very important to work with civic women's groups
to find ways that technology can enhance civic participation.
One of the most empowering effects of technology and access to
the Internet and the information that the Internet brings to
women, is by allowing women to become more active citizens in
their societies, with their governments, something that we here
not only take for granted, but are able to exercise and enjoy
the benefits of that benefit.
Most women in developing countries don't have the ability
to enjoy that, not only civic participation, but free and open
civic participation without fear that their actions, their
thinking, their ideas may not be retaliated against. And so we
need to support that kind of civic engagement and civic
participation by women and especially by women's groups that
are much closer to the--live the realities of women in
developing countries.
And as some of our colleagues already mentioned, I would
say always put women at the center of policymaking. Here we are
in this room, people come in and out, but I can tell you I have
been counting how many of you women policymakers have been on
the bench, and there are very few of you, and if there were
more, many more of these issues would be considered. It is no
different in any other part of the world.
When women are at the center of decisionmaking, issues are
thought differently from a different perspective, they are
imagined in new ways. And so more women at all levels of
planning, development, policymaking is absolutely critical to
ensure that those concerns come through in the final result of
policymaking, in international development, in the kind of
support that we as a government here in the United States can
make international development, and the kind of impact that we
want to see taking place as a result of our actions. Thank you.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you very much.
Chairman Royce. And, Lois, last month on our hearing on the
anti-poaching bill, we had the academy award winner for best
director, we had Kathryn Bigelow here, who directed ``The Hurt
Locker'' and also directed ``Zero Dark Thirty,'' so----
Alan, Alan Lowenthal.
Mr. Lowenthal. From California. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And
thank you, witnesses, for being here. And I apologize for
coming a little late.
Last night as I was going through preparing for this, and I
know we are kind of looking at both developing and developed
nations and kind of--I was shocked by something, and it was the
last paragraph of the memorandum that was put out by the chair
of the committee, where it said that in the United States,
fewer women are now completing technology engineering degrees
than what occurred 30 years ago. So there are fewer now, and
half of all that enter technology companies leave them by mid
career. These are staggering statistics, and it really just
knocked me for a loop when I read that.
And so what are we going to do from a policy standpoint
here within the United States to really reverse this? Less than
30 years ago: It is just a shock. And I just want to know if
you can help us, as we begin to kind of grapple with this, both
the idea of both access, but also retention. How are we going
to deal with this issue, and--which is just shocking,
absolutely shocking. And I ask for any help, me not knowing
kind of where to go from here.
Ms. Warner. So in full disclosure, it is not my personal
expertise, but I would say----
Mr. Lowenthal. Not mine either, so you can say anything you
want.
Ms. Warner. Okay. Thank you. I would say a couple things.
One is I think many of the technology companies as they look at
how their family policies and others are designed, and what it
takes to advance and stay in the field is very important.
There was a report done a few years ago by the Department
of Commerce actually, that looked at women in STEM and what is
going on and why people go in and study and then leave the
field, and I think that that might be something that really
looks at some of the patterns.
Mr. Lowenthal. Are there some things that you remember from
that, that really stand out----
Ms. Warner. Yeah.
Mr. Lowenthal [continuing]. Why we are going in the wrong--
we are not even talking about being flat, we are talking about
going in the wrong direction?
Ms. Warner. I don't remember if this was the number one
reason, but I think a lot of it had to do with the scheduling
and the work and being able to balance, once you had a family,
the workload and the hours and----
Mr. Lowenthal. I got it.
Ms. Warner. Yeah.
Mr. Lowenthal. Anybody else want to give some help?
Ms. Davis. I would just say that I think there is so little
encouragement for women in this field that--you know, there was
a study at Yale not too long ago where they sent out resumes
from--it was actually a woman's resume to apply for a position
in the science department at colleges, and they--so they sent
out identical resumes except the first name was changed on some
of them to a male first name, and it turned out that the man
got far more offers for a position at a higher salary and he
was judged to be more likable and somebody that you would want
to work with.
So in the face of that, that your teachers from grade
school on and your professors in college have bias against
women in the STEM fields, it kind of makes sense that that is
reflected in how many women pursue it, how many--you know, that
we are not making--sorry we should have made--been building
on----
Mr. Lowenthal. That is right. Rather than building, we are
going in the wrong direction.
Ms. Davis. Right, right.
Mr. Lowenthal. And that is what is so shocking. I can
understand beginning to build, to deal with some of these
issues----
Ms. Davis. Right, right.
Mr. Lowenthal [continuing]. But to be going in the wrong
direction is just shocking.
Ms. Davis. Yeah. We just need a cultural shift as far as
this is concerned, and this hearing is bringing a lot of
attention to it, which I think is very welcome.
Mr. Lowenthal. Well, thank you. Any other thoughts?
Ms. Jorge. I will just share a quick story----
Mr. Lowenthal. Yes.
Ms. Jorge [continuing]. A personal story that I think is
telling of the realities that we face as parents, as citizens.
I was looking just recently with my older daughter at different
school options, and when I went to visit a particular school
that I cannot disclose the name, I was asked--you know, my
daughter is very interested in math and science, but also she
is a musician. And so we were talking about her qualities, et
cetera, and the kinds of things that she wanted to get out of
the school. The assistant headmaster asked me, oh, so what does
your husband do? What is his profession? And so I told her, and
she carried on the conversation.
And so my daughter asked me, she didn't ask you what you
did? And so, you are right. So I turned back to the assistant
headmaster and said, are you interested in what I do? And she
was pretty shocked and kind of embarrassed, so much so that she
tried to overcompensate in even more embarrassing ways. But the
truth is that is the reality that we face, women, girls, face
in many environments, including in what are, you know, largely
perceived as very well educated, very important and nice
schools, very privileged schools, I must say, and still the
stereotypes and the kinds of things that we have to address are
so ingrained, as Geena and Joyce have been saying, that are
flabergasting.
And so I can tell you that none of my daughters would ever
go to that school until another person changes. But this is the
reality that women and girls face on their daily lives
regardless of where we are in the world, and in some places
more so than others because of other issues. And so can we do
something about it? We can, and that is why we are here. And I
hope that you through your, you know, actions, through your
policymaking, through your support in international development
support programs that can help change these realities that
should not exist.
Mr. Lowenthal. And I think that is a wonderful reason for
having this hearing, and I agree, but I think the narrative,
just for us to be aware of just how serious the problem is in
the United States, not just in developing nations when we are
talking about developing nations, that we are going in the
wrong direction real clearly, raises the red flag, that this is
an amazing--you know, this is such an important area, that we
need to be using our resources wisely, bringing all people into
the system, and making sure that everyone really is able to
function as we move forward.
And the fact that we are losing women and not having them
go into the most important professions, and the data is clearly
going in the wrong direction, is really cause for great alarm,
great alarm.
Ms. Jorge. May I?
Mr. Lowenthal. Yes.
Ms. Jorge. I just want to add one more thing just so that
we also complete the thought, is that I think it is also
important to think of these issues not just from an overall
gender perspective, but thinking of all the different kinds of
women and men in the world from different backgrounds. Because
the kinds of things that we are discussing in terms of
inequalities based on gender are even more exacerbated for
women and some men, but especially for women of different
races, different socioeconomic groups. And they face even
greater barriers and greater, you know, obstacles in their
lives.
And so it is important to not just be aware from a general
gender perspective, which is clearly very important, but also
to be very aware of other differences that affect the way
people have access to opportunities, including their
backgrounds, whatever that might be.
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you. And I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Congressman Lowenthal.
And we will be incorporating the testimonies of our
witnesses here in the legislation that we are writing in the
committee.
And we want to again thank our witnesses for their trips
out here today and all the work they have put into this
testimony. It is now part of the official record and will be
part of our legislation.
We stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:40 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
