- ACCOUNTABILITY AND TRANSFORMATION: TIER RANKINGS IN THE FIGHT AGAINST HUMAN TRAFFICKING

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ACCOUNTABILITY AND TRANSFORMATION:
TIER RANKINGS IN THE FIGHT AGAINST
HUMAN TRAFFICKING

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON AFRICA, GLOBAL HEALTH,
GLOBAL HUMAN RIGHTS, AND
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 22, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-64

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

___________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
94-307PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2015

_________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
TOM EMMER, Minnesota

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights, and
International Organizations

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey, Chairman
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         KAREN BASS, California
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          AMI BERA, California
TOM EMMER, Minnesota
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

The Honorable Mark Lagon, president, Freedom House (former
Ambassador-at-Large for Trafficking in Persons, U.S. Department
of State)......................................................     8
Fr. Shay Cullen, president/chief executive officer, PREDA
Foundation.....................................................    21
Mr. Matthew Smith, executive director, Fortify Rights............    62
Mr. Jesse Eaves, director of policy and government relations,
Humanity United................................................    80

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

The Honorable Mark Lagon: Prepared statement.....................    12
Fr. Shay Cullen: Prepared statement..............................    26
Mr. Matthew Smith: Prepared statement............................    65

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    90
Hearing minutes..................................................    91
Questions submitted for the record by the Honorable Christopher
H. Smith, a Representative in Congress from the State of New
Jersey, and chairman, Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health,
Global Human Rights, and International Organizations, and
written responses from:
The Honorable Mark Lagon.......................................    92
Fr. Shay Cullen................................................    94
The Honorable Christopher H. Smith: AP investigation, ``Are
slaves catching the fish you buy?''............................    97

ACCOUNTABILITY AND TRANSFORMATION:.
TIER RANKINGS IN THE FIGHT AGAINST.
HUMAN TRAFFICKING

----------

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 22, 2015

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health,

Global Human Rights, and International Organizations,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:41 p.m., in
room 2200 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Christopher H.
Smith (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. The subcommittee will come to
order, and welcome. First of all, let me apologize to all of
you, our witnesses and our guests. We did have a series of
votes that went a little bit longer than what we thought so,
again, I want to apologize for convening this more than an hour
late.
Welcome to today's hearing on the importance of
accountability in the annual Trafficking in Persons Report, the
State Department's biggest opportunity of the year to prod
countries to fight human trafficking with greater effect,
greater efficiency, and greater effort.
There are some 20-plus million people around the globe who
live in sex or labor slavery today. When one hears such a
figure, over 20 million people, one's eyes begin to glaze over
as a number of such magnitude becomes an abstraction. There is
a cynical saying attributed to Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin
that ``The death of one man is a tragedy. The death of millions
is a statistic.'' Stalin knew that many would shrug their
shoulders and avert their gaze.
But we must never allow such cynicism to obscure the fact
that each of those 20 million persons is a human being with
inherent God-given dignity. Each one is a child that suffers
from beatings and abuse, a woman raped, or a man who labors in
the field as a slave, all for the commercial gain of others.
The annual Trafficking in Persons Report required by the
landmark Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000,
legislation which I authored, ensures that countries making
anti-trafficking efforts a priority are praised and supported,
while countries that ignore the cries of the enslaved are
justly shamed and considered for sanctions.
The success of the TIP Report and rankings is beyond
anything we could have hoped for. From presidential suites and
the halls of Parliaments to police stations in remote corners
of the world, this report focuses anti-trafficking work in 187
countries on the pivotal principles of prevention of
trafficking, prosecution of the traffickers, and protection of
the victims.
Each year the trafficking office at the Department of State
evaluates whether a government of a country is fully compliant
with the minimum standards for the elimination of human
trafficking prescribed by the TVPA or, if not, whether the
government is making significant efforts to do so. The record
is laid bare for the world to see and summarized in a tier
rankings narrative. Tier 1 countries fully meet the minimum
standards. Tier 2 do not meet the minimum standards, but are
making significant efforts to do so. Tier 3 countries do not
meet the standards and are not making significant efforts to do
so, and indeed, may be subject to sanctions.
Over the last 14 years more than 100 countries have enacted
anti-trafficking laws, and many countries have taken other
steps required to significantly raise their tier rankings. Some
countries openly credit the TIP Report for their increased and
effective anti-trafficking response--kind of look at it as a
mirror and look to us for examples of how to do even better.
Last year, for example, I was invited by the speaker of
Peru's unicameral Congress to address legislators on how to
protect victims of trafficking, meeting also with prosecutors,
members of the multi-agency task force, victims and those who
provide for the victims.
The Tier 2 Watch List was created in the 2003 TVPA
authorization, which I also authored, to encourage good-faith
anti-trafficking progress in a country that may have taken
positive anti-trafficking steps late in the year.
Unfortunately, some countries made a habit of a last-minute
effort and failed to follow through year after year,
effectively gaming the system.
To protect the integrity of the tier system and to ensure
that it worked properly to ensure progress, Congress in 2008
created an automatic downgrade for any country that had been on
the Tier 2 Watch List for 2 years but had not taken significant
efforts to move up a tier. The President can waive the
automatic downgrade for an additional 2 years if he has
certified credible evidence that the country has a written and
sufficiently-resourced plan that if implemented, would
constitute significant efforts to meet the minimum standards.
In 2013, the first test of the new system, China, Russia, and
Uzbekistan ran out of waivers and moved to Tier 3, which
accurately reflected their records.
In 2014 reporting cycle, only Thailand and Malaysia were
auto-downgraded out of six countries. Russia and Uzbekistan
retained their Tier 3 downgrades from the previous year, but
China was upgraded from Tier 3 to the Tier 2 Watch List which I
consider to be a very big mistake.
I am very concerned that China fooled the State Department,
which seemed to believe that China was abolishing its
reeducation through labor camps, rather than simply renaming
the camps and continuing the practice. The Congressional-
Executive Commission on China reported that in 2013, Chinese
authorities increasingly used other forms--their word--of
arbitrary and administrative detention such as legal education
centers, custody and education centers, black jails, and
compulsory drug detoxification centers.
Moreover, the Commission reported that in 2014 the Deputy
Director of China's Ministry of Justice said at a press
conference that ``The vast majority of China's reeducation
through labor facilities have been converted to compulsory drug
detox centers.'' The China Commission believes that these
compulsory drug detox centers force detainees to do labor and
do the custody and education as do those other centers.
If true and I believe it is, then the Chinese Government is
directly involved in human trafficking and profiting from it.
The Chinese Government also continues, through its one-child
birth limitation policy, to absolutely decimate the female
population, creating a vacuum for sex and bride trafficking in
China, as males confronted with a sentence of lifetime
bachelorhood obtain or seek to obtain a mate.
Despite a much-ballyhooed November 2013 government
announcement of a relaxation of the one-child policy that
affects only a small subset of the population, this fig leaf
will not do enough to correct the gender imbalance in China,
the missing daughters as we so often call them.
Last summer a local official at the Mid-Year Family
Planning Work Meeting in a municipality noted that
,
quote, deg. ``The intensity of family planning work has not
diminished,'' and of course that includes coercive abortion and
coercive sterilization.
The U.N. Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
following its May 2014 review of China, noted that it
was
, quote, deg. ``Seriously concerned about reported
instances of use of coercive measures, including forced
abortion and forced sterilization, with a view to limiting
births.'' Of course this is absolutely unacceptable and a gross
violation of women's rights.
Approximately 40 million women--and some put it far, far
higher--girls and women are missing from the population and
China's birth limitation policy continues to increase that
number making China a regional and maybe even a world, but
certainly a regional, magnet for sex and bride trafficking of
women from neighboring countries such as Burma, Cambodia,
Vietnam, Laos, and North Korea.
Indeed, an estimated 90 percent of North Korean women
seeking asylum in China are trafficked as brides and yet China
does not take responsibility for the government-made disaster
and provide these women with aid. Rather, China denies the
women refugee status, sends them back to punishment in North
Korea, sometimes execution. Yet we gave China a pass last year
turning our backs on these suffering women, and that really is
objectionable.
But Asia is not the only place where there are victims of
trafficking. This afternoon's hearing will also look at three
African countries that must be automatically downgraded unless
they significantly improve efforts to fight human trafficking
in 2014--Burundi, Comoros, and Angola. The shared tragedy of
these countries is that their children are being trafficked.
Chinese nationals in Angola, for example, exploit the Angolan
children in construction, rice farming, and brick making. In
Comoros, poor families place their children with wealthy
relatives who then exploit them in domestic servitude.
Similarly, in Burundi, family members sometimes profit from the
prostitution of children with tourists, or according to the
State Department, teachers, police officers, gendarme,
military, and prison officials.
In 2013 as an automatic downgrade loomed, the President of
Comoros finally admitted his country had a serious trafficking
issues and the National Assembly changed its penal code. Angola
and Burundi have also amended their penal codes while on the
Watch List. Aggressive implementation of these anti-trafficking
laws would keep people off Tier 3, as well as protect children
from trafficking. And I very earnestly hope implementation has
been a priority.
The southeast Asia region continues to struggle with
particularly acute and entrenched human trafficking. Thailand
and Malaysia were downgraded to Tier 3 last year. Burma must
receive a Presidential waiver this year to avoid Tier 3.
One of the key drivers of intense human trafficking in the
region is the vulnerability and desperation of the Muslim
minority Rohingya people. Squalid living conditions in
displacement camps, discrimination, child limitation, and
violence are pushing the Rohingya out of the Buddhist-dominated
Burma into the hands of human traffickers who claim to have
jobs for them in Muslim-majority Malaysia. However, according
to reports, including some by Reuters last year, many Rohingya
never made it to Malaysia, instead ended up in tropical gulags
in the jungles of Thailand, where they were held for ransom.
Many die from abuse and disease. Those who cannot pay the
ransom are sold into sex slavery or forced labor, often in the
fishing industry. Thai General Prayut Chan-o-cha has vowed to
crack down on many of the Thai authorities involved and to
bring an end to the practice.
While we have seen an impressive number and variety of
anti-trafficking efforts in Thailand during last year,
including a new law in March that heightened penalties to life
imprisonment for traffickers, prosecutions have significantly
diminished in the last year. Prosecutions regarding trafficking
of Rohingya migrants seem particularly low as well.
Nevertheless, over the last year, Thailand has taken concrete
steps to register nearly 100,000 migrants, amend laws related
to the fishing sector, raise the minimum age for labor at sea
to 18, set mandatory rest periods and employment contract
requirements, and inspect hundreds of boats.
And we also need to look at ourselves and ask whether we
are complicit in abetting trafficking, perhaps unwittingly.
Last month, for example, the Associated Press documented Thai
boats picking up seafood in Indonesia caught by Burmese slaves
who when not at sea are kept in cages on remote Indonesian
islands. The seafood was taken back to Thai ports and processed
by the company that owns Chicken of the Sea. Much of the
tainted seafood may have entered the supply chain to reach the
shelves of American grocery stores, and through vendors such as
Sysco, have landed on the plates of our service men and women.
There are nevertheless success stories as well, and
Thailand has been a stalwart partner with the United States in
fighting sex tourism that drives sex trafficking. The
Philippines has also worked with us in fighting sex tourists
and helping the victims of trafficking. Indeed, one of the
witnesses we will hear from this afternoon is a priest, whose
faith-based organization has helped thousands heal from the
horrors of human trafficking.
Finally, a word to those who think that our TIP Report
embarrasses allies and undercuts our efforts to cultivate
friendly ties around the globe, I will never forget when two of
our closest allies, Israel and South Korea, at one point, were
both on Tier 3, the worst rank. I remember meeting with their
Ambassadors who had files demonstrating to all of us and anyone
who would listen that measures were being undertaken to
mitigate this terrible crime, and both of those countries got
off Tier 3 when they backed their words with substantive
action. Rather than alienating them, the exercise underscored
that friends watch out for each other and that we must call
upon our friends to live up to the high ideals that they
profess. Ultimately, countries that do live up to their ideals,
show they value and treasure their citizens, their greatest
resource, in the long run will benefit the most.
And before I recognize my friend and colleague Ms. Bass, I
would like to recognize Christian Boujaoude who is age 16 who
is in the audience. He is from my district from Eatontown, New
Jersey. He and his parents, Elias and Maureen. A junior at
Monmouth Regional High School, Christian, in recent months
coordinated the labeling and shipping of 2,000 bars of soap
with human trafficking messages to Arizona hotels prior to the
Super Bowl there. He also successfully urged a number of
Monmouth County towns to issue proclamations recognizing
January 11th as National Human Trafficking Awareness Day. I
want to thank him for his work in raising awareness about
trafficking and for taking the time for being at today's
hearing.
Ms. Bass. Where is he?
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Christian? In the back.
Ms. Bass. Stand up.
[Applause.]
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Ranking Member Bass.
Ms. Bass. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I see you are taking care
of the next generation of leaders in your district. So I want
to join in congratulating you. It is wonderful that you are
here today.
Again, I want to thank the chairman for your work and your
leadership in this area, and I know that the TIP Report, you
are one of the reasons why the TIP Report exists, your
legislation and all that you have been doing over the years. I
also want to thank our distinguished witnesses including the
Honorable Mark Lagon, former Ambassador-at-Large for
Trafficking in Persons at the State Department as well as
tireless advocates from civil society, and I look forward to
hearing your perspectives.
During the hearing I also look forward to hearing
strategies to address specific types of trafficking, both
domestically and abroad, while embracing an inclusive approach
that acknowledges that human trafficking affects U.S. citizens
and foreign nationals. I think it is wonderful that other
countries are looking to us for our leadership, but I think it
is also critical that we always hold ourselves accountable as
well, because we do have a domestic trafficking problem here.
And as a matter of fact, today, I believe, or maybe
tomorrow, over in the Senate, hopefully they will finish
legislation that was passed out of this House, unanimously, to
address sex trafficking domestically. One of the areas of sex
trafficking domestically that I am concerned about are the
children in the child welfare system who fall through the
cracks, a lot of times have been cast as runaways and we find
out now have been abducted and put on the streets and some of
them being pimped by street gangs. So holding the rest of the
world accountable is very important and it is critically
important to holding ourselves accountable as well.
So again I want to thank our witnesses today and all of
your leadership in combating trafficking is inspiring and has
truly made a difference around the world. With that I yield.
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Thank you so very much.
Mr. Cicilline?
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you Mr. Chairman, and I thank you and
Ranking Member Bass for holding today's hearing. And I
particularly want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your long
leadership on the issue of human rights. And certainly, on the
issue of human trafficking and the work that you did, the
really groundbreaking work, have produced the TIP Report and
this ongoing responsibility for Congress to both understand
this issue and be sure that we are demanding action around the
world to eradicate human trafficking. Thank you to our
witnesses who are here for your work and for your distinguished
service, and I certainly look forward to hearing your
testimony.
It is hard to believe that in 2015 that slavery, which we
now call human trafficking, is still so pervasive around the
world. Victims of human trafficking are deprived of their
individual freedoms and suffer through unimaginably harsh,
coercive, and even extraordinarily heartbreaking conditions. It
is horrifying that reports indicate there is no place in the
world where children, women, and men are safe from human
trafficking.
This means that the United States must and will continue to
lead efforts in combating human trafficking. Every single
country has an obligation to dedicate resources to eradicate
the trafficking of human beings. And although we have made
significant progress in the last decade, much work remains, and
the United States must be prepared to impose serious
consequences on countries in the report that do not meet
minimum standards. And as has been pointed out, be certain that
we are doing our part to be sure that we are eradicating
trafficking here in our own country.
Again I thank the chairman and ranking member for calling
this hearing and look forward to the testimony of our
witnesses, and I yield back.
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Thank you very much.
Mr. Clawson?
Mr. Clawson. Thank you for coming today to the four
witnesses, and especially thankful to the ranking member and
chairman for this hearing. Full respect for both you all.
I think about human trafficking in business, and I always
come at it in terms of competitiveness, meaning that low-cost
labor or zero-cost labor creates a competitive advantage and
therefore higher profits and that could be the driving motive
here for folks that do things they shouldn't. And from there I
draw from my own experience a conclusion that says an advantage
for everyone is an advantage to no one and a disadvantage to
everyone, and a marketplace is a advantage or a disadvantage to
no one.
And therefore, any solutions with respect to human
trafficking in a competitive marketplace would have to have a
broad involvement. Otherwise, if you cut it off in one place
you will by definition be creating an advantage for an immoral
actor in a different part of the marketplace. Does that make
sense to you all?
And so while I think it is great to fight things on
humanitarian grounds and moralistic grounds, as we well should,
because everyone deserves a sliver of sunshine in their life
and a chance, but if we view how marketplaces work in a global
economy, we also have to think about it being how we make this
disadvantageous to all actors which therefore eliminates the
competitive advantage of taking advantage of people.
So in your speeches today, if you can give me a little bit
of insight on how we can make this broad enough to really have
a global impact, I would really appreciate the thinking along
those lines. Thank you.
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Thank you very much, Mr. Clawson.
Mr. Meadows.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will keep my
remarks very brief so we can get to your testimony. I must
admit though as we continue to have hearings with regards to
human trafficking in a number of areas, it is an area that not
only for the vast majority of Americans they don't realize the
extraordinary volume of children that are being trafficked
across the country. And for me, I think my biggest concern is
how we continue to have hearings and meet about this, and yet
from being effective and actually making a difference, we are
not making a difference in a lot of these areas.
Specifically with the TIP Report, obviously the ranking of
some countries at Tier 3, the moving of some countries from
Tier 3 to Tier 2 it seems ambiguous, I guess, is the best way
to put it, or disingenuous would be a more accurate way in that
there are conflicting agendas, at times, it seems like for
those ratings. That being said, I look forward to hearing each
one of your testimony on how we cannot only have a hearing, but
that we can move this along to make sure that this scourge that
is on our globe at least gets diminished and hopefully one day
gets eradicated. And I thank the chairman for his leadership on
this issue.
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Thank you so very much, Mr.
Meadows.
I would like to now introduce our distinguished panel,
beginning first with Ambassador Mark Lagon, who was our third
Ambassador-at-Large for human trafficking, as well as director
of the Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons at
the U.S. Department of State. His record of involvement in
human rights is long, spanning from Deputy Assistant Secretary
in the Bureau of International Organization Affairs with
responsibility for human rights, humanitarian issues and U.N.
reform, through academia, where he was the chair for Global
Politics and Security at Georgetown University's Master of
Science in the Foreign Service program and Adjunct Senior
Fellow for Human Rights at the Council on Foreign Relations.
He was also the executive director and CEO of the anti-
human trafficking nonprofit, Polaris, and currently serves as
the president of Freedom House. And he has a very distinguished
resume and career.
We will then hear from Mr. Matthew Smith who is a founder
and executive director of Fortify Rights and a 2014 Echoing
Green Global Fellow. He previously worked with Human Rights
Watch and at EarthRights International. His work has exposed
wartime abuses and forced displacement, crimes against
humanity, ethnic cleansing, multi-billion dollar corruption,
development-induced abuses, and other human rights violations.
He has also written for a variety of major media and other
outlets. Before moving to southeast Asia in 2005, Matthew
worked with Kerry Kennedy of the Robert Kennedy Center for
Justice and Human Rights on Speak Truth to Power. He also
worked as a community organizer and an emergency services
caseworker.
We will then hear from Father Shay Cullen who is a priest
from Ireland, a member of the Missionary Society of St.
Columban and founder and president of PREDA Foundation. He has
also worked protecting women and children from sex slavery and
promoting human rights, peace and nonviolence in the
Philippines since 1969.
Father Shay established the PREDA Foundation in Olongapo,
neighboring the old U.S. Navy base in Subic Bay to rescue
children and women from sex slavery. He established the PREDA
Fair Trade as a private enterprise to alleviate poverty. PREDA
has 62 professional staff dedicated to rescuing sexually abused
children from traffickers, brothels, and prisons, and providing
them with therapeutic homes. He has been nominated for the
Nobel Peace Prize three times.
We will then hear from Mr. Jesse Eaves, who is the director
of Policy and Government Relations at Humanity United. In this
role he has worked to advance its policy priorities, which
include anti-slavery projects, peacekeeping and atrocity
prevention. Prior to joining Humanity United, Jesse was a
senior child protection policy advisor for World Vision USA,
where he managed an advocacy portfolio focused on child
trafficking, child labor, child sexual exploitation, and child
soldiers. He has worked with war-affected communities,
assisting victims of human trafficking used as child soldiers
and sex slaves and overseeing a community development program
that includes counseling and education for war-affected youth.
Very, very great contributions by all four of you, which
this subcommittee deeply, deeply appreciates. I would like to
now yield such time as he may consume to Ambassador Lagon.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MARK LAGON, PRESIDENT, FREEDOM HOUSE
(FORMER AMBASSADOR-AT-LARGE FOR TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE)

Ambassador Lagon. Mr. Chairman, Ms. Bass, members of the
committee, I want to thank you for inviting me. As the history
of the TIP Report shows, seriously researched, credible reports
assessing the performance of governments have a really
demonstrable impact. I will say for 43 years, Freedom House's
Freedom of the World survey has gotten the attention of
authorities. I am learning that now in my current job. The TIP
tier rankings are a potent tool themselves for U.S. diplomacy.
Of course I have to say that the State Department TIP office
needs a permanent Ambassador named and confirmed to be fully
effective for the report to be fully useful.
Let me look at a few key countries starting in east Asia.
In 2013, China was automatically downgraded to Tier 3 but moved
to the Tier 2 Watch List in 2014, due to the abolition of the
reeducation through labor policy. Well, decades of a one-child
policy have resulted in a deficit of 34 million women, fueling
China's thriving sex slavery and bride trade industry. Just as
Chairman Smith referred to, women have been kidnapped or
trafficked from Burma, Vietnam, Laos, Mongolia, North Korea,
and even from Africa and the Americas. Rather than treating
these women as trafficking survivors, Chinese officials
typically arrest them before deporting them. In the case of
North Koreans apprehended, being returned home is worse than
remaining in Chinese jails.
Freedom House research has found that for political and
religious activists, the abolition of reeducation through labor
has brought little relief from the risk of detention. Prisons
and detention centers appear to still be engaging in forced
labor, including for religious detainees, political prisoners,
and foreign nationals. And some of the products made this way
appear to be imported into the United States.
As for Cambodia, it is a testament to the threat of a
potential downgrade that in February, the Cambodian Government
launched a new national action plan on trafficking and
restructured the national committee for counter trafficking. It
is important that the 2015 TIP score reflect whether the
Cambodian Government demonstrates commitment to implementing
this strategy. I will say that my colleagues at the
International Justice Mission believe that it should graduate
to Tier 2, based on their prevalent studies of child sexual
exploitation going down, but I think the larger picture needs
to take account of also the matter of labor trafficking.
Thailand. Well, Thailand is on Tier 3; it was last year.
Many of the problems I highlighted in testimony right here
before this subcommittee last year still remain--defective
mechanisms for identifying victims among vulnerable
populations, lax investigation, prosecution and conviction of
perpetrators, inadequate regulations concerning labor brokers
and recruitment fees, and official complicity in smuggling of
migrants. It is good that Thailand passed a law. It is not good
that prosecutions continue to be anemic in terms of
implementation.
In sub-Saharan Africa we have seen progress in many
countries, including the passage of anti-trafficking laws but
there, too, implementation remains an obstacle. Lack of
accountability for those guilty of trafficking is the result of
governments who are attacking the very actors who would ensure
that anti-trafficking laws would be enforced--civil society
organizations and independent media.
Many of the countries on the Tier 2 Watch List in Africa
have passed laws to limit the ability of these non-government
groups to expose forced labor, sexual exploitation and the use
of child soldiers. For instance, in Kenya, President Uhuru has
tried to limit freedom of expression and association and
efforts are underway to increase regulation of Kenyan NGOs.
Freedom House operates there. Our partners say that that effort
to increase regulation would give government control over NGO
activities and their ability to accept foreign funding, and
they wouldn't be able to hold officials involved in trafficking
or complicit accountable.
In Rwanda, President Kagame pledged to increase efforts to
end trafficking in late 2014, but let us look at the
implementation record. In an effort to clean up the streets,
hundreds of vulnerable individuals including prostituted people
and street children have been arrested, often without charge.
The government has eliminated independent human rights
organizations. Press freedom remains severely restricted. One
might say that the watchdogs on trafficking have been leashed
and muzzled. A Presidential waiver to remain on the Watch List
in my mind would be farfetched.
In the Middle East, the vulnerability of migrant workers
and females makes it a particular hazard zone. Qatar is
particularly troubling as it prepares for the 2022 World Cup
soccer tournament, an effort rife with corruption. And there is
heightened trafficking in the construction leading to those
games. Corporations investing in Qatar and American
universities like the one I used to teach at with campuses
there have an obligation to raise trafficking with authorities.
Bahrain. Other than Assistant Secretary of State Tom
Malinowski, the United States has been all too muted in raising
human rights in Bahrain. The U.S. naval base and the effort to
mobilize a coalition to take on the Islamic State don't justify
muted criticism on human rights. Bahrain got a waiver in 2014
to remain on the Watch List based on a written plan it
presented. If it hasn't met the TVPA standards, and it hasn't
fulfilled its own written plan, it should get downgraded.
Finally Saudi Arabia. The repression of women is even more
pronounced in Saudi Arabia than other Middle Eastern countries.
Small Gulf countries say that they have to have sponsorship
laws, they have to have passport confiscation, they have to
have housing, which actually in reality is prison-like, because
the population is outnumbered by these foreign nationals who
are migrant workers. Well, that lame excuse doesn't even exist
for the Saudis. They aren't outnumbered. Smaller states look to
Saudi Arabia. If it doesn't promote reforms there is very
little hope its neighbors will.
To respond to some of the points raised by Mr. Clawson and
Mr. Meadows, I just want to say in terms of global trends let
us remember that labor trafficking victimizes more people, but
sex trafficking yields more profits to the traffickers. Both of
those types of trafficking matter enormously. We must not
forsake one to focus on the other.
TIP rankings demonstrably propel the passage of laws, we
know that. But absent external assistance you are not going to
get the will and the capacity of countries to implement those
laws. So, we need two things. We need to preserve the integrity
of the TIP Report rankings, and then secondly we have to foster
partnerships and leveraged resources in order to get that
implementation. I commend the End Modern Slavery Initiative
Act, S.553, championed by Senator Corker and endorsed by
Freedom House, because in creating a partnership fund it would
do just that.
Let me close by saying a recent Freedom House report found
that the U.S. and other democracies are less likely to press
human rights issues with China due to strategic and economic
interests. Well, there is a lesson to be learned for that for
the TIP rankings. Countries failing to address modern slavery
shouldn't get a pass simply because they are so-called
strategically important countries. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ambassador Lagon follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Ambassador Lagon, thank you very
much for your testimony and without objection your full
statement, which went into even greater detail, will be made
part of the record.
Just starting from our left to your right, Father Cullen if
you wouldn't mind being next, and then we'll go to Mr. Smith.

STATEMENT OF FR. SHAY CULLEN, PRESIDENT/CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, PREDA FOUNDATION

Fr. Cullen. Good afternoon. I am Father Shay Cullen,
Catholic Columban Missionary and president and founder of the
PREDA Foundation. We are a Philippine social development
organization. So in the interest of time I will just make a
brief summary of the written testimony.
Okay, so Honorable Chairman, Ranking Member Karen Bass, I
will greet you and all the members of the distinguished
subcommittee. Thank you for inviting me here today. And I just
wanted to share with you really personal experience working to
address the widespread situation of human trafficking and
particularly in the Philippines.
My remarks focus on human trafficking for the purpose of
commercial sexual exploitation and exploitation of innocent and
blameless street children who are trafficked for begging and
drug deliveries for the criminal gangs. Many, but not all of
the child victims of trafficking who are used for begging,
prostitution or being drug couriers are frequently confined in
jail-like, subhuman conditions, instead of being helped as
actually victims, and some are as young as 8 to 12 years old.
When I previously testified before this subcommittee, it
was a testimony regarding street children, some victims of
human rights trafficking who were incarcerated in jails with
adult criminals. A letter signed by members of this
subcommittee and other members of the House to the then-
President Gloria Arroyo of the Philippines recommending the
separation of minors from adults in the prisons had a very
immediate, strong, positive effect at the time, and President
Arroyo ordered this separation. However, the situation is even
more grave today.
Prison officials all over, they made a separation but into
very small, overcrowded cells where even younger children were
confined. As young as 8 years old are now being confined in
small cells with subhuman conditions and with accused youth
offenders of the ages of 17 and 18 years old.
They are deprived of their human rights, of course. They
are placed in grave circumstances of being physically
neglected, starved, and abused. The small children, when
rescued by social workers of the PREDA Foundation, are given
protective shelter, therapy, counseling, and then they are able
to reveal the extent of the abuse. Many children are trafficked
for the begging on the streets. There are thousands of children
all over the Philippines into the begging industry. Some of
these small children are victims of the trafficking and brought
into the city to beg for organized criminal syndicates or else
to be exploited as drug couriers. While the juvenile justice
welfare law, R.A. 9344, disallows criminal liability for
children 15 years and younger, many are still imprisoned now in
dire circumstances contrary to law.
Now I will just give you a few quick pictures of what we
are talking about here, very young children, and this is just
over the past year or so.
[Slides.]
Fr. Cullen. We are not talking about isolated incidents,
no, of some children by accident put in a jail. This is going
on for years in the Philippines. We are challenging it. We are
trying to get it changed as much as possible. And it indicates
the systematic neglect and the abuse, not of just a few
isolated incidents, as some of the Philippine Government
officials would like all of us to believe.
Some are claiming, government officials, that the
photographs you see here, shocking as they may be, are not
genuine, or they insidiously say they were released for
fundraising purposes. But I have taken many of these personally
myself.
The centers where these photographs of the--take for
example we have the pictures here of the children behind these
cages and children that are, like these starved children, this
is like the image from a concentration camp. And this is
genuine, taken in a Manila center for children under the Manila
Government, until recently, and that is how they treat many of
the children there.
So this child--our campaign and rallies, we managed to
close down that government center due to the result of good
media coverage. There are still many other centers where reform
is needed. This was also a violation of the children's rights,
this attitude, a complete disregard for the human rights and
the concern and the suffering of children. And these are just
kids who were accused of begging on the streets but controlled
by the syndicates.
So there are many other centers and we are challenging the
government in this. It was a big controversy during the visit
of Pope Francis, and even because of these images, our Web site
was hacked and knocked offline. So we have since restored our
Web site, indeed, our images of the truth. Pictures of the
truth have to be displayed. We are not giving up.
Human trafficking of young people and some as young as 18
months old, this is the most, latest terrible tragedy of
children which are being trafficked and sold to international
pedophiles for making of these horrific movies, videos which
are sold here in Europe and the United States, and the police
have found these terrible images.
The children for exploitation are used by this particular
case, which we have on record which is quite horrific, making
videos for the commercial exploitation and used by sex
tourists. Some of these videos have been sold, and the Dutch
police and the Australian police in recent months gave shocking
evidence showing children as young as 18 months old being video
taped, the one tortured, sexually assaulted and murdered. Other
children 6 and 12 years old have been victims of torture and
sexual assault and also videoed. One video is entitled ``The
Destruction of Daisy.'' The videos are commercially distributed
over the Internet and sold even in the United States, the UK
and European countries.
We also have a problem for many of the victims of
trafficking in brothels used for sexual exploitation and the
growth of this human trafficking is linked of course to the use
of the Internet promoting sex tourism, which is a growing
business, and for transmitting images of child pornography
which are, as I said earlier, made in the Philippines. Some
victims of human trafficking are subjected to several human
rights violations and forced abortion is one of them, but these
are quite difficult to prove because of the secrecy, the lack
of medical and forensic evidence. And it is done illegally and
secretly. It is revealed by the rescued victims in therapy and
through their oral narratives they tell us what has happened to
them and how they are forced into doing this.
Anyway, the Philippine Anti-Child Pornography Law is
something which we helped to, the NGOs, to pass this in 2009,
and it mandates that Internet service providers in the
Philippines filter and prevent such images of sexually
transmitted sex acts. The cyber-sex is a big business there.
Thousands of children are sold into these dens and shown live
over the Internet for payment through credit cards. The
telephone companies actually in the Philippines, many of the
shareholders are U.S. nationals. You can check, we checked it
out online and we submitted some evidence to that.
But among the top 100 shareholders who are violating the
law, the law is not practiced in any way whatsoever. There are
no filters in place as demanded by the law. They seemingly have
placed themselves above the law and it is possible they get
away with it with collusion of Philippine Government officials.
So the Philippine National Telecommunications Commission is
responsible for the implementation of the regulations that
would implement the law, so in addition to the Anti-Child
Pornography Law they are also, allegedly, violating with
impunity the Public Telecommunications Policy Act of 1995 and
Executive order 546.
Forty percent of tourists come for sexual exploitation. We
must keep in mind they too from the side of the Americans say
return to the U.S.A. and they will be endangering children in
this country. And thousands of young people, many are underage,
are very vulnerable to these foreign nationals and locals who
will prey upon them and to supply this demand of the sex
tourist industry.
Well, as the former Ambassador to the Philippines, the U.S.
Ambassador Harry K. Thomas said in his time in 2013, 40 percent
of male tourists to the Philippines go there for sex tourism.
It was quite a controversial statement. He withdrew that
comment later under a lot public outcry, but there was no way
they could really deny the reality and the truth. It has become
a destination for sex tourists, despite Philippine denials.
We just add a little note to say that the return of the
U.S. Military into the Philippine Navy bases now in the last
weeks alone the numbers are increasing very much, and we
understand that they are already engaged now in the sex tourist
business. Well, we made a little assessment of what the
Philippine Government is doing to defend the children and stop
this trafficking. There is a strong political commitment by
President Aquino, and we recognize it. And also we work closely
with the Justice Secretary de Lima, and the Office of the
Ombudsman are fighting corruption quite strongly in the
Philippines and have some notable successes.
But their effort to address the widespread and the
spreading of human trafficking, unfortunately, is not so very
successful. And even the implementation of the law by police
and prosecutors results in very low arrest and conviction
rates. I think it is 15 years the TIP Report saying only 150
convictions and that is why the Philippines is on Tier 2. It is
not so great.
Anyway the grave, we know of course, economic inequality is
quite shocking there in the Philippines, and the very rich
elite, no, of a 140 families running the country of 100 million
people. It is not a really true democracy in this sense. There
is a developing middle class growing quite strong, but the gap
between rich and poor is growing greater and greater.
Corruption by some members of the prosecution and the
Departments of Defense and the judiciary is preventing the
prosecution and really creating the rule of law. It is a
mockery in many cases. This is why it is spreading without
control. They just don't recognize the law for being the law.
And what is right and good and true, they just don't give it
the value and dignity it deserves. So the slow pace of the
judicial process, it can take 4, 5, 6 years to complete a
single case. And others is the corruption where they reduce the
charges against foreigners from trafficking, they reduce it to
child abuse so they can escape. They get to the airport; they
are gone.
Another problem we heard earlier that we are dealing with
is those of us defending human rights and trying to protect the
children and implement the law as best we can because we
prosecute as many offenders as we can and so we know the legal
problems. But the death squads as used in the past, and I am
sure it is being recorded, but still very active today, we are
sad to say. And Human Rights Watch has done very thorough
investigations about the death squads and interviewed some of
the assassins. No, quite shockingly what they revealed, how
they were paid by mayors to kill over 150 unwanted opposition
people.
So this is what we are up against. So we as in these places
where there is a lot of trafficking and the traffickers operate
they do so with impunity and human rights workers and anti-
traffickers--we feel very vulnerable. There is in danger of
retaliation.
So all I can say in closing and draw to the attention of
the subcommittee, we submitted the report of Human Rights
Watch, ``One Shot to the Head,'' which is the death squads
going on very recently up to the present in the Philippines,
and that you know many human rights workers, activists,
priests, pastors have all been assassinated, including many
journalists. We are number three in the world as the most
dangerous place for journalists. And as I, a journalist, writer
myself, I am feeling the pressure quite a lot, the death
threats and all that stuff.
Amnesty International has a very strong report on torture,
revealed the wheel of torture where they played with the
victims before they torture them, and we know that some police
are sadly protecting these traffickers. So the Philippine
Government is striving to address the problem at the top, but
unfortunately they are not able to solve it and going down to
the bottom to the streets and where it is all happening.
And the U.S. State Department is lauded because they work
quite well in the Philippines with us and we have implemented
all of these programs with the help of USAID very recently
working. And what we need is a reform of police, judiciary, and
local government because they issue permits for the sex
brothels and the sex tourist places to operate, and so this
must be greatly restrained to reduce sex trafficking. So
children trafficked must have greater protection, shelter, and
assistance. Suspects must be prosecuted in a robust manner with
the greatest integrity. So thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cullen follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Thank you very much for your
testimony and also for your leadership in defending the weak
and the vulnerable. Thank you.
Mr. Smith?

STATEMENT OF MR. MATTHEW SMITH, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, FORTIFY
RIGHTS

Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, other
distinguished members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
invitation to be here today. It is a real honor and we are very
pleased to be able to share some of our work with you. On
behalf of my colleagues I would especially like to thank you
for your work to end human trafficking worldwide.
I would like to focus my remarks on some of our findings
related to a few of the countries we are working in, namely,
Myanmar, Thailand, Malaysia, and Bangladesh. Specifically I
would like to draw attention to the exodus of the Rohingya
Muslims from Myanmar which the chairman mentioned in his
introductory remarks, exodus of Rohingya Muslims from Myanmar
and Bangladesh and to the situation of armed conflict on the
Myanmar/China border.
Now we have recently conducted hundreds of interviews with
witnesses and survivors of abuse, and I have also conducted
interviews with more than a dozen brokers and human traffickers
who are either directly involved in human trafficking or
otherwise knowledgeable of the trade, the illicit trade. The
Rohingya, as you may know, are an ethnic and religious minority
from western Myanmar. There are currently more than 650,000
Rohingya displaced in Myanmar and in Bangladesh, and this
particular segment of the Rohingya population is particularly
at risk of human trafficking.
With regard to why Rohingya are getting on boats, we heard
a little bit about, and I will just share what we have
documented over the last couple years, and in the last year. In
Myanmar they faced killings and coordinated arson attacks.
Rohingya are facing avoidable deprivations in humanitarian aid,
protracted and targeted policies of discrimination. The
Government of Myanmar has essentially implemented an apartheid-
like segregation in Rakhine State.
We have documented widespread and systematic forced labor
of Rohingya by the Myanmar Army and other state security forces
and this includes child forced labor. We have also documented
systematic rape of Rohingya women and girls with complete
impunity. The government continues to deny Rohingya citizenship
and imposes restrictions on freedom of movement, marriage,
childbirth, and other aspects of everyday life.
These abuses and policies have given Rohingya very few
options but to flee the country and essentially flee into the
clutches of transnational criminal syndicates. Meanwhile,
authorities have been complicit in and profited from the
trafficking of Rohingya, in some cases taking payments directly
from criminal syndicates and in other cases actually escorting
boats out to sea.
With regard to Bangladesh, following the violence in
Rakhine State in June 2012, the Government of Bangladesh made
the unconscionable decision to close its borders to Rohingya
and to restrict humanitarian aid to the refugees. This of
course has led many Rohingya, likewise, to flee into the
clutches of transnational criminal syndicates and to take risky
journeys by sea.
When Rohingya board ships from Bangladesh or Myanmar, they
are typically deceived into thinking they will be comfortably
taken directly to Malaysia. Instead, passengers become
abductees on these ships. They are held in conditions of
enslavement for the purposes of exploitation. They are not
destined for Malaysia of course but most typically directed
through Thailand. These people have been crammed into boats,
denied adequate food, water and any freedom of movement. We
have documented killings and rapes, beatings and other abuses
at sea.
Once they get to Thailand, they are typically herded like
animals into horrific camps that are located in remote jungle
areas or on islands. At these locations they are given the
option to buy their freedom for up to $2,000, or in other cases
they are simply sold into another exploitative situation. We
have documented how Rohingya women and girls have been sold
into forced marriages in Thailand and in Malaysia. Thailand's
fishing sector, as has been mentioned here today, has become
notorious for employing slave labor.
I recently had the opportunity to meet with some senior
Thai officials to discuss some of these issues, which was a
welcomed opportunity. Thailand's Military leader General
Prayut, whom I have not met, has vowed to prosecute and punish
traffickers, but Thailand as mentioned has prosecuted fewer
traffickers in 2014 than it did in 2013.
In 2014, Thai authorities reported a mere five trafficking
cases involving Rohingya. General Prayut likewise warned the
media to not publish news about human trafficking, and the Thai
Navy has failed to drop charges against two journalists for
reporting about human trafficking.
In Malaysia, unfortunately, the situation is not much
better. In many cases human traffickers transfer Rohingya to
situations of debt bondage or similar situations of captivity.
Like in Thailand, there is no real legal framework in place to
regulate the status or protection of refugees in Malaysia, and
this of course contributes to the problem of human trafficking.
Refugees and asylum seekers in Malaysia are treated as
illegal migrants. They are subject to arrest, detention and
deportation. Authorities routinely extort money from them in
Malaysia. Predictably, asylum seekers rarely report abuse or
exploitation to Malaysian authorities out of a fear they will
be arrested or detained, rather than protected.
Lastly, as mentioned we have been working in the conflict
zones in northern Myanmar, where war between various ethnic
armies and the Myanmar Army has raged since June 2011. This
conflict over the last several years has displaced more than
170,000 civilians. We have documented torture, killings,
attacks on civilians, and forced labor committed on the front
lines of the conflict near the Myanmar/China border. The
Government of Myanmar currently restricts aid groups from
delivering assistance to displaced communities in Kachin and
northern Shan States creating a ready environment for
trafficking to China. Displaced women and girls are
particularly at risk of being abducted, deceived or forced into
marriages in China.
The use of recruitment of child soldiers is another issue
that we have been focusing on. This likewise continues to be a
problem in northern Myanmar and other parts of the country.
Accountability for the use of recruitment of child soldiers in
Myanmar continues to be very, very weak.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, we believe Myanmar,
Bangladesh, Thailand, and Malaysia have failed to meet the
minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking. It is a
view of Fortify Rights that these countries should be relegated
to Tier 3 status. Thank you again for the opportunity to be
here to share with you and I would be very happy to answer any
questions you may have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smith follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Thank you so very much.
Mr. Eaves?

STATEMENT OF MR. JESSE EAVES, DIRECTOR OF POLICY AND GOVERNMENT
RELATIONS, HUMANITY UNITED

Mr. Eaves. Well thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, for
convening this incredibly important hearing and for inviting us
to testify. Both you and Ranking Member Bass and the other
members of the subcommittee have really been leaders in the
fight against human trafficking, forced labor, and modern day
slavery around the world and thanks to your tireless efforts,
America remains a global leader in combating these atrocious
crimes. So it is my pleasure to be here today representing
Humanity United and our partners around the world who are
working to combat modern day slavery.
Humanity United is a philanthropic organization based in
San Francisco, California, and it was started by Pam and Pierre
Omidyar to build peace and advance human freedom around the
globe, and we have been working on ending modern slavery for
over a decade. Now this hearing is really an opportunity to
shed a light on the critical importance of the United States in
combating trafficking.
In 15 years on since the Palermo Protocol, and the original
Trafficking Victims Protection Act that you authored, Mr.
Chairman, almost every country in the world has laws that
address human trafficking to some degree. And much of the
credit for the rise in action against slavery can be attributed
to the work of the State Department's Office to Monitor and
Combat Trafficking in Persons. A strong TIP office with strong
tools is a powerful catalyst for change and it holds countries,
including the U.S., accountable for their actions or inactions
against human trafficking.
But if these tools are compromised or the TIP office
weakened, we really stand to lose much of the ground that we
have gained over the past 15 years. And the opportunity is now
and the tools are definitely available to make U.S. engagement
more coordinated, effective and efficient in tackling human
trafficking.
So Mr. Chairman, obviously the TIP Report is a critical
resource to organizations like Humanity United and, though may
loathe to admit it, countries around the world. Whether a
country governments denounce the TIP Report or rejoice in their
rankings, the TIP Report is a key driver for national change
and we have seen that again and again around the world.
The leverage and impact of the TIP Report is and remains
that there are consequences to where a country is placed on the
tier rankings. Countries don't want to be known as having
failed to meet the minimum standards or to be a safe haven for
traffickers, and if they fail to meet those minimum standards,
there are real consequences in the form of targeted U.S.
sanctions. So between moving a country to act and then
providing funds to help them take the first steps, the TIP
Report and the resulting assistance programs that the TIP
office manages create real change on the ground.
So for instance in the Trafficking Victims Protection
Reauthorization Act of 2013, it included key provisions of the
Child Protection Compact Act which you wrote and championed,
Mr. Chairman. This legislation allows the State Department to
partner with a government and set measurable goals over a
multi-year period to strengthen the protection systems for
vulnerable children and improve justice systems so that they
investigate and prosecute those that would exploit a child.
And just this year, the trafficking office announced its
intention to sign the first ever Child Protection Compact with
the country of Ghana. So this is a tremendous opportunity to
partner with a country that has historically not received much
trafficking in persons program funding but has a high
prevalence of trafficking, particularly of children. And there
are several reasons for excitement over this new effort.
So first, while attempts to address child labor and other
abuses in the cocoa industry have been ongoing for a decade,
other sectors such as fishing, gold mining, forced begging,
domestic labor exploitation, and forced prostitution all remain
a problem. Second, launching this pilot effort in Ghana is a
regionally smart choice. Many countries in sub-Saharan Africa
face extremely low capacity to adequately address the issues
raised in the TIP Report. U.S. partnership will go a long way
to elevate the work of our partners who are addressing the low
capacity of these governments and of local communities to help
enable them to tackle human trafficking more effectively.
So, for example, International Justice Mission is working
to strengthen the justice systems to address slave labor in the
fishing industry in Lake Volta, and Free the Slaves is working
in cocoa and gold mining communities to address the root causes
of vulnerability through a focus on education. So the funding
for the Child Protection Compacts bolsters U.S. credibility and
should absolutely continue, but so should overall funding for
anti-trafficking programs at large.
The TIP office currently funds projects in 76 countries.
However, these grants are typically very small and very limited
in scope, and last year the TIP office received applications
for a $107 million with the programming, but was only able to
provide $18 million. So that is $18 million put up against a
$150 billion industry. So we see from the testimony today that
the TIP Report, the TIP office and the U.S. Government's
overall efforts to combat human trafficking raised the level of
accountability and transformation that can occur around the
world.
So with this activity, however, there is one glaring gap,
and Ambassador Lagon raised this right at the top of his
testimony. The Trafficking in Persons Ambassador position at
the State Department has been vacant for 5 months, and the
absence of a TIP Ambassador jeopardizes U.S. leadership,
period. Without an ambassador, the transformational impact of
the TIP office is severely limited, so the administration has
to appoint a strong TIP Ambassador immediately, especially as
we enter this critical period prior to the release of the TIP
Report.
So Mr. Chairman, the TIP Report remains a critical element
in this fight against human trafficking around the world, but
we obviously still have work to do. Yourself, and Members of
Congress, have given the administration good tools and it is
critical that we work together so that these tools are not left
to rust in the toolbox. We in civil society stand ready to
deepen the conversation and work with you to ensure that
together as partners we are on a path toward eradicating human
trafficking and modern day slavery and advancing the cause of
human freedom.
So thank you so much for this opportunity and for holding
this hearing and I look forward to your questions.
[Mr. Eaves did not submit a prepared statement.]
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Mr. Eaves, thank you very much for
your leadership and for your testimony, all of you.
We do have some votes that will be triggered in probably 5
or 10 minutes, if not sooner, so I thought I would ask a series
of questions and perhaps my good friend and colleague Mr.
Meadows might, and as best you can if you could pick through
those questions, and otherwise a lot of questions will lay on
the table. We will get some additional ones to you and if you
could get back to us in the record.
Let me just begin, Ambassador Lagon. With you, with China,
you were very strong in your statements about China. Do you
believe China should be Tier 3?
Ambassador Lagon. Yes, I do.
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. You pointed out in your testimony
one of the drivers, and when you were Ambassador was the one
who finally put those two together that those missing daughters
in China, many of whom now are--it is right through a couple of
generations. The one-child-per-couple policy has been in effect
since 1979.
But you point out that the missing girls, the missing
females has become a magnet for the traffickers, particularly
for the countries in proximity to China. That shows no sign of
abatement, if anything it is getting worse. Unfortunately, Xi
Jinping has shown no, I mean the talk of reforming the one-
child policy was what they have done previously with talk. It
is basically talk for international consumption but very little
in terms of on the ground; if you could speak to that.
And you did point out, and I thought it was a very
important point that you brought out. When we did the
Trafficking Victims Protection Act, there was a sea-change in
how we look at the women who are exploited, the children, all
of the exploited ones as victims, rather than perpetrators of
crime. And you pointed out that the women, when they are
apprehended by the Chinese Government, are treated by
criminals. If you might want to expand upon that if you would.
I would point out, and kudos to the Associated Press for
the tremendous work they did with their year-long
investigation. It might have even been longer with regards to
Thai food, of tuna especially. I recently went to a store and
picked out some Bumblebee tuna and one was made in Thailand,
the other said made in China. They were right next to each
other. So my thought is there is probably a whole lot of
wrongdoing going on on the Chinese side, too, as well as
exploitation of fishermen and right through the supply chain
that needs to be looked at.
But they did enormously good investigative work to bring
all of this forward, and hopefully General Prayut will follow
through as he seems to have indicated he would to end this
egregious practice. But hanging in the balance is whether or
not Thailand, again, is replaced or put back on I should say on
Tier 3, and many of you wanted to speak to that.
But again I want to thank Martha Mendoza and the Associated
Press. Without objection, their report will be made a part of
the record.
And we also ask you, Father Cullen, your points upon the
exploitation in the Philippines. In late 1980s, early 1990s and
one of my brothers was a fighter pilot on the USS Enterprise.
He flew A-7s. And he was appalled.
We had talk after talk about how when our ships would come
in they, would make a beeline to places of exploitation of
young girls, many of them underage. And then when the guys came
back, they would line up at sick bay to take care of an
assortment of sexually transmitted diseases, but meanwhile
leaving behind an exploited young girl.
I have a bill that I have been working on for 8 years
called the International Megan's Law, which again coincides
with what you talked about, U.S. citizens as well as others
making their way into the Philippines to exploit little
children. This would advise the country of destination in a
timely fashion of any convicted pedophile, Megan's Law
registrees, of the travel plans of that individual. It has
passed the House three times, just passed again in January. It
remains in the Senate. My hope is that the Senate will take it
up and pass it and get it to the President.
But if we don't start noticing and taking action, you can't
stop them, perhaps, from traveling but you can tell the
Philippines they are coming. You can tell Bangkok they are
coming. And they can deny them a visa or they can take other
appropriate means. And you might want to speak to that.
And you did mention in your testimony, Father Cullen, about
the U.S. ships coming in, whether or not you are seeing a
resurgence of that kind of exploitation. I say that because
when we learned that in Korea, that many U.S. servicemen, and I
actually got a video from an investigative reporter, not unlike
at the AP, who worked for the Fox News from Ohio who showed me
a video of women in Filipino juicy bars, as they
euphemistically call them, where they were being exploited.
There were Russian women there and mostly Filipino women and
they couldn't leave.
And Bush, to his everlasting credit, President Bush issued
a zero tolerance of policy and made it actionable under the
Uniform Code of Military Justice if any service members are
involved with trafficking or prostitution. So if there are
those kinds of things happening and men are exploiting women in
the Philippines, please give us that information because it is
actionable.
And it looks like we are being called for a vote, but if
you could speak to that. I have many many other questions, but
I will go to my friend Mr. Meadows.
Mr. Meadows. I will be very brief. We have got a series of
questions that we will get to all of you and you can respond.
But Ambassador, I want to come to you. And one, thank you for
your work, but piggyback on something the chairman was talking
about in a meeting that he and I participated in almost 2 years
ago now.
I found it just interesting that the head of the U.N. was
not aware of, according to him, of some of these issues that we
have highlighted today in China, specifically in China, he
acted like it was the first time he had heard about it. So my
question is this, what can we do on the international scene?
One is an awareness here in the United States to do something
about it. What can we do to make more of an emphasis
internationally, other than a TIP Report or sanctions or
anything else that obviously doesn't happen, how can we best do
that? So I will let you answer that.
And then the other is the Invisible Girl project as you
know has looked at the root cause, primarily in India which is,
I think, a Tier 2 country right now. But that imbalance that
the chairman was talking about in China and we are also seeing
in India. Does that imbalance where really abortions create
that imbalance, does that increase the trafficking that we are
seeing both in India and in China?
And I will leave it to you. I want to thank each of you for
your work. My daughter first let me know about this
unbelievable, horrific blight on our world when she was 15. She
did a report on it; she has been actively involved in it. And
so for all of those that are listening out there, you never
know who is listening to you. And little did she know that her
bringing, that up that her dad would be a Member of Congress
and be here in a hearing today. And so I just want to say thank
you so much for continuing to speak up for those who can't, Mr.
Ambassador.
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. And before we go to questions, we
do have a few more minutes. Father, you talked about forced
abortion for trafficking victims. That is the way that the
traffickers deal with a woman, or a young girl, who becomes
pregnant.
We had a situation in my own state where a group called
Live Action, a sting operation was done with Planned
Parenthood. And a would-be, fake pimp with a young Hispanic
girl went into one Planned Parenthood after another, including
at Perth Amboy where I went to high school, and to my shock
because I have watched the video, I have watched it many times,
the Planned Parenthood representative said we can get her an
abortion, she was 13, and get her back on the street.
And at one point the Planned Parenthood person said, again
from an area where I went to high school, Perth Amboy, said she
may not be all that good from the waist down but she will be
usable from the waist up. I was sickened. I was angry. No
action was taken by prosecutors against that. And yet we know
throughout the world that the collaboration of the abortion
industry and trafficking of victims is very real. And I'm
wondering now or in the future if there are any NGOs that you
know of that are participating in that kind of--this was
Planned Parenthood in Perth Amboy, New Jersey, and just was an
eye-opener to me because we know this is going on all over the
world, and what other NGOs are complicit in exploiting that
young little girl when she was like 13 that they were talking
about. So if you could speak to that as well.
And then, Ambassador Lagon, on Rwanda you said watchdogs on
trafficking have been leashed and muzzled. That is outrageous.
We are planning a Rwanda-specific hearing in the coming weeks.
I would like to elaborate on that at that hearing. So please
proceed on all the questions.
Ambassador Lagon. With apologies. As I told your staff in
advance, I am co-hosting an event at the National Endowment for
Democracy for just such journalists from Africa who are being
muzzled, and I am going to need to go. If I may, in a minute,
respond to your questions.
You said, poignantly, that when numbers go into the
millions they become statistics, and they are not treated as a
human story. But the gender imbalance in places like India and
China as a function of policy and a function of cultures that
don't value girls, it causes a problem. It is a market dynamic
and it spikes the demand for both buying brides and for the sex
industry. When added to it, is a heartless policy by China to
treat refugees, people who are really refugees from North Korea
as economic migrants and they just be sent home and their
traffickers or their exploiters can hold that over their head,
it is much worse.
You asked for a larger answer. It is not only in the lap of
business, but it is in my view that it is very important for
the governments and the NGOs that are out there to work in
partnership with businesses. They have an interest in not
having their business operations tainted by this, so that those
cans of tuna are not tainted by slavery on the high seas or in
seafood processing plants like those that I visited in Samut
Sakhon in Thailand.
I am sorry I have to go, but I thank you for your
leadership.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Ambassador.
Fr. Cullen. Okay, I will just answer quickly. I know time
is of the essence. But the abortion, forced abortion of young
girls. Of course when they get pregnant, in the sex bars and
clubs it is common knowledge. It is evidence of a crime. It is
evidence that the child can point to the father. Sometimes at
the sex bars in our areas, especially Angeles City, the big
areas, Olongapo, they are operated by U.S. nationals, some of
them foreign nationals, and therefore if the young girl in the
bar, many of them underage, get pregnant, of course they have
to eliminate the evidence. So that is one of the big drives
behind the abortion in the industry. It is not to recycle the
girl again, they can get so many from the countryside. So that
is how we see it.
And they get away with it because of the rule of law in all
areas and anti-trafficking is so miserable. It is so I mean
prevalent that is just so hard to implement even basic laws,
never mind the Anti-Child Pornography Law, which is totally
ignored. And we could have saved a lot of children from being
abused if only make it quite problematic for them to transmit
this one.
The second is tourism. The business of the name of sex
tourism has to be damaging the whole economy of it and
government officials just can't see it. However, corrupt
politicians who own the hotels, the properties and so on, they
will promote sex tourism because of--their hotels are full of
these people. And even the other kind of tourism, you will find
on the Internet, as we have researched, and you will see like a
diving school in a remote island, and the advertisement is
bring your own girls. Pick them up in Angeles City and bring
them with you.
So the military, just that one and now coming back in
again, and this new extended Visiting Forces Agreement is
opening up Philippines as a gimmick to get around the
constitutional ban on military facilities in the Philippines.
So we see that more and more of these Philippine Military bases
are being turned into the sort of proxy military bases for U.S.
troops.
Now that is all good, but they have a way around the law.
We are aware of the good law that was banning these. They don't
go to the sex bars even though there'll be advertisements,
welcome you as Navy or Air Force, but what they are doing as we
have discovered very recently with my staff, they are renting
hotels. Somebody is promoting this. rent hotels, they stock
them with young girls, and then the sailors check in the normal
way but their room is already occupied. It is a technique to
get around this and of course the poor women are already
trapped and there is no way out, so those few remarks kind of
focus on how the tricks of the trade go.
But local government is for us, okay, the national
government, they cannot, I mean at the level of the national
government they cannot reach this problem. It is local
government who are the most corrupt. They give the permit to
the sex bar, and as I say foreign nationals run a lot of these
bars.
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Mr. Smith?
Mr. Smith. Yes, sir. With respect to the question about
Thailand, as mentioned it is our view, and we do regret it, but
it is our view that Thailand should continue at Tier 3. There
have been some efforts that have been made which you have
highlighted particularly registering migrants, I would just
like to emphasize this is still an ad hoc policy. Thailand has
had an enormous population of refugees and migrants for quite a
long time so this is still an ad hoc policy.
The government is currently directing migrants who want to
register, which of course would help them avoid situations of
exploitation, the government is still directing them to
brokers. When they are directed to brokers there are situations
of corruption and exploitation. In some cases it is
exploitation on top of exploitation. Refugees are still held in
detention, and this is of course a word that the authorities do
not like to use, but the facts of the matter is that refugees
are still behind bars. We have visited them.
I regret actually not bringing pictures after seeing Father
Cullen's photos. There have been preventable deaths in
detention, so we are talking about not only refugees being held
in detention, people are dying in detention. They don't have
enough food. And these are primarily the cases that we focused
on, Rohingya Muslims. Local Muslim communities are providing
food and basic necessities to people who are within government
custody because the government is not providing that for them.
There is still a help-on policy, thousands of boats
arriving. And as I mentioned there were only five cases
involving Rohingya, trafficking cases in 2014. This is a policy
that continues today. It is our understanding, as right now, as
we speak there are over 1,000 people being held in a torture
camp on the border of Thailand and Malaysia, right at this
moment. We are not seeing any raids on these camps. It is our
understanding that the authorities know where these camps are,
but the objective is to usher the asylum seekers to Malaysia.
And the justification for this is that, well, the Rohingya want
to go to Malaysia.
So there are some serious problems still happening there,
and of course this help-on policy where boats are just pushed
back out to sea is in violation of the principle of non-
refoulement, so we remain very concerned about that as well.
Thank you.
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Mr. Eaves.
Mr. Eaves. Well, in relation to Thailand we have seen yet
again, as we see every year, the debate between the regional
bureau in the State Department and the Trafficking in Persons
office over where to place a country. This year in particular
there has been incredibly strong pushback. You have the Trans-
Pacific Partnership in play, you have Thailand as a potential
regional ally militarily and otherwise, so the pressure is very
strong. But based on what we are seeing on the ground, based on
the media reports, the partners that we fund, we definitely
feel that Thailand would need to remain on Tier 3 for another
year. We have seen some positive vocal statements, but nothing
has actually been implemented yet.
And I think to what Representative Clawson was saying
earlier, we are actually seeing the marketplace and the
corporate sides start to add some pressure as well.
Corporations are being forced to deal with this and we are
seeing the private sector step up and start to put pressure on
the Thai Government to create a regulatory framework that they
can work under so that they can start to address this
entrenched issue of exploitation within their supply chains.
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Thank you so very much. We do have
to vote. They are out of time on the floor so I am going to
have to run, but I thank you. Anything that you want to send to
us to augment your testimonies, all of which will be made a
part of the record, and I thank you for not just the
preparation and the thought that went into it but above all,
your leadership. And it is so deeply appreciated, and thank you
for defending those who are at risk.
The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:04 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material submitted for the record by the Honorable Christopher H.
Smith, a Representative in Congress from the State of New Jersey, and
chairman, Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights,
and International Organizations

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
