- DEMANDING ACCOUNTABILITY: EVALUATING THE 2015 "TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT"

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DEMANDING ACCOUNTABILITY: EVALUATING THE 2015 ``TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS
REPORT''

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON AFRICA, GLOBAL HEALTH,
GLOBAL HUMAN RIGHTS, AND
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 4, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-186

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

97-461PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights, and
International Organizations

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey, Chairman
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         KAREN BASS, California
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          AMI BERA, California
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Kari Johnstone, Ph.D., Principal Deputy Director, Office to
Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons, U.S. Department of
State..........................................................    11
Mr. James Carouso, Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary, Bureau of
East Asian and Pacific Affairs, U.S. Department of State.......    12
Mr. Alex Lee, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Bureau of Western
Hemisphere Affairs, U.S. Department of State...................    14
The Honorable Mark P. Lagon, President, Freedom House (former
Ambassador-at-Large for Trafficking in Persons, U.S. Department
of State)......................................................    40

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Kari Johnstone, Ph.D., Mr. James Carouso, and Mr. Alex Lee: Joint
prepared statement.............................................    15
The Honorable Mark P. Lagon: Prepared statement..................    43

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    56
Hearing minutes..................................................    57
Written responses from Kari Johnstone, Ph.D., to questions
submitted for the record by the Honorable Christopher H. Smith,
a Representative in Congress from the State of New Jersey, and
chairman, Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human
Rights, and International Organizations........................    58
The Honorable Christopher H. Smith: Material submitted for the
record.........................................................    63

DEMANDING ACCOUNTABILITY: EVALUATING
THE 2015 ``TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS
REPORT''

----------

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 4, 2015

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health,

Global Human Rights, and International Organizations,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 1:03 p.m., in
room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Christopher H.
Smith (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Smith. The subcommittee will come to order. And good
afternoon to everyone.
We have come a long way since the September 14, 1999
hearing in this room that I chaired on human trafficking, one
of a series that continues to this day. At that particular
hearing, then Assistant Secretary of State for the Bureau of
Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor Harold Koh called human
trafficking a ``global plague'' and said that while the Clinton
administration supported the objective of my bill to combat
human trafficking, he testified that the ``existing legislative
framework was sufficient and that new legislation should not
focus on developing new institutions or establishing onerous
new requirements.''
No TIP office, no TIP Report, no TIP sanctions, he said.
Beefed up reporting in the annual country reports of human
rights practices would suffice. Assistant Secretary Koh
testified that the administration strongly objected to singling
out and sanctioning nations with poor records and government
complicity in trafficking, but did agree on the need for alien
asylum protection and enhanced criminal penalties for
traffickers that was also contained in my legislation.
That said, I pushed ahead in a bipartisan fashion and
crafted a comprehensive piece of legislation, landmark
legislation, known as the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of
2000 which just celebrated its 15th anniversary of when it was
signed into law on October 28th.
The power of the Trafficking in Persons Report, a mainstay
of the legislation, rests on its credibility. And the
credibility of the report rests on its accuracy. We must get
the report right--no fudging, no favors to nations based on
other agendas--or we risk losing the most effective tool we
have to help the more than 20 million victims of trafficking
enslaved around the world.
Some countries, as you know, as the distinguished people at
our witness table know, openly credit the TIP Report for their
increased and effective anti-trafficking response. Over the
last 14 years, now into the 15th, more than 100 countries have
enacted anti-trafficking laws, and many countries have taken
other steps required to significantly raise their tier
rankings. Tier 1 is for those who fully meet minimum standards;
Tier 2 is for those who are making significant efforts to meet
minimum standards and; Tier 3 is for those who are not making
significant efforts to meet minimum standards and, indeed, may
be subject to sanctions.
And for those between Tier 2 and 3, Congress in 2003
created a Tier 2 Watch List for those who have undertaken
significant anti-trafficking steps, often late in the
evaluation year. And just for the record, I wrote that law too.
Unfortunately, this ranking has been misused to allow countries
to escape accountability, a loophole we thought we had closed
with the Wilberforce Act. And that bill was sponsored by Howard
Berman.
We are holding this hearing today to focus due to well-
founded concern that some of the rankings in the most recent
report are inaccurate and undermine the credibility of the
report. Grade inflation for certain favored countries
undermines accuracy and accountability and, I would
respectfully submit, demoralizes countries that actually made
significant progress last year.
The State Department heard from many House Members, 161 to
be exact, when it was leaked that Malaysia was upgraded this
year from Tier 3 to the Tier 2 Watch List. The report justified
the upgrade because Malaysia introduced, but did not pass, an
amendment to their trafficking law and allowed a limited number
of their trafficking victims to work outside of detention while
keeping the rest of the victims in detention.
These incomplete actions pale in comparison to the size of
Malaysia's trafficking problem. Malaysia was the subject of an
incisive Reuters investigative report in 2014. And without
objection, I'd like to make that report a part of the record.
It found that human traffickers were keeping hundreds of
Rohingya refugees from Burma captive in houses in northern
Malaysia, beating them, depriving them of food, and demanding a
ransom from their families.
At least 2 million vulnerable migrants work in the informal
economy in Malaysia. NGOs on the ground tell us that the
traffickers operate openly and with impunity, and that those
who get in their way are killed. Only three traffickers were
convicted in Malaysia last year, three in a country of more
than 30 million people.
I note for the record and parenthetically, as we went
through the minimum standards over the last decade-and-a-half,
we were always trying to calibrate those minimum standards
because some countries like to game the system. In the very
first piece of legislation we talked about the prosecutions and
arrests and then found lots of prosecutions, but very few
convictions. Then we started looking at how long and whether or
not that individual or individuals served any time in jail,
incarcerated.
Again, in Malaysia only three traffickers were convicted
last year.
If that ratio were not bad enough, it also marks the third
year of decline for convictions in Malaysia. Three convictions
is one-third the number of convictions in Malaysia that they
had in 2013 when Malaysia was Tier 3, and one-seventh of the
convictions they had in 2012.
Trafficking in Malaysia is getting worse and the
government's enforcement of the law was nearly non-existent,
and yet Malaysia was upgraded. So what happened? Was Malaysia's
upgrade in any way related to that nation's eligibility to join
the Trans-Pacific Partnership?
This spring, Congress approved the Trade Priorities Act of
2015, excluding Tier 3 countries from expedited consideration
by the Congress, for the simple reason that Congress does not
want to increase trade with countries that engage in persistent
trafficking, including labor trafficking. Malaysia was
disqualified until their upgrade.
More than bad optics, more than fighting the will of
Congress, such circumventing of accountability is disastrous
for labor trafficking victims and victims of all kinds in
Malaysia. Instead of demanding change before Malaysia became a
major trading partner, the administration weakened our
standards to give Malaysia a pass. In other words, we looked
the other way to empower a slave economy.
The administration also upgraded Cuba this year to the Tier
2 Watch List on very flimsy justifications, namely that Cuba
began sharing information with the U.S. on trafficking and that
it convicted 13 traffickers 2 years ago, which is outside of
the reporting period. But what has changed in Cuba for
trafficking victims in the last year? Cuba legally permits the
pimping of 16-year-old girls, it is the top destination in the
Western Hemisphere for child sex tourism, and does not
criminalize labor trafficking at all.
And I want to say again parenthetically, I read the TIP
Report for all these countries. The Cuba report is excellent
but it doesn't comport with the ranking. You got it right on
the report, not right on the ranking.
On the labor trafficking side, Cuba does not criminalize
labor trafficking. Indeed, Cuban healthcare personnel, who are
sent abroad by the Castro regime to generate income for the
government, report being forced to work in medical missions,
having their passports withheld, and their families threatened.
Again, as the author of the TVPA, I have to say
unequivocally that the spirit and the letter of the law make
clear that trafficking rankings should not be used in the hopes
of bringing about better bilateral relations with countries
such as Cuba. Rather, better relations with Cuba should be
preconditioned on real protection for Cuba's exploited and
abused children and women, and recognition of labor trafficking
which, again, they don't recognize it.
The bar also seems to be lowered in the case of Uzbekistan
which was upgraded to the Tier 2 Watch List despite the fact
that Uzbekistan's Government openly and unapologetically forces
its population into forced labor every year during the cotton
harvest, something that Ambassador Lagon previously testified
to at a hearing here, having similar parallels to slavery in
this country harvesting cotton before emancipation took place
in the United States.
In recent years the government has shifted away from
pulling young children out of school and allowed the ILO to
monitor conditions. But instead of children, they conscripted
adults, continuing this systematic exploitation of its
population.
China's premature upgrade to Tier 2 Watch List in 2014, and
its continued presence there in the 2015 report, also raises
very serious questions. How can a country that systematically
trafficks its own people be anything but Tier 3?
After 1 year on the Tier 3 list in 2013, China passed a law
to allegedly closed its 320 re-education through labor
detention centers which forced prisoners and other detainees to
perform manual labor and padded the pockets of the government.
The State Department upgraded China because of that reform in
2014. But now we know from the report--and I again would add
parenthetically, I chair the Congressional-Executive Commission
on China and we just put out our comprehensive report on China.
They just simply have changed how they do business, not the
fact that the laogai system continues and is a terrible blight
on the Government of China.
The report itself says the government only closed several
of the 320 forced labor sites and converted other reform
through labor facilities into state-sponsored drug detention or
custody and education centers. Again, tjere was a great deal of
hype about this; there is very little when it came to actually
changing the system. In other words, China continues to force
detained citizens to perform manual labor and yet it got the
tier upgrade it was given for allegedly ending this practice.
I would note and remind my colleague that I have chaired 55
hearings on human rights in China, sitting right where you sit.
Years ago it was six members, including a Tibetan Palden
Gyatso, who talked about the so-called reform through labor
camps. He held up a cattle prod and said, ``They put it here in
our groin area, and that's how they get us when we are
reluctant to perform the mission.'' Twelve to fourteen hours a
day, or more, they are forced to be a part of work, so-called
reform through labor.
That hasn't changed. It has morphed into a different but a
very similar situation. And, again, that was the pretext for
the upgrade.
Additionally, China's coercive of population control
policy, in combination with the cultural preference for boys,
has resulted in tens of millions of women and girls missing
from the population, making China a regional magnet for sex and
bride trafficking as men who reach marrying age, simply cannot
find a wife. Just ask the Burmese, Cambodian, Vietnamese,
Laotian, and North Korean women imported to meet Chinese
demand.
And let me say and note here as well, I wrote an op-ed, it
was in the Washington Times yesterday, Nicholas Eberstadt did
an excellent one that was contained in The Wall Street Journal,
and others have spoken out on the so-called relaxation of the
one-child policy to a two-child policy has not changed one iota
the coercive aspects of that population control program in
China with forced abortion and forced sterilization as the
mainstays and these terrible fees that they impose, draconian
fines, as a means of implementation.
So the continuance of missing girls will continue in China,
and that will lead to more sex trafficking.
We have had, at this subcommittee, a number of women who
have been compelled to perform sex work, in other words sex
trafficking, from other nations. An estimated 90 percent of
North Korean women seeking asylum in China have been
trafficked. We have had them sit here and tell their stories
with very few lucky ones. And of course China breaks its word
to the Refugee Convention, and rather than providing them some
kind of durable remedy or protection, sends them right back to
North Korea at the end of their exploitation, where then they
are either executed or sent to that gulag system.
Consider this: China convicted 35 traffickers last year in
a country of 1.3 billion people. Three five. Not 3,500, not
35,000, 35.
Thailand by contrast, a Tier 3 country of 67 million
people, had 151 convictions in 2014. Nothing, and I say again,
nothing in China's deplorable record in 2014 warrants anything
but a Tier 3 ranking. Thailand by contrast is Tier 3. China,
with such a small number, a piddling number of convictions and
government complicity up and down the system, is no longer a
Tier 3 country.
I wrote the TVPA to allow flexibility and discernment in
rewarding a country for making progress over their record from
the year before, and for significant, not modest or superficial
changes, efforts that go to prosecution, prevention, and
protection.
Having a 3-day conference or making something around the
edges isn't what constitutes significant. Tier rankings are a
tool to aid real change, not a rubber stamp for simply holding
a meeting or being a major trading partner. The rankings in
this 2015 report seem to be a real opportunity lost for several
countries, not just for the countries we gave a pass to, but
other countries where good faith efforts were made but were not
sufficiently acknowledged.
No country will take U.S. trafficking rankings seriously
when there seems to be a wink and a nod agreement to look the
other way when it suits U.S. business or other interests.
Tellingly, Reuters reports that there was a lot of infighting
at the State Department between the trafficking experts at the
TIP office, who I have the highest regard for, and the bureaus.
This year the two sides split, according to Reuters, on 17
countries, and J/TIP lost almost all of those conflicts.
I look forward to our distinguished witnesses. But I would
like to yield to my friend and colleague Ms. Bass for any
opening comments.
Ms. Bass. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, as usual, I
want to thank you for your leadership on this issue and your
creation of the TIP Report to begin with.
I want to say that I share your concerns over Malaysia and
Malaysia's upgrading and say that there might be some of our
colleagues that come and attend this session so that they can
express their concerns over that.
I don't though, however, share your concerns about Cuba.
And, in fact, I have been impressed with the way Cuba has
responded to trafficking, especially sex trafficking. And I
remember years ago when it was so obvious and open and
flourishing. And what I saw took place is an absolute decline
in this and the Cuban Government providing a lot of education.
What was happening in the early years was that girls and
women from the countryside were coming to the city because
there wasn't any employment. And so to discourage that they
provided a lot of education. And they actually created a soap
opera on television that was shown widely throughout the
country to educate people in the countryside and ask them not
to come to the city and get involved with this.
So I do think that improvements have been made there and
that it is important for us to acknowledge it.
In regard to doctors that go over and go to different
countries, I have spoken with many of them. And one of the
things that I think that we are doing that I hope we stop,
especially with the change in policy toward Cuba, is to try to
seduce some of the Cuban doctors that are practicing around the
world from returning to Cuba but actually to come to the United
States.
And when you see doctors that are providing healthcare in
developing countries, to me it is important that they continue
to do that.
I also have to say that I often cringe when comparisons are
made with other countries to slavery that took place in the
United States, in particular because you are talking about my
ancestors who actually don't even know who they were. And when
I think about our Capitol, our Nation's Capitol which was built
with slave labor, what we did is that we rented, the U.S.
Government rented slaves from local plantations and they built
the U.S. Capitol. And there is an acknowledgment of this in the
Capitol Visitor Center.
And so I think sometimes when those comparisons are made it
can minimize what actually took place in this country for over
200 years.
And then in terms of the Trafficking Report, I am always
interested in trafficking that takes place in the United
States, in particular with girls who are in the foster care
system. And I am proud to say that in my County of Los Angeles
the Sheriff's Department as well as social services got
together. And our Sheriff's Department have now adopted a
policy where they will not arrest girls who are caught up in
trafficking, and that they will stop using the term ``John'' to
refer to the child molesters, because that is actually who they
are.
So while we hold the world accountable, and rightfully so,
I think it is important that we continue to hold our own
country accountable. And I appreciate that in the TIP Report it
does have a section on the United States. But I want to
continue to call for our own country, and as a matter of fact
all 50 states, to adopt a policy where they will no longer
arrest girls.
Thank you. With that I yield back my time.
Mr. Smith. I yield to Mr. Meadows.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for your
eloquent remarks as you opened up this particular hearing.
To my right, to your left is the gentlewoman from Missouri,
Ms. Wagner. And as the ranking member was talking about putting
the emphasis on what we do here in the United States, it has
not only been her calling but her passion to address that. And
so I wanted to acknowledge not only her presence but her
willingness to engage on this horrific crime against, for many
practical purposes, young girls, but not just young girls,
young boys as we well know, but not only here in the United
States, but internationally. And so her presence here hopefully
underscores the importance that all Members of Congress,
whether they are on this committee or not, places on this
particular topic.
I am troubled by the trend that I see. And I want to be
very specific in terms of what I am looking for today from each
one of you. I don't doubt the work that many of you do and the
passion at which you do it. This is some of you have been
called to this and you see it as a personal mission and not
just a profession. And I thank you for that.
But I am troubled by what I see is a manipulation for
political purposes of the TIP Report that basically has
elevated to a level beyond many of you who are seated here at
that particular desk. I am troubled by the reports, not only
that the chairman has mentioned, but specifically how we seem
to have all the way up to Secretary Kerry and those that are
just shy of his position intervening with regards to decisions
on who will be included and who will not be included.
So let me be very clear. Many times when we have the
Secretary or an Under Secretary coming in to testify and things
have not gone well, they say that they oversee a vast agency of
hundreds if not thousands of different reporting supervisors
and managers, and they couldn't individually weigh in on those
when it comes to accountability. But yet as we started to do
the analysis with who was included and who was excluded, it
appears that it goes to the very highest levels within the
State Department and then weighing in on who should be on the
report and who should not.
That is troubling because once you get away from those who
best understand it, the decisions are political. It is beyond
my comprehension, and certainly I find it extremely interesting
that Malaysia would have been removed from their status during
a TPP negotiation process that is ongoing. And yet we somehow
see this as being a pragmatic decision when very little on the
ground appears to have changed.
Either the report and our efforts to correct these terrible
crimes are meaningful or they become a political tool. And if
they become a political tool, then indeed we need to do away
with the agency and the very report itself because it is
nothing more than sending the wrong message that we don't take
this serious.
I am here today because I take this serious. I take it very
serious. My daughter at 15 years of age brought this particular
subject really up close and personal when she talked about what
was happening in the United States and abroad. And if we are
not going to stand up and be a voice, then who will?
And so I am being direct. I expect direct answers as we go
into the question and answer period, and specifically with what
kinds of intervention has taken place that could potentially be
perceived as political.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I would yield back.
Mr. Smith. Very well. Mr. Cicilline.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the
witnesses for being here today. And also thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and Ranking Member Bass for calling this hearing and
for being such leaders in the fight against human trafficking,
and particularly both here in the United States and around the
world.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your legislation that
created the TIP Report in your early years upon this issue.
The Trafficking In Persons Report which was authorized by
Congress in 2000 is designed to be used as an important tool in
our international diplomacy to incentivize countries to take
important steps to combat human trafficking and sanction those
who fall short. Since the report's inception, more than 120
countries have enacted anti-trafficking laws and many countries
have taken other steps required to significantly raise their
tier rankings, citing the report as a key factor in their
increased anti-trafficking response.
And that is why it is my judgment that it is particularly
alarming and really a shame that we are here today discussing
what seems to be the obvious politicization of the report in
the context of Malaysia.
I do not make that statement lightly. I think that the men
and women of the State Department are dedicated public servants
who fight every day to promote American values abroad. But it
is nearly impossible, looking at the facts, to conclude
anything other than the determination to move Malaysia from
Tier 3 to Tier 2 Watch List status is without sufficient
justification, and ill-advised at best.
Universally, advocates on the ground and in the anti-human
trafficking community here in the United States have reported
that Malaysia has made minimal progress and, in fact, has
fallen in some key areas in their anti-trafficking campaign in
the past year. Both The Washington Post and The New York Times
editorial boards raised concerns about this year's report.
Moreover, the anti-trafficking amendments that were
apparently taken into account to improve Malaysia's score have
still not been adopted, more than 7 months after they were used
in part to justify the change in ranking. With TPP eligibility
for Malaysia hinging on this determination, it certainly comes
off as a political one.
I hope to hear a thorough explanation today of how this
determination was made and by whom, but I fear that the damage
has already been done. Countries around the world, many of whom
have made much more progress in their countries than the
countries that we are going to be discussing today have seen
the discussion around this year's report and decided that
politics is more important than their actions. And that is a
regrettable consequence.
So I hope to hear from our witnesses how the State
Department intends to take action to restores credibility to
this vitally important report and to restore our credibility
around the world on the issue of anti-trafficking efforts.
And with that I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Mr. Donovan.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
From what I have heard from my colleagues, if any of this
is true this is alarming. So I am going to yield the rest of my
time so we can hear from the witnesses.
Mr. Smith. Okay.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Smith. Thank you. Without objection, we are joined by
Ann Wagner. And I would like to recognize my good friend.
Ms. Wagner. Thank you very, very much, Mr. Chairman. And I
thank our witnesses for being here today to testify, many of
whom are good and loyal, upstanding members of the State
Department, of which I had the pleasure of serving as a United
States Ambassador for 4 years. I applaud your work in this
area. I applaud the chairman's work, lifelong work in this
area, along with Ranking Member Bass and the kind indulgence of
the subcommittee in letting me come and speak on this very
important issue.
And I thank you for convening this hearing to investigate
the potential political interference in this year's Trafficking
In Persons Report. I applaud the committee's efforts to
increase awareness of human trafficking, especially Chairman
Smith's ongoing leadership and dedication to combating this
terrible crime that affects the most vulnerable members of our
society, both here in the United States of America and around
the globe.
On July 27th, the State Department published the 15th
installment of the Trafficking In Persons Report. This
independent annual publication ranks 188 countries on their
efforts to combat human trafficking in accordance with
standards outlined in the Trafficking Victims Protection Act.
As a former United States Ambassador, I know well, very well,
how the TIP Report serves as an important tool for pressuring
countries to take meaningful action to address human rights
violations.
Frankly, my very first introduction to the world of human
trafficking, both sex trafficking and labor trafficking, girls,
boys, men, women, all of the above, came when I served at the
State Department as a U.S. Ambassador and was responsible for
the TIP Report that came out of my mission.
And thus, when I came home from my tour of duty began to
delve into this horrific crime against humanity and the most
vulnerable, mostly young girls and women in the United States
of America, and have worked hard with many on this committee
and many throughout Congress in a bipartisan way to pass some
of the most cutting edge legislation that we have seen in many,
many years on human trafficking here domestically, and I am
pleased that the President signed into law this past May.
But it is absolutely, the TIP Report is key, key to
addressing human rights violations.
These recent media reports indicate that political
appointees meddled in the compilation of this publication by
challenging State Department human rights experts' ratings
recommendations for 17 political strategic countries, and
inflating the assessment of 14 of these. Over the objections, I
am told, of the State Department's own experts, Malaysia and
Cuba were among countries upgraded from the blacklist of worst
offenders on human trafficking.
Malaysia's unsubstantiated upgrade is particularly alarming
because of its overt importance to the Trans-Pacific
Partnership. Congress has restricted TPP negotiations with
countries that have the worst records in combating human
trafficking. Malaysia was one of those countries. However, on
the eve of the July TPP negotiating round, the State Department
took Malaysia off its human rights blacklist by upgrading its
status from a Tier 3 to the less incriminating Tier 2 Watch
List rating.
If it is true that the administration politicized this
report there are questions about why they chose to
significantly, significantly diminish a tool that has been
effective in fighting the scourge of human trafficking around
the world. The United States cannot be a leader in the fight
against human trafficking if we do not honestly assess the
state of the problem for all countries, even our own, and most
importantly including trading partners like Malaysia. The U.S.
cannot allow political interest to outweigh the safety and the
freedom of the thousands of trafficked men, women, and
children. We have to hold governments accountable for their
actions.
I welcome the continuing investigations into this year's
TIP Report, and I would urge the administration to remain
vigilant against any attempts to circumvent the veracity of
future TIP reports and the protections they provide.
I thank again the chairman, the ranking member and other
members of the subcommittee for their kind indulgence. I yield
back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith. Curt, do you want any opening comments?
Mr. Clawson. Thank you for coming. I like you a lot. Yield
back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Let me now introduce our very distinguished panel beginning
with Dr. Kari Johnstone who is the Principal Deputy Director of
the Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons. She
began serving in this role in November 2014.
Previously she served in the Bureau of Democracy, Human
Rights, and Labor in the Office of International Religious
Freedom. She also served as the Director for Russia and Central
Asia at the National Security Staff of the White House, as an
election officer at the U.S. Embassy in Afghanistan, and the
Human Rights Officer at the U.S. Embassy in Uzbekistan.
Then I would like to introduce Mr. James Carouso who is the
Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary in the Bureau of East Asian
and Pacific Affairs. He joined the Department of State in 1995
following a 14-year career in international banking and
finance.
Most recently Mr. Carouso served as the Counselor for
Economic Affairs at the U.S. Embassy in Indonesia. Prior to
that he served with the State Department in a variety of
economic and commercial roles in the Dominican Republic, South
Africa, Australia, Thailand, and Cyprus.
And finally we'll hear from in this panel Mr. Alex Lee, who
serves as Deputy Assistant Secretary for South America and Cuba
in the Bureau of Western Hemisphere Affairs. He is a career
member of the Senior Foreign Service and he was named to his
current position in February 2014.
Mr. Lee has led the biannual U.S. delegation to the
migration talks with Cuba in 2013 and 2014, and was Deputy
Chief of Mission at the U.S. Interests Section in Cuba. Prior
to joining the State Department Mr. Lee was a staffer in the
U.S. House of Representatives.
Dr. Johnstone, the floor is yours.

STATEMENT OF KARI JOHNSTONE, PH.D., PRINCIPAL DEPUTY DIRECTOR,
OFFICE TO MONITOR AND COMBAT TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Ms. Johnstone. Thank you, Chairman Smith, and members of
this subcommittee for inviting us here today to talk about the
2015 Trafficking In Persons, or TIP, Report. It has been my
honor to be associated with the TIP Report and to lead the work
of the Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons in
recent months.
I also want to thank Deputy Assistant Secretary Alex Lee
and Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary Jim Carouso for
testifying alongside me.
Producing the annual TIP Report is a year-round,
department-wide effort involving hundreds of staff in
Washington and at U.S. Embassies and consulates around the
world. The final report reflects the Department's best
assessment of foreign government efforts to comply with the
minimum standards to eliminate trafficking in persons as
outlined in the Trafficking Victims Protection Act, or the
TVPA.
I know how important the issue of modern slavery is to
Congress. On behalf of the entire Department I want to thank
you for your commitment to this issue and, Mr. Chairman, for
your authorship of this important legislation. We are thrilled
that your colleagues in the Senate have recently confirmed our
new Ambassador-at-Large to head the TIP office, Susan Coppedge.
Last week Ambassador Coppedge and the TIP office recognized the
15th anniversary of the TVPA.
Over these last 15 years we have learned that the TVPA's
legal framework is what makes the TIP Report such an effective
tool in combating human trafficking across the globe. Since the
passage of the TVPA, the TIP Report has helped to draw public
attention to the issue of human trafficking and prompted
foreign governments to take meaningful steps to address this
crime. It is often referred to as the gold standard. And I have
learned during my time leading the TIP office that it truly
lives up to this designation.
Not only is it one of the most effective diplomatic tools
our Government has for encouraging a foreign government to take
action and make progress in combating modern slavery, it also
gives voice to the many stakeholders working on the front lines
of the problem, whether they be government officials who want
to see change in their country, activists who confront the
crime wherever it occurs, or professionals providing services
to victims around the world. And it conveys the human face of
the world's trafficking crimes to its readers. There is much to
be proud of in this report.
As always, the narratives and tier rankings reflect
government efforts to increase prosecutions, improve
protections and enhance prevention efforts to combat modern
slavery, not to the extent of human trafficking in any
particular country. We saw tangible progress in many places in
the world. Many governments adopted new anti-trafficking laws
or improved existing laws, strengthened their law enforcement
efforts to convict and punish traffickers, increased inter-
governmental coordination to combat human trafficking by
establishing senior-level bodies and adopting national action
plans, and improved victim protection measures.
Between April 2014 and March 2015, Afghanistan, Angola,
Barbados, the Czech Republic, Eritrea, Sierra Leone, and Sudan
all became parties to the 2000 U.N. TIP Protocol, which we also
refer to as the Palermo Protocol. Of the 188 countries and
territories assessed in the 2015 TIP Report, 18 countries were
upgraded this year. Unfortunately, we also saw efforts fall
short in the 18 countries that were downgraded. Much work
remains, and all of us must continue to improve our efforts to
fight this crime.
We will continue to use the report to elevate human
trafficking and encourage governments to implement the actions
recommended in the TIP Report. Secretary Kerry personally
raises the issues with foreign leaders, as he recently did in
both Cuba and Malaysia. Ultimately, the purpose of the report
and our shared goal is to effect change. We continuously review
how we can use the report ever more effectively as a lever
year-round to motivate tangible progress around the world.
For example, I just returned from a productive trip to
Thailand, Malaysia, Hong Kong, and China during which I urged
these governments to make stronger efforts to implement the
recommendations in the 2015 TIP Report. I was pleased to see
that every official I met with was aware of their tier
designation in the TIP Report. I won't claim that all these
officials fully agreed with our assessment, but the report and
minimum standards have clearly focused attention on the
realities of modern slavery and the tangible steps required to
combat this crime.
It was also clear in each country I visited last month that
officials in our Embassies and consulates are regularly
engaging their host governments to improve their anti-
trafficking efforts and to implement the TIP Report
recommendations. Amidst all the important information found in
the annual TIP Report, one message becomes clear year after
year: Human trafficking is a challenge in nearly every corner
of the globe, including here in the United States. Governments
all over the world, including those on Tier 1, struggle to keep
up with a crime that affects millions of individuals compelled
into service for sex or labor or both. We must all continue to
improve our efforts to fight and end this crime.
We know our work is critical. We remain committed to
addressing these challenges. And we look forward to helping to
create a world free from modern slavery.
Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Would either of you like to add? I know it is a
joint statement but please.

STATEMENT OF MR. JAMES CAROUSO, ACTING DEPUTY ASSISTANT
SECRETARY, BUREAU OF EAST ASIAN AND PACIFIC AFFAIRS, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Mr. Carouso. Thank you, Chairman Smith, and members of the
subcommittee. It is a privilege to testify with Dr. Kari
Johnstone. This acknowledged expert on this issue has done so
much to combat trafficking across the region, I echo her
appreciation for inviting us here today to talk about the 2015
Trafficking In Persons Report. And I want to again acknowledge
the work of this subcommittee and you, too, Mr. Chairman, on
the importance of this report for the work we do in our
Embassies across the region.
As Dr. Johnstone explained, producing the TIP Report is a
year-round Department-wide effort involving all of our
Embassies and consulates around the world. As a Foreign Service
Officer I have experience myself when I served in Thailand I
was in the border with China I was sent to a room full of
garlic, a mountain of garlic, and all these young women peeling
the garlic, speaking Chinese. Obviously they didn't belong in
Thailand.
The credibility that we have as an Embassy, as U.S. Embassy
employees, and using tools like the TIP Report help us solve
problems like that. And some of my proudest moments are to be
able to deal with things like that.
It truly is, the TIP Report, is one of the best diplomatic
tools we have to ensure the governments across the region take
seriously the efforts to combat trafficking in persons. When
progress is insufficient, as it unfortunately is in a number of
countries in East Asia and the Pacific, the recommendations of
the TIP Report provide guidance, concrete guidance, to our
Embassies and consulates overseas as they carry out their
diplomatic duties, as the Ambassador was saying.
EAP and the TIP office collaborate closely with foreign
governments and international partners to combat trafficking.
EAP and the TIP office also work very closely with federal
partners to provide foreign assistance to combat human
trafficking, particularly the Bureau of International Narcotics
and Law Enforcement; Population, Refugees, and Migration;
Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor; USAID, and the
Department of Labor. The TIP office currently funds 20 projects
in 14 EAP countries.
I would like to just highlight a few examples of this
bilateral engagement. In the Philippines, civil society
organizations are providing law enforcement with training and
support to address the ongoing commercial sexual exploitation
of children. Across the Pacific Islands we fund programs to
enhance victim protection, strengthen anti-trafficking
investigations and prosecutions.
In Thailand we recently collaborated with the Department of
Homeland Security to embed agents in the Royal Thai Police's
Anti-Trafficking Division and we are considering ways to
replicate that model in other countries.
Our approach to trafficking is not limited to just
bilateral engagements. Due in part to the focus the U.S.
Government places on combating trafficking in the region, we
are working with ASEAN, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, as they come close to endorsing a Convention on
Trafficking in Persons. And the State Department is planning to
fund regional ASEAN projects to help meet the requirements of
the convention.
Year-round, even after the report is complete, U.S.
officials at every level from Ambassadors down to the most
junior officer regularly engage host governments in trafficking
issues. From my own experience I know that these efforts are
well-integrated into our Embassies' overall strategic plans as
well as their daily work. And thanks largely to the
effectiveness of the report's tier ranking system, we are able
to urge progress. Armed with these rankings, the TIP office,
EAP, and our posts overseas will continue to be able to
effectively collaborate on programs and diplomatic strategies
better combating this scourge in the future.
Once again I truly thank you and we look forward to your
questions.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much.
Mr. Lee.

STATEMENT OF MR. ALEX LEE, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY, BUREAU
OF WESTERN HEMISPHERE AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Mr. Lee. I have a short statement.
Thank you, Chairman Smith and members of the subcommittee
for the opportunity to develop and present remarks about the
2015 Trafficking In Persons Report.
The scourge of modern day trafficking in persons touches
every region of the globe, including that of the Western
Hemisphere. And the Bureau of the Western Hemisphere Affairs
takes trafficking in persons and the challenge of addressing
effective solutions to it very seriously. We regularly engage
with partner governments to encourage the prosecution of
traffickers, provide protection to victims, and to provide
programs for prevention.
Our Embassy personnel are on the front lines of this
diplomatic engagement, whether at the senior level of the front
office of our Ambassadors, whether at the working level with
the ministries of foreign affairs, justice, or the security or
public security ministries. And in addition, our Embassy
personnel provide the reporting that informs much of the annual
Trafficking In Persons Report.
U.S. programs that promote rule of law, good governance,
citizen security, and economic prosperity throughout the
Western Hemisphere seek to address the underlying factors that
allow trafficking in persons to persist. For example, the
Department of State funds capacity building of law enforcement
and immigration officials in the region to screen and identify
victims of human trafficking and to investigate and prosecute
those cases.
We work closely with the Office to Monitor and Combat
Trafficking in Persons and with partner governments to compile
the most accurate information that will allow us and our
partners to assess government efforts and work toward the most
effective solutions.
I look forward to answering your questions.
[The joint statement of Ms. Johnstone, Mr. Carouso, and Mr.
Lee follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Smith. Thank you. Thank you very much for your
testimony. And again thanks to all of you for being here today.
Let me just ask you, in light of the Reuters report, in
light of concerns that many of us have about Malaysia, China,
some of us at least have strong concerns about Cuba and
Uzbekistan, and even Vietnam--I mean Vietnam has complicity in
trafficking, particularly labor trafficking--did any other
concern, such as a trade, factor in any way or come into play
in the administration's decision to upgrade Malaysia or Cuba or
China?
Again, I read the report on Cuba three times. It is
excellent. It frames it. It gets it. It captures the
information based on everything else I know and other sources.
And yet it, it doesn't warrant an upgrade.
And I am wondering in light of the rapprochement that has
occurred between Washington and Havana, was that in any way a
part of this, any way? Because I would think that the TIP
Report made recommendations--and perhaps, Doctor, you might
want to speak to that--there should be more transparency in
this process. I know very often the default is to say we can't
say what we recommended. But we need to know that. This is all
about a gross human rights abuse that disproportionately now
affects women and children. And, you know, like as I said in my
opening, China had 35 convictions; Watch List. Thailand had 151
convictions; Tier 3. Malaysia had three convictions and Cuba is
down in the single digits as well.
You know, Thailand must feel aggrieved with the
juxtaposition of these other countries, the upgrades. And there
appears to be other issues that come into play.
I will note parenthetically, I was never more proud, and I
am a very stauch supporter of Israel and South Korea, but
during the previous administration both Israel and South Korea
were designated as Tier 3 countries because that is where the
evidence took the administration. And, frankly, both countries
did robust things, did tremendous things. South Korea passed
new laws. And certainly, I met with the Ambassador from Israel
several times, they are reporting, their closing up of brothels
just was extraordinary. And they got off Tier 3 the old
fashioned way, they earned it.
But then to look at, was there any other factor in this
continuum of decision made by TIP, goes on to the Assistant
Secretary, the Deputy, the DASes, right up to Secretary Kerry
and to President Obama. And if you could--and I hope you will--
if you could provide us with who made these decisions at the
end of the day?
Ms. Johnstone. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. If I may
begin at least to answer that question.
This year when we prepared the 2015 TIP Report, as in
previous years it was a truly deliberative, fact-based process
of discussions between our experts throughout the State
Department, both at our Embassies and consulates overseas, with
our colleagues in regional bureaus here in Washington, and
experts in the TIP office. That is the same process that we use
every year. We compare and assess governments' efforts against
that own government's efforts the previous years, against the
minimum standards as outlined in the TVPA, specifically looking
at those criteria and whether or not the government has indeed
made significant efforts to fulfill those minimum standards.
That is the process that was true for all of the countries
this year when we made those decisions. Ultimately, the final
tier designations are made by the Secretary of State, this year
as they are every year, by the authority given to him in the
TVPA. So these decisions are in fact his to make, not the TIP
office or others in the State Department.
Mr. Smith. But again, Doctor----
Ms. Johnstone. The recommendations certainly----
Mr. Smith [continuing]. You do make a recommendation as to
what the designations should be when there is a split? I mean
no one knows more about it than you and the daily calls that
went out to the various Embassies. They are on the ground. They
know.
And I think 15 years later we are really getting it right
because every Embassy I go to, and there are many, I always ask
who is doing TIP there. And I am always impressed just how
seriously they take this.
But, again, my big question is like with Malaysia, did TPP
play a role in that upgrade?
Ms. Johnstone. The Secretary himself has said publicly that
TPP did not come into it. He did not consult others in the
administration, nor did the White House through USTR weigh in.
I have no knowledge that that came up at any other officials'
discussions on the tier designation for Malaysia or any other
country.
Mr. Smith. How about with regards to Cuba? Again the Report
is excellent in its detail. And I mean when a country doesn't
even acknowledge its forced labor, when it pimps out girls who
are 16. And we know that the government runs the infrastructure
for hotels and the like. And it is a very, very cruel
exploitation of young girls and young boys. And I am just
wondering who, you know, what was the recommendation of the TIP
Office and then to the bureau? Was it to keep it at Tier 3,
Cuba?
Ms. Johnstone. As you yourself indicated, we don't discuss
the internal deliberations and recommendations of the different
parts of the State Department. There is a robust discussion. In
the vast majority of cases we reach consensus at the expert
level and discussions don't go further.
There are some cases that the evidence may be pointing in
different directions. As you know yourself, within the minimum
standards there are four minimum standards and 12 indicia. So
there are a lot of different factors we are looking at. In some
cases they all point in the same direction of either progress
or lack thereof. In some cases they are mixed, as was the case
in Malaysia that we saw increased prosecutions and
investigations but a decline in convictions.
So when we do have more complicated situations like that,
the discussions do go further up the chain and ultimately the
Secretary makes the decision.
Mr. Smith. But again on this increased prosecution, without
objection the testimony of Most Reverend Eusebio Elizondo an
Auxiliary Bishop of Seattle who led a delegation of the U.S.
Conference of Catholic Bishops to Malaysia. They make the point
that despite the presence of an anti-trafficking law, the
delegation learned that the government offers little or no
protection or rescue to victims. And on the very issue you just
mentioned, while Malaysia's arrests increased, arrests for
human traffickers, the conviction rate remains low due to the
ability of the traffickers to bribe or threaten officials.
That is exactly what we thought we corrected in previous
iterations of the TVPA. It is not just how many arrests you
make and then put that out as a neon light. Yes, look at all
these arrests. What good is it if there are no convictions and
nobody does real time or have their assets seized that they
gleaned through such a nefarious enterprise.
So, again, if there is a way you could tell us who made
this decision? I mean TPP had no impact on this? Mr. Carouso,
you might want to speak to that?
I mean the Senate was very robust, including my senior
Senator, in raising this issue, Bob Menendez.
Mr. Carouso. I can tell you in every meeting I was ever in
to discuss this, the discussions were strictly related to the
facts of the trafficking in persons situation in the countries
involved. And that includes reports you got in from the
Embassy.
Ms. Johnstone. If I may add, also you asked about the
importance of the TVPA and the criteria outlined therein in the
discussions. Absolutely they are central. And in the case of
Malaysia we did look across the three P's. And as you noted, we
have serious concerns about victim protection in Malaysia. That
has been our number one recommendation in the last several
years in the TIP Report, encouraging the government to
fundamentally change how it treats trafficking victims.
They have essentially been held in government shelters that
essentially serve as detention facilities where the victims
have neither freedom of movement nor the right to work. And
that has been our top priority recommendation in the last
several years because, as you point out, it is a very serious
concern
The government did make significant efforts over the course
of the 2015 reporting period in the 2014 calendar year to
improve that. And the amendments that were passed just after
the reporting period ended do seek to fundamentally revise that
system. We are cautiously optimistic that once they are
implemented they will make meaningful progress in this area.
But that was the number one priority.
Mr. Smith. I have more questions but two of our members do
have to leave.
Ms. Johnstone. Sure.
Mr. Smith. I would like to yield to Ms. Bass and then to
Mr. Meadows both.
Ms. Bass. Thank you. I really appreciate that.
I wanted to ask you about online trafficking. And it is
certainly a growing problem, especially in the U.S. when there
are like large sporting events like, like the Super Bowl, for
example. And there was this big, huge bust on sex trafficking
and then there are sites like Backpage, Craigslist, and even
Facebook.
And so I wanted to know what, what efforts within the
Federal Government are being made to curtail this? And then
also, is this an international phenomena?
Ms. Johnstone. We are definitely tracking that issue, both
in the United States. Our colleagues and other parts of the
Federal Government are increasing their efforts on that in
terms of law enforcement efforts to try to identify traffickers
who are using online methods to find their victims.
We, unfortunately, are also seeing that as a growing trend
in some other countries. The Philippines, for example, is an
area that we have focused on. So both through our diplomatic
efforts, but also our programming efforts, we are trying to get
a better handle on this because there does seem to be an
increasing problem around the world.
Ms. Bass. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. I would like yield to Mr. Meadows for questions
he has.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So, Dr. Johnstone, your testimony today, and let me be
clear, is that no factor other than trafficking issues, no
trade issues, no domestic policy issues have entered in in the
decisions to either raise or lower the status of any of these
countries this year? Is that your testimony?
Ms. Johnstone. In all of the discussions that we had within
the TIP office----
Mr. Meadows. Not discussions. I am asking about your
testimony here today. Is that your testimony that it did not
play a factor?
Ms. Johnstone. None of the discussions with respect to the
recommendations that were made by my colleagues in regional
bureaus or the TIP office included any other factors other than
trafficking itself.
I cannot speak to the discussions that took place amongst
the----
Mr. Meadows. I am not asking about discussions, okay. You
are giving a great answer to a question I didn't ask. I am
talking about consideration. There is a difference between
discussion and what is really considered in terms of the way
that a decision is arrived at. And I am just saying that the
evidence wouldn't support that there were not other mitigating
factors.
And I want to know what your testimony is here today
because that, you are leading us that direction and I want to
make sure that we are clear.
Ms. Johnstone. The decisions on the tier rankings
themselves were made by the Secretary of State. He himself has
publicly said no other factors came into it. That is the full
total of my knowledge.
Mr. Meadows. I am asking for your testimony. You are here
today. If he was here I would ask him the same question. But I
am asking for your testimony.
Ms. Johnstone. Any of the recommendations that were made--
--
Mr. Meadows. Yes or no.
Ms. Johnstone [continuing]. By my colleagues----
Mr. Meadows. I need to know, yes or no?
Ms. Johnstone. There were no factors other than the TVPA
criteria to my knowledge.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. Are you and Mr. Carouso, are you willing
to give us your split memos or split reports and supply them to
this committee as it relates to the decisions and how they
came?
Ms. Johnstone. The State Department does not share the
internal deliberations.
Mr. Meadows. I know they don't. I said are you willing to
give them? Because that would help us eliminate the decision-
making process without you having to weigh in on it personally.
And do you not think the American people have a right to know?
Ms. Johnstone. I believe that the question of what
information we would share and what documents we are able to
share is being discussed currently by----
Mr. Meadows. Do you think the American people have a right
to know?
Ms. Johnstone. Have a right to know about how we----
Mr. Meadows. Arrive at these horrific crimes and whether we
trade with them, how it would be trade, do you think the
American people have a right to know? It is an easy question.
Ms. Johnstone. I think it is very important to the American
people how we address the issue. And I think that the facts
speak for themselves in the reports themselves.
Mr. Meadows. All right. So will you supply the split memo
to this committee?
Ms. Johnstone. I will have to consult with my colleagues
back in the State Department what documentation we are able to
provide.
Mr. Meadows. Are you saying that you are prohibited?
Because I don't believe you are prohibited.
Ms. Johnstone. I am saying I don't have the authority to
decide what documentation the State Department can provide.
Mr. Meadows. All right. Mr. Carouso, are you willing to
give us your split memos?
Mr. Carouso. I agree with Dr. Johnstone, I would have to go
back to my bosses and----
Mr. Meadows. Well you guys, I am sure you prepared for this
hearing today. And as you were preparing for this hearing I
believe that you would anticipate that this particular question
would have come up. And so when you prepared what was the
decision was made? Were you going to give that information to
this committee or not, Mr. Carouso?
Mr. Carouso. I never asked, sir.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. All right. So let me ask you this. There
were 17 different cases. Of the 17 cases, the initial
recommendations were only adhered to, according to my
information, in three times, three out of 17. That is a batting
average of .175. Normally it wouldn't put you on the Kansas
City Royals with that kind of batting average.
So if your recommendation was only followed and not
overruled, that is the way that I view it, being overruled, by
people up the line, only out of 17 times you were overruled 14
times, would you say that that is indicative of people up the
line making a decision that may not be based on those closest
to the information?
Ms. Johnstone. That would certainly not be how I would
characterize it. I do believe that the entire State Department
takes the issue very seriously and our obligation----
Mr. Meadows. I am not denying that. What I am, what I am
getting at is it appears that Secretary Kerry and the Under
Secretary made a decision in 6 of the 17 cases. Is that
correct?
Ms. Johnstone. We are not discussing the internal positions
but----
Mr. Meadows. That is not an internal position. That is just
saying how many times did they weigh in? Did they weigh in six
times or not?
Ms. Johnstone. The internal discussion process and which
countries who weighed in on them we are considering to be the
internal deliberation process. And to maintain the----
Mr. Meadows. Well, I, I appreciate----
Ms. Johnstone [continuing]. Reliability of the report----
Mr. Meadows [continuing]. That. But you know what it
appears is is that you're coming here, we are asking very
specific and not difficult questions and yet you seem to want
to avoid those. Wendy Sherman, who I have a great deal of
respect for, admire, weighed in on 11 countries; is that
correct?
Ms. Johnstone. I am not able to comment on the internal
deliberations.
Mr. Meadows. Not able to not willing?
Ms. Johnstone. Not able.
Mr. Meadows. So you are saying by statute you are not
allowed to tell this committee, who has oversight of this
particular issue? Is that your testimony?
Ms. Johnstone. The way that the process goes within the
State Department, we have expert-level discussions within our
office and----
Mr. Meadows. Are you willing to have us review that when we
are not in a public forum with just members of both the
minority and the majority looking at those split memos? Are you
willing to do that?
Ms. Johnstone. That is certainly something that I will
consult with my colleagues on.
Mr. Meadows. When will you have an answer back to this
committee?
Ms. Johnstone. As soon as we possibly can.
Mr. Meadows. So within 7 days?
Ms. Johnstone. That should be possible.
Mr. Meadows. All right. I will yield back. Thank you.
[The information referred to follows:]
Written Response Received from Kari Johnstone, Ph.D., to Question Asked
During the Hearing by the Honorable Mark Meadows
These types of documents requested are inherently deliberative in
nature.
In order to inform his tier ranking decisions, the Secretary draws
upon the expertise of the entire State Department and considers
different perspectives on the facts and criteria set forth in the
Trafficking Victims Protection Act (TVPA). In the case of a few
countries each year--as in 2015--senior Department officials may offer
the Secretary their assessments of the totality of a government's
efforts measured against the minimum standards in the TVPA, thereby
helping inform the Secretary's decisions.
As a matter of policy, the Department does not share internal
documents that are part of the deliberative process. It is critical
that Department officials are able to convey their views frankly during
the deliberative process, which ultimately contributes to the integrity
of the TIP Report and the strength of tier ranking decisions. If you
would like to discuss further, we are happy to answer any remaining
questions you may have.

Mr. Smith. Let me just follow up and continue my
questioning and then I will yield to Mr. Cicilline. We do have
a break. We have five votes on the floor. Take about 20 minutes
if we all make the last one, or the first one I should say.
Just with regards to Vietnam, I have chaired hearings on
Vietnam Human Rights Act that I have gotten passed four times
in the House. I have been there. We know that labor trafficking
is a huge problem. The first case that was prosecuted
successfully was against Vietnamese leaders from Daiwa. And
that was the first conviction that was gleaned from that law.
Mark Lagon from Freedom House, also a former TIP
Ambassador, makes an excellent point that the upgrade of
Vietnam to Tier 2 is bewildering and claims that there is an
utter absence of prosecutions for labor trafficking, as well as
official complicity, which we know is a huge problem. And we
have had hearings on just that: Vietnam's complicity with human
trafficking.
And I am wondering why they even got an upgrade to Tier 2?
Also if you could answer again on the Chinese issue. As I
said in my opening comments, the reform through labor. I am
probably the only member, along with Frank Wolf, who has ever
been in a laogai, Beijing Number 1. Soon after the Tiananmen
Square massacre we saw 40 Tiananmen Square, protesters we
weren't allowed to talk to, who had shaved heads and looked
like concentration camp victims. The laogai has not been
dismantled. It has morphed into something else. It is still
utterly repressive. And, again, that was the pretext for
upgrading China.
China ought to be Tier 3. Whether or not you sanction them
is all up to you. There is huge discretion there. But in terms
of looking at the facts on the ground, whether it be sex
trafficking or labor trafficking, China is a basket case. And
it is in a race to the bottom with North Korea on these issues.
And yet, superpower considerations maybe were mitigating
factors there.
And that is what Mr. Meadows and I and so many others are
trying to get at. Were other issues involved, intervening
issues, like opening an Embassy in both Havana and Washington,
China being a superpower? This TIP Report is sacred. We have
got to get it right and pull no punches, and say it exactly the
way it is, assign tier rankings exactly the way they ought to
be. And then what you do on sanctions is all up to you; the
second shoe that needs to drop, which we seem to be late in
hearing anyway when it comes to the sanctions part, which we
thought would be in September.
So if you could, on Vietnam, on China, and again answer on
the record whether any intervening issues, not whether or not
it was discussed, that could be plausible deniability, we never
discussed it so we can say in front of a committee that there
was never discussion on other issues--but if the elephant in
the room was the TPP, well we have many members on both sides
of the aisle, disproportionately Democrat, who feel that the
system was gamed. I believe it was gamed on Malaysia.
Again, if I were Thailand looking at those conviction
numbers, China 35 convictions, Thailand 151, Malaysia 3. I mean
that is a cruel joke. And so please if you could address that
and as well as our distinguished DASes.
Ms. Johnstone. Do you have a preference for which country
we take first?
Mr. Smith. In the order you would like to answer.
Ms. Johnstone. One thing I just wanted to point out
quickly, you mentioned the sanctions and waivers piece. The
White House did in fact release that information in October. I
was looking for the date but we can get you the exact date.
That was indeed released already.
And I think perhaps my colleague can talk about Vietnam. I
am happy to talk about China.
Mr. Carouso. Okay. I think what impressed us in Vietnam
were the arrests of 685 suspected traffickers, and that they
prosecuted 472 and convicted 413. Most sentences ranged from 3
to 15 years imprisonment. More than 1,000 potential trafficking
victims were identified and provided protection. And integrated
support to another 668.
U.S. participated in joint investigations and rescue
operations in neighboring countries. In 2012 Vietnam's anti-
trafficking law expanded to specifically define and criminalize
sex and labor trafficking with punishments from 2 to 20 years
and 3 to 25 years imprisonment. It has also increased the
number of officials who received anti-trafficking training.
So all those factors weighed on the Tier 2 ranking.
Part of the issue here is that the problems are horrific,
as you point out. And when we are doing these rankings it is
measuring a country against itself. Because if we try measuring
countries against other countries then it gets really, really
complicated, as you know, sir. So Vietnam made some progress.
And even the miserable number of three convictions in
Malaysia, yes, that was terrible. So now we are working with
them to train officials on how you prosecute these cases and
they welcome that. We are working with them on how to get the
implementing regulations right on the amendments that you
passed so that there can't be loopholes which mean they can't
get the convictions later on.
And again, getting to the bottom line, were are encouraged
modestly by Malaysia's apparent effort to address this issue
with seriousness. And this report and your subcommittee's
passion about it, which we point out every chance we get, that
this is being watched very, very carefully, that we have to
answer to a higher authority, they know. Deputy Prime Minister
Zahid of Malaysia was here just a couple weeks ago and
Secretary Kerry pointed this out to him in very short, clear
words and he promised how he would personally make sure these
issues were addressed.
Anyway, I just, I wanted to really emphasize that.
And now you want to talk about China?
Ms. Johnstone. Sure. I can take over for China.
Mr. Carouso. Please.
Ms. Johnstone. If you would like.
When I was there last week I reinforced the serious concern
that I know you share and that Deputy Secretary Blinken raised
when he was in China as well. We are deeply concerned about the
situation of human trafficking in China. Particularly, they
need to take robust steps to address forced labor, including in
state facilities. We raised that quite directly.
We are also concerned about women and children who may be
trafficking victims that are not screened and identified as
trafficking victims and may in fact be arrested and ultimately
either prosecuted or deported if they are not Chinese citizens
for crimes that they committed as a result of being victims
rather than treated as victims.
We are also concerned that the government has forcibly
repatriated North Koreans, as you mentioned. We continue to
raise these issues both in the report and in our engagement
with the government.
I must say that in my conversations last week with Chinese
officials I was somewhat pleasantly surprised by their openness
to share information with us, the efforts that they are taking
to address particularly sex trafficking, and their expressed
eagerness to continue to share best practices and even engage
in joint training. Hopefully this can be a foundation that we
can help them build better understanding of the crime.
One of the things that I left the country with was a sense
that the Chinese Government's understanding of the crime of
human trafficking is not the same as our own or as is outlined
in the U.N. Palermo Protocol. In particular, they focus on
issues in their laws as more expansive than our law or than
Palermo. So we are trying to get a better understanding of
their law enforcement data, how much of that actually is
addressing what we would consider to be human trafficking as
opposed to other horrible crimes that we just don't call human
trafficking, like organ harvesting and organ trafficking,
illegal adoption.
We talked a lot about the issue of forced marriage and
trafficking amongst those women. As you yourself mentioned, Mr.
Chairman, there is plenty to be concerned about in China. We do
indeed measure the government's efforts against its own efforts
in previous years, which is why China remained on the Tier 2
Watch List based on its efforts in previous years and what we
do believe to be increasing law enforcement efforts.
We have serious concerns that we will continue to raise
with them. And, hopefully, we will make some progress in the
future.
I think my colleague also wanted to answer some of your
questions about Cuba if we may.
Mr. Smith. Please.
Ms. Johnstone. And before I----
Mr. Smith. And before we leave Asia, if I could very
quickly.
Ms. Johnstone. Yes.
Mr. Smith. There is a Reuters report this morning that
India has been preventing trafficking victims and their
families who have been granted T visas by the U.S. from leaving
India and starting their lives in the United States. India is a
Tier 2 country. We don't have numbers on convictions or victims
identified as assisted. I am not sure why or how they could be
a Tier 2 country.
I have, we have had hearings on India as well in this
subcommittee raising these issues. And so that is a bit
baffling as well. We don't give out T visas mindlessly. We do
our due diligence. I applaud the administration for that. But
now they are on their end showing a great reluctance, claiming
that it is fraudulent. So and then Cuba too, if you could.
Ms. Johnstone. If I could just mention.
Mr. Smith. Sure.
Ms. Johnstone. October 5th was when the Presidential
determinations with respect to waivers and sanctions for the
Tier 3 countries were released. October 5th.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Mr. Lee. Thank you, Chairman.
You asked in your opening presentation whether a TIP
upgrade was a subject of discussion in the reestablishment of
diplomatic relations. And I can answer categorically that it
was not.
Mr. Smith. And again, it was not part of the decision.
Whether or not it was discussed, it just was completely
separate and distinct?
Mr. Lee. It was completely separate. And but I would like
to make the observation that our constructive engagement with
the Cubans, which was basically done prior to the normalization
talks in the migration talks, which I participated in, we have
been talking about TIP sets of issues. And there was a distinct
change on the Cuban side after they acceded to the Palermo
Protocol, the Palermo Convention in mid-2013.
What happened after that was kind of an accelerated
bilateral engagement on TIP in a way that had never occurred
before. And so in a sense, our understanding of what the Cuban
Government was doing, whether on prosecutions, protection, or
prevention, greatly increased as a result of these exchanges.
So, for example, we had in November 2013, a first
videoconference of TIP experts at a very senior level on both
countries.
In March 2014 we had a joint J/TIP and WHA visit to Havana
looking at what the Cuban Government was doing on the ground in
a way that we had never had access to.
In February 2015 Under Secretary Sewall had a meeting with
the main Cuban Foreign Ministry official responsible for the
United States, again to emphasize the importance of TIP in our
bilateral relationship.
A month later a technical-level group of TIP, Cuban TIP
experts came to the United States for a series of technically
focused meetings. And----
Mr. Smith. Mr. Lee, if you could just suspend and we will
come right back to you as soon as we can. We are on zero, we
are out of time for voting. So we are going to run over and
vote. We will be back in about 20 minutes. And I apologize for
the interruption and for the inconvenience to all of you.
Stand in recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Smith. The subcommittee will resume its sitting. And
again I apologize for that lengthy delay.
You were, Mr. Lee, still in the process of answering. If
you would continue.
Mr. Lee. Thank you, Chairman.
I was essentially going through a litany of engagements.
But to make the larger point that our understanding of what the
Cuban Government does and does not do has greatly increased in
the past couple of years and in a sense has been a beneficiary
of the more constructive engagement between the two governments
in those areas both governments have decided to work on in a
cooperative manner, of which trafficking in persons is one of
those.
So for all of the areas that we have reported and
identified in the TIP Report on Cuba that we need to work on,
we have established with the Cuban Government, an ongoing
process of sharing information that allows us to make our
points and also understand what they are doing and what they
are not doing. And that is basically the point I wanted to
make.
Thank you, sir.
Mr. Smith. If you could, Mr. Carouso, speak to the India
issue, if you would like. And really touch on the T visa report
today, the Indian Government being very hostile toward that.
But also, what do we have? I mean some of the earlier hearings
that we had in this subcommittee were on very, very young
Indian girls who were trafficked. I remember I was actually in
Nigeria in between stops on a trip and I watched an
unbelievably incisive CNN report that talked about in \1/2\
hour what I had heard from a number of the witnesses from India
for years about how the police were tipped off right before a
brothel raid where underage girls, some as young as 10, were
quickly scooted out the building so that they could not be
rescued because there was an informant within the police
department.
One of the things that our TIP minimum standards emphasizes
is that police are part of the government. If there is
complicity by the police, prosecutors, judges, or anyone else
in law enforcement, that too constitutes a violation of minimum
standards.
So if you could speak to India, if you would, and then I
will yield to Mr. Cicilline.
Mr. Carouso. Actually, EAP does not cover India. So I am
going to defer to Kari.
Ms. Johnstone. So I will in fact speak about India.
We do have serious concerns about the trafficking situation
in India. We absolutely share your concern about such appalling
stories that we, unfortunately, do hear coming out of India.
The Government of India does not fully comply with the minimum
standards for the elimination of trafficking, but it is making
improvements in efforts to do so in our assessment.
During the reporting period, the government continued to
fund shelter and rehabilitation services for women and children
throughout India. It trained prosecutors and judges. And upon
order of the Supreme Court, several states launched searches to
trace the whereabouts of thousands of lost and abandoned
children, including, we believe, potential trafficking victims.
The government's law enforcement progress was unclear,
however, as you stated, as the government did not provide
adequate disaggregated anti-trafficking data. And official
complicity remained a serious concern that we share with you as
well, Mr. Chairman. We continue to be troubled that victims
were sometimes penalized through arrests for crimes committed
as a result of being subjected to human trafficking, and that
many anti-human trafficking units which liaise with other
agencies and refer victims to shelters were not functioning.
NGOs assessed that government victim care services were
inconsistent and inadequate for the scale of India's
trafficking problem. We, therefore, remain concerned about the
serious human trafficking situation in India, including forced
and bonded labor.
On the T visa issue that you mentioned, I also would like
to say that that is a concern that we share. We are deeply
concerned by the reports that some Indian nationals holding
U.S. T visa have experienced travel restrictions. As you noted,
this is an important protection that the United States provides
to trafficking victims, and we take that very seriously.
The current status of the Indian policy, as even the
Reuters story that came out today indicated, is unclear. We
continue to ask the Indian Government both to fully repeal the
policy and give us a better understanding of what they are
doing. We have engaged repeatedly, both in Washington and
within India through our mission at very high levels.
Ambassador Susan Coppedge and I will be heading there again
this month, and we will definitely raise the issue of the T
visas as well as the other, these other concerns that we have
about human trafficking.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you again to our witnesses for your work and for your
testimony today. I really want to focus my questions on
Malaysia.
I have looked carefully at the 2014 TIP Report. And when
you compare the 2014 and 2015 TIP Reports, the bulk of the
recommendations that the Department makes regarding Malaysia
are substantially the same. For example, they both report the
need to amend Malaysia's anti-trafficking law, to provide
protective services to all victims, to implement procedures to
identify labor trafficking victims, to offer alternatives to
deportation to countries where victims face oppression, to
increase efforts to notify migrant workers of their rights, and
to better cooperate with other governments in the region. They
look like the same recommendations.
And so my first question really is, if the Government of
Malaysia had made a good faith effort to improve its anti-
trafficking efforts, why did the government fulfill so few of
the recommendations that were laid out in the 2014 TIP Report?
Ms. Johnstone. If I may begin by noting that the
recommendations in the TIP Report generally are quite broad and
long-term. And they are usually meant to bring a government
into full compliance with the minimum standards. So they are
not short-term or small.
And very frequently if you look at different countries as
well, you would find that from year to year many of the
recommendations are repeated, even if there is tier movement,
because there may be some, some progress in one area of the
recommendations but not others. So that is something that you
would see in many countries.
In the case of Malaysia----
Mr. Cicilline. But again, the point is that they should do
some of those before they change positions on the rankings, not
just----
Ms. Johnstone. And they may, indeed, be making significant
efforts toward fulfilling those recommendations without
completely fulfilling the recommendations, which I think you
could say is the case with Malaysia in 2015.
We had said, I mentioned earlier, for several years that
our primary top recommendation, our biggest concern was how
victims are treated in Malaysia. And with the adoption of
amendments to their law we do believe that, if fully
implemented, that the new law would fundamentally change the
victim protection system.
Mr. Cicilline. But to be clear, those recommendations were
not adopted at the time of the issuance of the TIP Report. In
fact, it says specifically there were draft amendments that
were made to existing anti-trafficking law. The cabinet
approved the draft amendments and introduced them to
Parliament, but Parliament had not passed the amendments at the
end of the reporting period.
So it seems to me the only significant difference is the
creation of a pilot program for government workers to be out of
detention. Is there anything in addition to that that
distinguishes 2014 from 2015?
Ms. Johnstone. We certainly saw much increased government
efforts and four cabinet level meetings throughout the year in
which the government did ramp up and outline significant new
efforts that it was taking, including drafting this law through
new consultations with civil society which it had not done in
the past.
Mr. Cicilline. Yes.
Ms. Johnstone. That was indeed progress and one of our top
recommendations as well.
Mr. Cicilline. I am very concerned because when you take
these two reports and put them side by side, while it
identifies actions that Malaysia should take, which I think
most countries would understand to mean you should do these
things or some effort in a serious way to get these things
done. And if you get some of them done you will presumably have
some opportunity to move up in the rankings. They got none of
them done other than this pilot program and they had a
significant change in their status.
So my next question is, did any staff in the Office to
Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons recommend the upgrade
from Tier 3 to Tier 2 Watch List for Malaysia?
Ms. Johnstone. Well again, we do not discuss the internal
deliberations and who had which position within the State
Department. It is a fact-based deliberative process. And to
maintain the credibility of the process itself we believe it is
important that the expert opinions throughout the State
Department are able to be expressed freely and candidly and
that the credibility of the process is really important.
Mr. Cicilline. So is it the normal course that the
Secretary of State's recommendation, without telling what they
are, that they mirror regularly the recommendations of your
office? Or are departures from the recommendations of your
office common? Does it happen once every ten countries? Does it
happen once a year? How frequently is the Secretary of State's
determination at odds with the determination or the
recommendation of the Department?
Ms. Johnstone. As I said earlier, the decision is
ultimately the Secretary's to make. Our----
Mr. Cicilline. No, I know that. My question is, how often
is his decision different from the recommendation of the staff
of your office?
Ms. Johnstone. In the vast majority of cases the
recommendations reach consensus at the working level between
the TIP office and the regional bureaus and our colleagues at
our Embassies and consulates around the world.
Mr. Cicilline. So you say this determination is fact based.
And obviously you can't tell us what was in the Secretary's
head. But the facts that you rely on to make the
recommendation, is one difference of circumstances this pilot
program?
Ms. Johnstone. As well as the activity of the government
throughout the year and in consulting with civil society and
drafting the amendments.
Mr. Cicilline. So on April 17th, the U.S. Ambassador to
Malaysia Joseph Yun said that Malaysia needed to show greater
political will in prosecuting human traffickers and protecting
their victims if the country hoped to improve its Tier 3
ranking. Given that the 2015 TIP Report covers government
efforts undertaken from April 1, 2014 through March 31, 2015,
meaning that all actions referenced in the report had already
occurred before Ambassador Yun's comments, can you explain why
the Department disagreed with the Ambassador's assessment?
Ms. Johnstone. Again, we are not free to discuss the
internal deliberations and who had which position. The
Ambassador did indeed convey accurately the concerns that the
entire Department had, including the Secretary, about human
trafficking in Malaysia and that the government needed to do
more. Ultimately the Tier 2 Watch List assessment makes it very
clear that the government still has a lot of work to do. It is
far from a good grade. It is equivalent of a D minus. It
indicates in fact that they still have a lot of work to do. And
we do have serious concerns that are to be addressed.
Mr. Cicilline. But, Dr. Johnstone, the fact is the
Ambassador who is there on the ground makes this determination,
says very clearly that they have much more work to do before
they can improve its ranking. Your either recommendation or the
Secretary of State's determination is contrary to that. And I
am wondering if you had a basis for why it is that either you
concluded as a recommendation or the Secretary concluded that
the Ambassador was wrong? Because you can't both be right. It
cannot be that Ambassador Yun is right and Secretary Kerry is
right.
Ms. Johnstone. I wouldn't characterize his quote as saying
that Ambassador Yun made a recommendation on the tier ranking
within that quote as well.
Mr. Cicilline. No, but he did say that before they could
move to Tier 3 they had to demonstrate greater political will
in prosecuting human trafficking and protecting their victims
if they hoped to improve from a Tier 3 ranking.
Ms. Johnstone. And we did see increased prosecutions and
investigations. Of course we are very concerned that we didn't
see progress and, in fact, saw a decline in the convictions.
Mr. Cicilline. In addition, Ambassador Yun noted that there
had been a failure to engage in sufficient prosecutions of
perpetrators of trafficking. And although the TIP Report notes
an increase in prosecutions, it also notes that there were only
three trafficking convictions. That is a decline of two-thirds
from last year's report.
And it also notes that ``The government did not report any
investigations, prosecutions or convictions of government
officials complicit in trafficking, despite evidence that some
government officials facilitated migrant smuggling.''
Do you believe, again, that those facts represent a good
faith effort to prosecute traffickers?
Ms. Johnstone. We very much share the concern that you just
voiced about the low number of convictions. And we have said
that both publicly and privately.
When I was just in Malaysia last month we made that point
very clearly and indicated that we anticipate significant
progress as we are making the decisions for the 2016 Report.
Mr. Cicilline. But with all due respect, that is comforting
to hear. But in the face of an upgrade it sort of raises the
question of why it is that a country would receive an upgrade
with very little. In fact, other than that pilot program. I
don't see evidence.
And I just want to ask you finally, Tenaganita, which is a
Malaysian NGO that helps trafficking victims, claims that
police have known about the north Malaysian trafficking trail
and the existence of human trafficking camps for many, many
years. And, in fact, the organization says that migrants have
been reporting about the camps since 2007 and that no police
action was taken when reports were made about the camps.
Can you tell me, Dr. Johnstone, whether any officials at
Tenaganita were interviewed during the compilation of the TIP
Report? And does the State Department agree or disagree with
those allegations, and if so, why?
Ms. Johnstone. We do maintain a relationship both through
our Embassy and our office here with Tenaganita. I met with
them myself as well in Malaysia last month. Their information
definitely is something that we take into account when we are
compiling the report.
We noted in the report and subsequently in our meetings
with government officials the serious concern that we take
about the allegations of trafficking in those areas and the
camps and mass graves that were found. We understand that there
is an ongoing investigation that has produced a report that is
now with the Attorney General. We stressed the importance of
accountability for everyone who is responsible for any human
trafficking in those places, including government officials.
Mr. Cicilline. So you don't disagree with the allegations
that were made by that NGO?
Ms. Johnstone. It is definitely a serious, serious issue
that we have raised with the government, yes.
Mr. Cicilline. So let me just ask a final question. You
said that this is a fact-based deliberative process. Can you
tell me specifically what facts you relied upon to raise
Malaysia's standing in the TIP Report?
Ms. Johnstone. The facts that are outlined in the report
itself, the ones that we just discussed, including the increase
of prosecutions and investigations, noting that it is a mixed
picture, that declining convictions are still a cause of
concern. The government efforts that were made to reform the
victim protection system during the reporting period, which was
our top recommendation for the last several years.
Mr. Cicilline. So no investigation or prosecutions of
government officials; correct?
Ms. Johnstone. There have been investigations of government
officials. We don't have the prosecutions or convictions.
Mr. Cicilline. No prosecution of government officials
despite evidence of complicity of government officials. A
decline in overall prosecutions by two-thirds. No enactment of
any anti-trafficking laws, but some expectation they will, and
the pilot program. Those are the facts.
Have I missed any important ones?
Ms. Johnstone. I believe that you maybe misspoke about the
prosecutions. The prosecution investigations did increase. The
convictions decreased.
Mr. Cicilline. Convictions.
Ms. Johnstone. So the law enforcement picture was actually
a mixed one. There were increases in both prosecutions and
investigations.
Mr. Cicilline. But a significant decline, and I think it
was three convictions.
Ms. Johnstone. Three from nine, so.
Mr. Cicilline. But nine wasn't----
Ms. Johnstone. It is woefully inadequate. We completely
agree with you on that.
Mr. Cicilline. Before I yield back, Mr. Chairman, this
raises very serious concerns for me. I consider this report to
be sacred and a very powerful international diplomatic tool.
And I think the context in which this decision was made about
Malaysia and that woeful lack of evidence to support it, and
the context of the trade agreement, is something which will do
permanent damage to this process. And I am disappointed,
frankly, that nothing in this hearing has disabused me of that
conclusion.
For all the men and women who put so much work into this
and for the mission it is designed to support, this is a very
disappointing occurrence.
And with that I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Cicilline. I will
without objection go in a moment to Brad Sherman.
Just so I am absolutely clear, no ambiguity whatsoever,
because like Mr. Cicilline, I have read everything I could
possibly get my hands on regarding Malaysia and I just want to
have it established beyond any reasonable doubt that no other
factor like trade, when it comes to Malaysia, opening an
Embassy and new relationship with Cuba, or superpower relations
or geopolitical considerations when it comes to China was
involved, it was all exclusively on human trafficking, nothing
but trafficking that decisions for each of the designations was
made? Is that true? Is that your testimony?
Ms. Johnstone. As I said earlier, the decisions about the
tier designations are made by the Secretary of State. I was not
part of the final discussions in the decision-making that he
made. To my knowledge, certainly at the level of the people
that you have here today, all of our colleagues in the regional
bureaus and our Embassies and posts around the world and within
the TIP office, all of our discussions about the factors and
criteria were specifically looking at the TVPA criteria and the
minimum standards there and trafficking.
Mr. Smith. And did you disagree with the Secretary on any
of these designations?
Ms. Johnstone. Again, on internal deliberation process we
don't discuss that publicly, who took which position when, and
so that we can protect the credibility of the process. There
are robust discussions, as there are on any policy issues.
People have different perspectives on things. Ultimately the
Secretary has to take into account views, perspectives, and the
expertise of others.
And if I may, I would also like to address that I think
there is a misperception of some of our regional bureau
colleagues and our Embassies and missions, and perhaps others
in the State Department, who also bring expertise. It is not
only the TIP office that are experts on the trafficking
situation and the situation in their countries. But the
discussions that we have with them inform both the tier
designations, but even more importantly the report.
It could not be as factual and as accurate and as objective
as it is without the expertise and knowledge----
Mr. Smith. Again, as I said earlier, I thought your
reporting on Cuba was excellent, as well as some of the other
countries that where there is a dispute but the designation
didn't match, in my opinion, the findings. And again, just to
put an exclamation point behind it, Malaysia had three
convictions. China had 35 and yet they are not a Tier 3 country
as they ought to be. And Thailand had 151 convictions. Again,
it is not the only minimum standard but it is a very, very
important one. 151 convictions in Thailand and they remain Tier
3.
If I was in the Thai Embassy I would say, What gives here?
That is very, very discouraging. I think they ought to be Tier
3, but the others ought to be Tier 3 as well.
Mark Lagon makes a number of important observations. One of
them is about Uzbekistan. He notes that the report notes that
child labor mobilization continues in some districts. And he
points out that the government-compelled forced labor of adults
remained endemic in the 2014 cotton harvest. And asks the
$64,000 question: how can state-run trafficking earn anything
but a Tier 3 ranking?
What alleged U.S. strategic interests could motivate even a
purely cynical upgrade?
Ms. Johnstone. So on Uzbekistan, this is a country near and
dear to my heart. As you mentioned in the beginning, I served
as human rights officer there. And while I was there actually I
was asked by the Embassy to focus on trafficking in persons as
that was an issue that was of growing concern to the Department
and the administration, even then in 2003 when I served there.
The issues of forced labor, particularly child labor as
well as adult labor, are of great concern to the Department. We
have over the years in various roles that I have been in
personally also engaged on this with the Uzbekistan Government
in close collaboration with our NGO partners as well, who
provide vital information in very difficult circumstances. It
is definitely an issue that we remain very concerned about.
And, again, I would point out that Uzbekistan was upgraded
only to Tier 2 Watch List; that does indicate they are not
meeting the minimum standards. They have a long way to go to
improve their efforts on combating human trafficking. However,
we do believe and did assess that in 2014 they did make
significant efforts to dramatically reduce the use of forced
child labor.
We share your concerns about adult forced labor, both in
the cotton harvest and other sectors.
Mr. Smith. And without objection, and I mentioned this
earlier I believe, but if not I am doing it now, very incisive
articles by Reuters reporters Jason Szep and Matt Spetalnick
will be made a part of the record.
And also a series of reports of commercial fishing, slavery
in Papua New Guinea and Malaysia by Robin McDowell and Martha
Mendoza from the Associated Press. Without objection I would
like to make those a part of the record as well.
Without objection too, I yield to my good friend and
colleague for any comments he might have or questions.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Johnstone, you have an outstanding reputation. If you
would actually tell us something, I would believe it. If you
are just going to tell us that the decision was made by
Secretary Kerry, you are not qualified to psychoanalyze him. If
he made the decision, we ought to have him here and ask him.
Because we asked you what your opinion is, and you won't tell
us.
But let me go at this a different way. I tend to believe
what Reuters reports. Pretty accurate service. More accurate
than most. They report that Malaysia, Cuba, and China all got
better ratings than your office wanted to give them. Can you
give me any reason to disbelieve Reuters?
Ms. Johnstone. Well, I would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate that human trafficking is an issue that not only
the TIP office cares about, but our colleagues throughout----
Mr. Sherman. I know.
Ms. Johnstone [continuing]. The State Department.
Mr. Sherman. I know. Let us put, it is quite possible your
office could make a mistake. It is quite possible you want to
give some country a Tier 1, and due to factors and arguments
made by others in the State Department they get a Tier 2. It is
possible you give them a Tier 2----
Ms. Johnstone. I think that is what happened.
Mr. Sherman [continuing]. And some, and for other reasons
outside your office they are given a Tier 3. And all of a
sudden our trade negotiations blow up. That is possible. Didn't
happen in this lifetime but it is possible.
But I am asking about your office. And I, I have got a
report here from Reuters that says your office wanted to give a
lower rating to Malaysia, Cuba, and China than they ultimately
got. Can you give me a reason to disbelieve Reuters?
Ms. Johnstone. I would reiterate that, again, the
narratives themselves are accurate and objective and the
product of----
Mr. Sherman. Okay. You know, you could just say no, you are
not going to give me a reason to disbelieve Reuters. Because
telling me that you do a great job and that the other offices
of the State Department do a great job is not answering, it is
just telling me what, of course, the State Department believes,
which is every office is doing a great job.
Can you give me a reason to disbelieve Reuters' report
about what your office recommended?
Ms. Johnstone. I believe that the process through which we
came to the both the tier determinations themselves as well as
the reports was very much improved by the deliberative process
and the robust discussions and debates within the Department.
Of course people will have different perspectives. That is
natural for any----
Mr. Sherman. Okay. So that is not a reason to disbelieve
Reuters. That is just a reason to say maybe Reuters was right,
and your office recommended a lower. And maybe, and but maybe
the upgrade was justified. But you are not telling me in your
answer that there wasn't an upgrade from the position of your
office. You are just telling me that there are other brilliant
people at the State Department and they may have a good point.
Is that the point you are making? Or are you--I will
stipulate, other folks in the State Department are brilliant.
They have input. They may have good reason. And it could very
well be that the upgrade is called for, an upgrade beyond what
your department or office would recommend. But I am just asking
about your office. Can you give me any reason to disbelieve the
sentence I quoted from Reuters?
Ms. Johnstone. Again I----
Mr. Sherman. Okay, okay. We will go on. We will go on.
Do you personally believe that Thailand deserves a worse
grading than Malaysia? Your personal belief. Or do you simply
choose not to give your personal belief?
Ms. Johnstone. I am here representing the State Department,
so I----
Mr. Sherman. Could you give us your personal belief?
Ms. Johnstone. The Department's views on that, Thailand's
rating----
Mr. Sherman. I didn't ask for the Department's views. If
you refuse to give me your personal views, just say you refuse,
and I will go on, on to the next question.
Ms. Johnstone. If I could comment, I think that implicit in
your question is maybe a misperception as well that we, I think
the Reuters article also cast this as a winning and losing, and
that the TIP office lost more often this year. And I don't
think that is how we----
Mr. Sherman. That is you are answering a question I--this
is great, you won't answer the questions I do ask and you are
answering the questions I don't ask. I realize that your office
has got to fight with, argue with or at least discuss things
with other bureaus and offices around the State Department. I
am not asking what is the State Department's view. I got that
in writing. I am asking what your view is and what your
department's view is and you won't tell us.
And the fact that Secretary Kerry would send you here
without instructing you or authorizing you to tell us what
really happened gives me all the information I need. I have got
a Reuters report that Secretary Kerry and the State Department
is unwilling to deny.
Now I am not a good enough lawyer to get you to admit it.
Okay, you know, you don't have to answer a question. But
Reuters reports that your office wanted to give a lower grade,
lower tier than these three countries ultimately got. You are
not saying that is not the case. You are saying that the State
Department is a brilliant organization with lots of brilliant
people. Wouldn't want you to say anything else.
But if the State Department can't deny this Reuters report,
then I think we know who controls the ultimate decisions. And
that is those who want this trade deal. And I think this report
is an important part of our human rights efforts. I don't think
it is totally discredited. I think that it can be relied upon
except when there are major diplomatic or economic reasons to
go another way. And for 80, 90 percent of the countries there
is no other reason, there is no strong other reason to go
another way.
But can you mention any respected human rights organization
that says Malaysia is entitled to be treated, given a higher
grade than Thailand? You know them all. You work with them all.
We have got another one of them coming for the second panel.
But you know that is just one. He can only invite one. You
probably, if I asked you, could identify 40 organizations, some
very well known, some very well respected, some less so. Can
you name anybody who doesn't get a paycheck from the State
Department, who is involved in human rights who says that
Malaysia deserves to be in a higher tier than Thailand?
Ms. Johnstone. There are indeed a variety of opinions on
Malaysia, which we did take into----
Mr. Sherman. You know them all. Can you name one?
Ms. Johnstone. All I can tell you is that we have consulted
with NGOs. We certainly take their views and information. They
are very important----
Mr. Sherman. And every NGO I am aware of, and you know a
lot more than I do, every NGO I am aware of says that Malaysia
is not entitled to be in a higher tier than Thailand. And so I
go to you, the expert, and I say, Hey, there may be some
organizations I haven't talked to or even heard of. And I ask
you to name just one that thinks, you know, even if the
community was 39 to 1 against the position this report takes,
at least there would be one. And you know the top 40. Is there
one that agrees with the report's decision to put Thailand in a
lower category than Malaysia?
Ms. Johnstone. As I said, there are a variety of opinions
on the human trafficking situation in Malaysia, as there are on
Thailand. There are serious problems in both countries. The
Tier 2 Watch List ranking indicates very clearly that Malaysia
still has a long way to go and they are still serious----
Mr. Sherman. That is a nice answer but you didn't name one.
You didn't name one because there isn't one. If you knew one
you would tell me, wouldn't you?
Ms. Johnstone. At the end of the day the tier ranking is
the decision that the Secretary of State makes.
Mr. Sherman. And that is why it is the Secretary of State
who ought to have the whatevers to come before Congress and
defend this decision. Because it puts you in a terrible
position. The Secretary made these decisions. Only he can
indicate why he made them.
You don't know why he made them. I know why. You don't call
me as a witness, but if I was called as a witness I would say
he made them because he wants TPP to go forward and is willing
to throw the Trafficking In Persons Report out the window. But
I am not testifying to that because I am sitting up here. You
haven't asked me to sit down there.
Look, you work very hard. For those of us who think that
your work is very important this is a difficult situation. I
respect your personal integrity. You have been put in a very
difficult position. You have done as good a job as anyone could
possibly due in justifying one of the worst decisions made by
the Department this year. And you didn't make it.
And I will yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Sherman. And any time
you want to testify, you are more than welcome.
Thank you again.
Mr. Sherman. I fear some of my colleagues would be as tough
on me as I am on so many witnesses. They have seen it. I don't
have anything good, I don't have enough, enough in the karma
bank to put myself through that.
Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
I do want to thank our distinguished witnesses for your
testimony. As you can see, there is a great deal of bipartisan
concern here, particularly these countries in question. And I
would like, without objection, to put a letter that was sent to
Secretary Kerry from the Cotton Campaign which lays out their
very specific concerns about the ranking of Uzbekistan in this
year's TIP Report.
Thank you again for your testimony. And we will look
forward to working with you going forward.
Ms. Johnstone. Thank you. Likewise, we look forward to
working with you. And thank you for your commitment to this
issue.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Dr. Johnstone.
I would like to now welcome our second panel which is
Ambassador Mark Lagon, who is our third Ambassador-at-Large for
Human Trafficking and the Director of the Office to Monitor and
Combat Trafficking in Persons at the U.S. Department of State.
Ambassador Lagon's record of involvement in human rights is
long and diverse, spanning from Deputy Assistant Secretary in
the Bureau of International Organization Affairs, responsible
for human rights, humanitarian issues and U.N. reform, to
academia where he was the chair for Global Politics and
Security at Georgetown University's Master of Science in
Foreign Service program, and Adjunct Senior Fellow for Human
Rights at the Council on Foreign Relations. He was also
Executive Director and CEO of the anti-human trafficking non-
profit Polaris. He currently serves as the President of Freedom
House.
Ambassador Lagon, the floor is yours.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MARK P. LAGON, PRESIDENT, FREEDOM
HOUSE (FORMER AMBASSADOR-AT-LARGE FOR TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE)

Ambassador Lagon. Mr. Chairman, I am very pleased that you
and the members of the subcommittee have invited me to testify
on the TIP Report, as I have had occasion to do in the past. I
would like to look at some of the key issues in the report.
Of course, we are here to focus on specific countries, but
it is worth remembering that while getting less attention, the
report each year highlights themes as well, with the text that
precedes the country narratives. And this year's report
highlights some very interesting and important things: Global
supply chains and, in particular, offering cues to the private
sector to fight the problem of human trafficking.
The report highlights harmful cultural norms and, hence,
doesn't succumb to cultural relativism. Although I will note
that the report would have done well to note a cultural
tolerance for wide-scale sex buying in Latin America, Europe,
Southeast Asia, Japan, as a driver of sex trafficking.
And I commend the report for highlighting alternatives to
testimony drawn from traumatized trafficking survivors as the
means of evidence to hold tormentors to account because all too
often relying on testimony of the victims solely propels law
enforcement in countries around the world to leverage the
properly unconditional protection services to elicit
cooperation.
Most important, I want to highlight in the global findings
in the report, some percentages. I have pulled out my
calculator, as I do every year, and to look at a chart on page
48 of the report. We see a 23.1 percent drop in convictions
worldwide. And that was from an already modest 5,700
convictions the previous year.
Prosecutions for labor, as opposed to sex trafficking,
dropped from an already low 12.7 percent to 4.2 percent.
And the convictions went from a low 8.1 percent the
previous year to only 4.9 percent of convictions for human
trafficking being for labor. So there is, in essence, global
impunity for labor trafficking.
With respect to country situations, many of which you have
already raised, and I am happy that you even cited some things
already in my testimony, China in the view of Freedom House is
the largest governance problem in the world, both in terms of
its internal treatment of human rights and as a pernicious
model. Freedom House, of course, ranks China as not free in its
own reports.
Both the intrusive actions and its sins of omission are
important in the human trafficking area. Intrusive actions of
the state fuel trafficking, including a decades-long population
policies that created a shortage of females, both as spouses
and sexual partners. And I really want to highlight the report
this year which says, ``The government converted some reform
through labor facilities into different types of detention
centers that continued to employ forced labor.''
What the Chinese State neglects to do also matters in terms
of human trafficking. And very importantly, the report calls
for China to provide legal alternatives to foreign victims'
removal to countries where they would face hardship or
retribution. Read: North Korea. Heinous punishment to people
who would be returned to North Korea, which causes a human
trafficking problem in China.
There is a terrible arbitrary rule by law pattern, as
opposed to rule of law pattern in China. And that is manifest
in the failure to adopt legislation on all forms of human
trafficking.
Malaysia; much of the focus of your discussion today, and a
major controversy. Well, Freedom House ranks Malaysia as partly
free. And I will say for my own part, I have endorsed the
Trans-Pacific Partnership because generally speaking I think
open rules and norms put the right pressure on illiberal
regimes. But the upgrade seems quite clearly to coincide with
the desires of the Department of State to make Malaysia
eligible for the TPP, and not the merits.
For instance, corruption is rampant. It is under-emphasized
in the report. What the report does highlight seems
inconsistent with an upgrade, especially merely four
convictions for labor trafficking or passport retention. And
screening mechanisms to identify and assist trafficking victims
are truly thin.
By comparison, the State Department sustained a Tier 3
ranking for Thailand because of things like victim protection
remaining insufficient in its massive sex industry, in fishing
and seafood, and in Thai citizens migrating to work elsewhere.
I will repeat, as you noted, I believe that the upgrade of
Vietnam to Tier 2 is bewildering, especially with the utter
absence of prosecutions for labor trafficking and significant
official complicity.
Uzbekistan, being upgraded to the Tier 2 Watch List is
striking. The report notes that child labor mobilization
continues in some districts of the country and ``Government-
compelled forced labor of adults remained endemic in the 2014
cotton harvest.'' This is one of the most heinous human rights
abusers in the world, even among those countries that Freedom
House rates as not free.
As far as Cuba's upgrade to the Tier 2 Watch List, well,
Freedom House ranks Cuba as clearly not free. The grounds for
an upgrade are really questionable. The report itself says the
penal code does not criminalize all forms of human trafficking,
much less are those problems a matter of enforcement. And the
Cuban regime did not even claim efforts to prevent forced labor
or any trafficking-specific shelters.
So with cases like Cuba and Malaysia sparking observers to
suggest the report is politicized, what are we to make of this?
To say that no considerations besides the pure merits of human
trafficking come into play in the Department is a bit like the
claim of being shocked, shocked to find gambling going on at
Rick's joint in Casablanca. It shouldn't surprise us.
But what should be done to protect, to maximize the
integrity of the TIP Report rankings? Some steps we could take
would make the malady that you have been looking at in this
hearing worse. A few years ago a Senator on the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, no longer there, concerned that Singapore
and Malaysia were getting rather low rankings considering U.S.
economic and strategic interests, proposed legislation to
markedly increase the role of the regional bureaus. That was a
lousy idea, in short.
In the early life of the TIP office, former Deputy
Secretary of State Richard Armitage, who no one could call a
human rights idealist, came to the decision that the pen for
the draft of the report and the proposed rankings should lie
with the Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons.
That needs to be protected.
The most productive solution is for Congress to insist in
its oversight role, and the Senate in focusing on appointments,
that the Ambassador's position is filled and it is filled with
someone with strong experience, vision and bureaucratic chops,
because there is bureaucratic infighting, as your hearing has
focused on. Delays nominating and confirming an envoy lead to
more disputed rankings, ending up rejecting the substantive
expertise and recommendation of the TIP office.
And I am really troubled how long it took to replace
Ambassador Luis CdeBaca. A fellow human rights advocate in the
area of women's rights, who I won't name out of respect for
her, with deep experience in both civil society partnerships
and multi-lateral institutions, was rejected as a finalist as I
understand it because she was apparently too concerned about
the commoditization of females for sex trafficking. I have said
here before you when you have been kind enough to invite me to
testify, we need a strong advocate for fighting both labor and
sex trafficking. It is crucial.
How can we best protect the strength and integrity of the
report? Congress should insist that the leader of the office be
someone who themselves reflects strength and integrity. There
is going to be a deliberative process in the Department; we
know it. But it will be much more likely to produce credible
rankings that maximize the United States' diplomatic leverage
to get countries to pass better laws and, more importantly, to
implement them, if there is a strong leader of the office. Then
there will be fewer calls like Malaysia compared to Thailand.
So thank you for inviting me, as ever, to testify. This is
an issue in which dignity or enslavement lie in the balance.
[The prepared statement of Ambassador Lagon follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------

Mr. Smith. Ambassador Lagon, thank you so much for your
testimony, for your life-long commitment to human rights.
And when you served as Ambassador you were absolutely
candid both on the record as well as off. And I think that made
an enormous difference. I remember it was you who finally,
despite the China hands who didn't want, I'm sure, you to do
it, pointed out the nexus between the coercive population
control program of the PRC and the consequence, particularly of
sex trafficking, because of the missing daughters in the
People's Republic of China as a result of sex-selection
abortion. And you made that very clear.
Your comments on Uzbekistan, and I did ask that question
based on your testimony, and I thank you for it. I would agree
with you that when we originally did this law the absolute
intent was trafficking and only trafficking goes into the book.
We want an honest assessment of friend and foe alike, allies
around the world. No games, no brinkmanship.
And again, as I have cited many times, the fact that Israel
and South Korea during the previous administration's watch were
singled out, there was shock and dismay frankly among many
quarters, but it actually led to an amelioration of the issue,
victims were protected, and prevention strategies put into
place. And now South Korea has very, very strong laws as does
the State of Israel.
We should never pull our punches. And you have made that
clear. And I want to thank you because during your tenure you
were always available to this subcommittee and to other Members
of Congress, House and Senate, and you were always candid. And
that is beyond refreshing.
I will also say, any suggestions you have about
strengthening the TIP office would be appreciated from you
personally and from Freedom House.
The one of the things that you point out in your written
testimony is that the last trafficking reauthorization may have
inadvertently increased the role of the regional bureaus. I
believe that as well, reading the language. It was not my bill.
It was an amendment attached to the reauthorization of the
Violence Against Women Act, which I strongly support. But I
ended up voting against the reauthorization of my own law that
was proffered by Senator Leahy simply because it weakened the
TIP office vis-a-vis the regional bureaus. If they have input,
it ought to be to say, thank you for doing your due diligence,
and we accept it because you are the experts.
And then the second part of the Trafficking Victims
Protection Act, the sanctions portion, was always left to the
TIP Office, with all kinds of collaboration, but the belief was
that reasonable men and women would look at how we can best
advance the ball and protect victims and mitigate trafficking
in the first place. You make decisions. It is not based on
empirical data: How many convictions, what is country X, Y or Z
doing? The book, the TIP Report was always meant to be where we
would just say it in an unvarnished way.
And so the disappointment that I and so many others feel
about the artificial upgrades to Malaysia, to Vietnam, to
China, Uzbekistan where, as you have been dogged in pointing
out, and you did in one previous appearance here, the
comparisons to the cotton that was picked by slaves. You know,
you put it in that context and lights went off. Yes, that is
what many of the slaves did in the United States and they are
doing it in Uzbekistan.
So any particular thoughts you might have, in addition to
what you have already said, would be helpful.
Your testimony notes that Vietnam does not prosecute labor
trafficking at all and that there is a high level of official
complicity in labor trafficking. Again that raises questions
about a favored country where there are things on the table
other than trafficking. And they ought to be, in my opinion, a
Tier 3 country as well.
So perhaps you can spend some time on those questions?
Ambassador Lagon. Much to address, and I thank you.
Let me note three things. First of all, you played a role
in focusing on the question of official complicity. When a
diplomat is involved in subjecting a domestic servant to human
trafficking conditions, that should be seriously held to
account in the report.
You have raised the issue of peacekeepers of nations who
have in fact added to human suffering in places that they have
served, from the Balkans to places in Africa, as opposed to
relieving it. Complicit as agents of their government.
Think especially about a case where a government policy is
in fact a source of human trafficking, this is the case in
Uzbekistan. Sure, it has finally agreed to let the ILO come in
and start looking at the problem of child labor. Okay, that is
good. But if in fact it is a policy of the government to
continue forced labor for adults, and it is not eliminating
entirely the phenomenon of child labor, that is a special
category. I can't see how you could give an upgrade from Tier 3
for that.
And I think that is something that is worth really driving
home. If the government itself is doing it or its officials are
complicit, that should be reported. In fact, it is my view that
if officials of a government are involved, such as their
diplomats, that that should be mentioned in the report; maybe
not the names of the officials.
It has been long, secondly, my view that both the
Trafficking Victims Protection Act, with due respect to you as
its author, and the Palermo Protocol are heavily focused on the
prosecution and law enforcement precepts. There are more things
in the minimum standards there. I think it is very important
that you can see progress across the so-called three P's. And
in particular, I have been consistent in saying that the moral
imperative lies with the protection of victims, or what I would
call the re-empowerment of the survivors.
I think if there is anything one does to look at revision
of the legislation it should be to make sure that you are not
giving an upgrade and failing to take account of an anemic
record on victim protection. I think in some of the cases in
question here in East Asia with Malaysia and Vietnam that is
the case.
The last thing I would say is that any fix in the process
and wanting to protect the degree to which the pen is held by
the TIP office, you shouldn't seek a zero role for the regional
bureaus or a zero role for the Embassies. They do raise
considerations that should be looked at. I remember people from
the South and Central Asia Bureau who had very different views
from me as the TIP Ambassador on many countries saying, so, can
we say that Sri Lanka has the capacity to take steps on
fighting human trafficking when it has been facing an internal
conflict?
Those sorts of questions should be raised. What is
inappropriate is if there is a tier upgrade based on issues
that have nothing to do with human trafficking.
Mr. Smith. As I mentioned, is there anything that you heard
in testimony by our three previous witnesses that you would
like to respond to?
Ambassador Lagon. Well, I think it is an interesting
argument with regard to Cuba that by our having more dialog
with Cuba we found out more. I mean this was always an issue
with North Korea, Iran, and Cuba. We don't have diplomatic
relations with those countries so they are not about to hand
over the statistics that we ask of host governments through our
Embassies.
I think it is a more credible argument that Cuba may have
taken some steps following ratification of the Palermo Protocol
then to suggest, well, now we know because we are in dialog
with them. I still kind it kind of farfetched that what remains
one of the Marxist-Leninist governments of the world does not
have a problem with its state enterprises or its political
prisons of forced labor.
With regard to Malaysia, I heard nothing in the testimony
that would lead me to believe that the TIP office did not, as
Reuters reported it, recommend the Tier 3 ranking. One cannot
take the evidence raised for the upgrade and see it as a
tangible reason for this.
I will say I am sympathetic to the position that Dr.
Johnstone is in. And I would caution that we can explore what
happened, what went awry here, but ultimately if you want to
keep pressure on other governments, maybe it isn't best for the
specific different recommendations of the TIP office and
regional bureaus, whoever wins out, to be known globally. In
general, the vast majority of cases do come out where they
ought to be and where the TIP office recommends.
Some are howlers, as I described to the press in this
report, as mistakes. But I think we should take care about
revealing that there were different opinions too much, because
after all, the bill that you helped make a law and the office
that you helped create puts its pressure on by credible focused
leverage on other nations.
Mr. Smith. I agree with that. But we still have to get it
right for that credibility to be warranted.
Ambassador Lagon. Sure.
Mr. Smith. And let me just ask you about India. It is a
country that we have focused on in this subcommittee on a
number of fronts when it comes to human rights, religious
freedom, or the lack of it, and the issue of abducted children.
The new Sean and David Goldman International Child Abduction
Prevention and Return Act makes it very clear that India has a
serious problem with parental child abduction.
And the Tier 2 ranking for India doesn't appear to be
deserved at all. And I would really appreciate your thoughts on
that. India has a huge child sex trafficking problem, other
kinds of trafficking as well, but it is huge. And I am not sure
we get the kind of data back from the government,----
Ambassador Lagon. Right.
Mr. Smith [continuing]. Their government that would warrant
such a designation.
Ambassador Lagon. I agree with you entirely. I think that
the Tier 2 ranking is suspect.
You may have noticed in part of my written testimony that I
did not deliver orally that we should take care. There are some
very serious human rights issues or serious global issues that
aren't precisely human trafficking. They should raise doubts
about a country's overall human rights record. And that is true
of India as well.
You have been at the heart of every reauthorization of the
Trafficking Victims Protection Act. The only place in the
legislation where the scale of the problem is mentioned is in
the Tier 2 Watch List. That is, that is the one place where
there could be a justification for a nation not being on Tier 2
but being on the Tier 2 Watch List because the scale is so
large.
And it is true in India, it remains the demographic
epicenter of human trafficking in the world. And while there
have been improvements that might merit India no longer being a
country that anyone, that the TIP office would propose be Tier
3 because of some, finally some actions, in the states in the
federal system in India, the scale is so large and the
implementation so spotty that it is really hard to suggest that
Tier 2 is merited.
Mr. Smith. Let me ask you one final question and then any
concluding comments you might want to make.
Last week I chaired a hearing of the Commission on Security
and Cooperation in Europe on the Syrian refugees. One of our
witnesses was the regional representative for the UNHCR, his
name is Pitterman. He said that the trigger for this massive
move into Europe was a 30 percent cut in World Food Programme
funding. People are so desperate now for such basics as food
that they finally gave flight and now they are moving in large
numbers.
We are talking about 7.5 million IDPs, 4 million refugees
who are scattered everywhere. Are you convinced--and I should
have asked this of the previous panel as well--that the
concerns of trafficking in persons are being incorporated,
integrated into our efforts to assist refugees, particularly in
that part of the world?
Ambassador Lagon. I am very glad you asked that for
multiple reasons. One, I noticed that former Secretary of State
Hillary Clinton and former Ambassador-at-Large CdeBaca
emphasized that we need to look at humanitarian situations and
refugee situations and worry about the impact on human
trafficking. At least on a thought leader level they were, they
were focused on that earlier in this administration.
I don't think we are doing enough with respect to the
refugees. It is clearly a vulnerability for human trafficking
with the enormous desperation. Those who are seeking a better
life when they are in hardship are ones who are going to be
vulnerable.
I will say two things, however. We should not, as I say in
my written testimony, forget the heart of human trafficking
being exploitation rather than the movement of people. I
noticed earlier that people suddenly discovered a human
trafficking problem with Haiti when there was natural disaster.
There has been a human trafficking problem with Haiti with
restaveks for a long time. And so, too, we should not discover
a human trafficking problem when there have been some endemic
problems.
But I must say with my Freedom House hat on, the situation
here is a governance problem. This is a human rights calamity
that has been left to fester in Syria. It is amazing how the
United States and the West has not taken action to deal with
the cause of the problem which is the mass atrocities from
Assad. And these predated the atrocities of ISIS, which only
make the situation worse and, hence, create a human trafficking
vulnerability.
Mr. Smith. Ambassador Lagon, thank you so very much for
your testimony. And without objection your full written
statement will be made part of the record.
Ambassador Lagon. Thank you very much.
Mr. Smith. And please continue to provide counsel and
insight to the committee, as you have done so effectively for
many, many years.
Ambassador Lagon. Well, as a former Capitol Hill staffer
who was around at the time of the conference on the Trafficking
Victims Protection Act, I consider myself an honorary Hill
staffer. So I always will think about how the oversight and the
further refinement of the legislation are things I could play
my small part in helping on.
Thank you for your leadership.
Mr. Smith. Make that large part.
And thank you so very much, Mr. Ambassador. The hearing is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:55 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Material submitted for the record by the Honorable Christopher H.
Smith, a Representative in Congress from the State of New Jersey, and
chairman, Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights,
and International Organizations

__________
Material submitted for the record by the Honorable Christopher H.
Smith, a Representative in Congress from the State of New Jersey, and
chairman, Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights,
and International Organizations

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Material submitted for the record by the Honorable Christopher H.
Smith, a Representative in Congress from the State of New Jersey, and
chairman, Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights,
and International Organizations

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
