- THE ADMINISTRATION'S STRATEGY TO CONFRONT ISIS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE ADMINISTRATION'S STRATEGY
TO CONFRONT ISIS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 26, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-52

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

93-917 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
TOM EMMER, Minnesota

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

General John Allen, USMC, Retired, Special Presidential Envoy for
the Global Coalition to Counter ISIL, U.S. Department of State.     5
Brigadier General Michael Fantini, USAF, Middle East Principal
Director, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for
International Security Affairs, U.S. Department of Defense.....    13
Brigadier General Gregg Olson, USMC, Deputy Director for Middle
East, Joint Staff Strategic Plans and Policy, U.S. Department
of Defense.....................................................    26

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

General John Allen, USMC, Retired: Prepared statement............     9
Brigadier General Michael Fantini, USAF: Prepared statement......    15

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    52
Hearing minutes..................................................    53
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in Congress
from the Commonwealth of Virginia: Prepared statement..........    55
Written responses to questions submitted for the record by:
The Honorable Edward R. Royce, a Representative in Congress
from the State of California, and chairman, Committee on
Foreign Affairs..............................................    56
The Honorable Ted S. Yoho, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Florida.........................................    61

THE ADMINISTRATION'S STRATEGY TO CONFRONT ISIS

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 26, 2015

House of Representatives,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 8:30 a.m., in
room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Edward Royce
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Chairman Royce. This hearing will come to order. This
morning, the committee continues its examination of the threat
that is posed to the Middle East and to the United States by
ISIS. And one of the things we are trying to do here is to look
at the administration's strategy to destroy this brutal
terrorist organization and assess the proposed authorization of
military force to be used. They have sent an authorization to
us.
The goal of ISIS, I think, are pretty clear. It is to wreck
everything and every person in its path to establish a
caliphate and then fight to expand that caliphate. ISIS
affiliates are growing in power and presence throughout the
region. In the last few weeks, we have seen attacks in Yemen.
We have seen attacks in Tunisia and Libya. What is less clear
is the administration's approach and its determination to
tackle this threat.
Many of you know that for some time some of us on this
committee have been pushing the idea of hitting ISIS from the
air. We went through many months of ISIS going town by town in
Syria, and many in Iraq, without the use of U.S. air power
against ISIS. As a consequence, ISIS ended up taking many major
cities across the region and ended up taking the Central Bank
of Mosul. If we count the number of sorties against ISIS to
date, there are 2,959 that have been flown. If you compare that
to the 116,000 air strikes during the First Gulf War when Iraq
moved 40-some divisions into Kuwait, you get an idea of the
difference in magnitude between the way this has been conducted
versus the very real deterrence that we utilized in the past.
We also have the fact that at least among the Canadian
forces, their spotters are forward deployed so they can hit
their targets when they call those targets in. With the U.S.
forces, our forces are not forward deployed, so when you call
in an air strike, you are not forward deployed to do it. There
is some question about how effective that is going to be.
Most Americans would be puzzled to learn about a lot of
this and I think the piecemeal attacks that the Obama
administration has been systematically using here has been
squandering our air power advantage. At least one observer
tells us that is the case. Adding to the problem, the regional
forces on the ground these air strikes are supposed to be
supporting are badly under supplied. After 7 months of
fighting, this committee is still receiving troubling reports
from the Kurdish Peshmerga and visits from the Kurdish
representatives about how outgunned their men and women are on
the front line. Now 30 percent of their battalions are female
and those women are fighting against ISIS. They are fighting
with small arms and they have yet to receive the artillery, the
long-range mortars, and the anti-tank weaponry that they have
repeatedly asked for.
This morning, Ranking Member Engel and I are reintroducing
legislation to allow U.S. arms to be sent directly to the
Kurds. They are strung out on a 500 plus mile front against
ISIS. These brave fighters, these women and these men and these
battalions, need better equipment to defeat ISIS and we can't
allow Iran, through its influence over Baghdad, to continue to
prevent that type of weaponry from coming from the center. So
we should provide or we should sell it to them directly.
And the Sunni tribal fighters who would be central to this
fight are yet to trust Baghdad, as you know. Strong local
police and provisional national guard forces are desperately
needed to protect Sunnis in Anbar Province and elsewhere. Into
the void on the ground in Iraq have stepped Iranian-backed
Shi'ite fighters, the leading force behind the recent Tikrit
offensive.
Senior U.S. officials have put this development in positive
terms. The reports indicate that U.S. intelligence and air
power will now support this Iranian-backed mission. The
Washington Post wisely cautioned in an editorial this week,
``the growing power of the militias with their brutal tactics,
sectarian ideology, and allegiance to Iran's most militant
faction has become as large an impediment to the goal of
stabilizing Iraq'' as ISIS. Shi'ite militias taking on ISIS may
serve the immediate interest of killing jihadis, but it is hard
to see how empowering Iran's proxies is in the short, medium,
or long-term interest of an inclusive Iraq or stable Middle
East.
The fear that many of us have is that Sunni Iraqis who have
been tortured by ISIS, will get the same brutal treatment by
their Shi'ite militia ``liberators'' and that would fuel
endless conflict.
To see how this is viewed in the region with respect to
Iran being on the march, the other day the Iranians boasted
that they had taken four Arab capitals. Well, in taking Yemen,
you have set off a situation now where the Saudis and others
are reacting, a 10-nation coalition is reacting and the Saudis
are making preparations to hit that Iranian proxy on the
ground. We know that Quds Forces and other Iranian agents have
helped organize and toppled that government and now that the
Iranian regime is crowing about it, other countries in the
region are taking action and this is complicating the
circumstances here. In other words, Iran is very much
complicating the ability of the region to get some stability.
Political reconciliation in Baghdad must be central to U.S.
policy. The committee will be interested to learn what the
administration is doing to press Prime Minister Abadi to ensure
he doesn't become former Prime Minister Maliki, a disastrous
sectarian.
And we will hear today, our U.S. strategy is focused on
Iraq first. That is what we will be told. But until the
meltdown of Syria, where General Petraeus termed a
``geopolitical Chernobyl'' is capped, until that meltdown is
capped, ``it is going to continue to spew radioactive
instability in extremist ideology over the entire region.''
Last fall, Congress voted to authorize training and
equipping the Syria opposition forces, but to our great
frustration, that is still not up and running and when pressed
on the path forward in Syria, most administration officials
seem to suggest we can figure it out later. Our slow action is
creating a crisis of confidence among our allies.
Our witnesses are here to explain the President's strategy
and when the committee returns in April, we plan to hear more
from the Secretary of State and Defense about the President's
AUMF request.
I will now turn to the ranking member for his opening
statement.
Mr. Engel. Mr. Chairman, thank you for calling this
important hearing. General Allen, General Fantini, General
Olson, welcome. We are delighted that we have such a
distinguished array of generals to really speak with us this
morning. Thank you for appearing here today and thank you for
your tireless service to our country.
The main purpose of this hearing is to get an update on the
progress of the anti-ISIS coalition and the significant
challenges that remain. But we must also address the elephant
in the room, in my opinion, the need for a new authorization
for the use of military force or AUMF.
As I have said again and again, this committee and this
Congress have an important role to play in our foreign policy.
I believe that is the case with our negotiations over Iran's
nuclear program and the same must hold true when it comes to
our effort against ISIS. Congress needs to play its part. And I
will resist any attempt to marginalize Congress fulfilling its
constitution role.
By passing the new AUMF, our service members, the brave men
and women in uniform risking their lives against this enemy
would feel the full support of Congress. Our coalition partners
would see that the American Government is united in our
commitment to degrade and destroy this enemy. Congress would
reassert the important role we are empowered to play by the
Constitution. And we, as lawmakers, would show that Congress
doesn't shrink away from the tough decisions because if we do,
we are sending a message that Congress may put itself on the
sideline the next time a crisis arose and the time after that
and the time after that. That is simply unacceptable.
The language sent to us by the President with the AUMF
isn't perfect, but I believe it is a good start. So let us work
together to craft a bipartisan AUMF. Let us tailor it to the
needs of our troops and this mission because everything we are
dealing with today is taking place under the shadow of this
vital unfinished business.
I know that we are talking a lot about Iran these past days
as an impending agreement, the deadline for one is rapidly
approaching, and talk about an AUMF seems to have faded in the
background. But I really believe that that is something that
cannot fade in the background. It is something that we have to
tackle and this is the committee to do so. And we will do so.
Generals, we look to you for leadership in clearly
explaining our strategy to degrade and defeat ISIS to this
committee and to the American people. In my view, the
international coalition has made some real progress, conducting
military operations and advising our partners on the ground,
working to alleviate the humanitarian crisis, cutting off
funding sources for ISIS, taking steps to stem the flow of
foreign fighters and pushing back against the toxic message of
ISIS propaganda. This strategy is making a real difference.
ISIS is losing ground. Much of its top leadership has been
taken out. Obviously, we still have much more to do.
Thanks to our training, Iraqi security forces are improving
so that they can better deal with the ISIS threat. Regional
partners are playing a bigger and bigger role and the coalition
is holding steady. But we are still facing a lot of challenges
and I would like to touch on some of those today.
First of all, I am concerned about Iran's growing foothold
in Iraq. The Iran-guided operation in Tikrit has faltered, but
Shia militants, including some fighters trained by Iran's Quds
Force are playing a more influential role in Iraq. What are
their intentions? And how do our own plans take these elements
into account?
Secondly, I am struggling to see the path forward in Syria.
I think you know that I view our efforts to aid the opposition
is too little, too late, and far too slow. Two and three years
ago, I was yelling that we should be aiding and abetting and
providing weapons to the Free Syria Army. What has happened now
3 years later is these forces are barely hanging on. They have
been focused in fighting the Assad regime and that would be
hard enough, especially with inadequate weapons and training.
But they also have to face off against ISIS and other battle-
hardened groups like the Nusra front. They need more training
and equipment as quickly as we can get it to them.
And lastly, what more can we do, what more can we do to
support the Syrian people? More than 200,000 Syrians have
already perished in this war. Nearly 10 million have been
driven from their homes. This crisis has spilled over borders
into Turkey, Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon. This is a humanitarian
catastrophe. Assad has blood on his hands and the Syrian people
desperately need relief.
So gentlemen, I look forward to covering these issues with
you. I thank you again for your courageous service and I say
again that it is past time for Congress to give you the support
you need for this vital mission.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Engel. This morning, we are
pleased to be joined by senior representatives from the
Department of State and Defense. General John Allen is the
Special Presidential Envoy for the Global Coalition to Counter
ISIL. He was appointed on September 16, 2014 by President
Obama. General Allen is a retired U.S. Marine four star
general, former commander of coalition and U.S. forces in
Afghanistan from 2011 to 2013. During his combat tour in Iraq,
he played a critical role in the awakening movement in Al Anbar
Province.
Brigadier General Michael Fantini is the Middle East
Principal Director for the Office of the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for International Security Affairs. Previously, he
served as commander of Kandahar Air Field.
Brigadier General Olson is with us. He is the Deputy
Director for Middle East Joint Staff's Strategic Plans and
Policy at the Department of Defense and previously he served as
the deputy commander for Marine Forces Central Command.
Brigadier General Olson, as I understand, you will not be
giving oral testimony, but will be available to answer any
members' questions. So we thank you for that, sir.
Without objection, the witnesses' full, prepared statements
will be made part of the record and members will have 5
calendar days to submit any statements or questions of you or
any extraneous materials. So we would ask that you would
summarize your remarks and we will begin with General Allen.

STATEMENT OF GENERAL JOHN ALLEN, USMC, RETIRED, SPECIAL
PRESIDENTIAL ENVOY FOR THE GLOBAL COALITION TO COUNTER ISIL,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

General Allen. Esteemed members of the committee, thank you
for providing me this opportunity to update you on the progress
of the Global Coalition to Counter ISIL. More broadly, let me
thank you sincerely, the members of this committee, for the
tremendous support that that you have been giving our men and
women in uniform and also our diplomats in the Foreign Service
at far-flung posts and stations around the world who have
served our country so well. We are deeply grateful for the
support of this committee in that regard.
I returned to Washington this past week after a 10-day
visit to coalition capitals, where I met with partners in Rome
and Ankara, Baghdad and Berlin, and finally in Brussels, where
I briefed the members of the European Union and North Atlantic
Council. My engagements in each of these stops reinforced my
confidence in the coalition strategy to counter ISIL across the
informational, physical, and financial spheres in which it
operates. In the territory ISIL has lost, in the increasing
financial strain on the organization, and in the diminished
morale and increased desertions of its fighters, we are clearly
degrading its capabilities. The allure of the so-called
caliphate is under direct assault.
To date, the coalition has conducted nearly 3,000 air
strikes, I believe, in fact, went over that number last night,
against ISIL territories; more than 1,600 in Iraq and nearly
1,300 in Syria. We have taken out ISIL's fighters, many of its
commanders, as well as the infrastructure, support to its
terror infrastructure and facilities, including 20 training
camps and over 200 oil and gas facilities. Since the coalition
campaign began, ISIL has lost more than a quarter of the
populated territories it held in Iraq.
Because we lack the same kind of partners on the ground in
Syria, the situation there is more challenging and complex.
Still, we are working closely with regional partners to
establish sites for training and equipping vetted, moderate
Syrian opposition elements, in order to train approximately
5,000 troops per year for the next 3 years.
Syrian opposition groups to counter-ISIL continue to make
strategic gains, expanding west and east from Kobani in
retaking territory from ISIL. Coalition air strikes against
ISIL in Syrian territories continue to degrade ISIL's sanctuary
and limit its freedom of movement and military capabilities, as
well as its capacity to resupply its efforts in Iraq.
In Iraq, coalition air power has supported many Iraqi
Security Force-led operations, and we are actively supporting
training of Iraqi forces at four camps where nine Iraqi Army
and three peshmerga brigades are being trained and equipped.
The coalition is planning to build on this initial success,
as well as prepare to meet a set of critical challenges in the
months ahead. As ISIL is defeated in population centers and the
military forces must move on to other objectives, there will be
an immediate need for policing and public security efforts to
set the conditions for essential service delivery.
Populations that have fled the fighting will need shelter,
assistance, and security until they can return home. In many
cases, facilities have been destroyed or made insecure by
improvised explosive devices. Providers will need to rapidly
assess and respond with basic medical care, water, electricity,
and other municipal services.
As a successful stabilization effort begins with fair
treatment during military operations, we applaud Iraqi leaders,
including Grand Ayatollah Sayyid Ali al-Sistani, who publicly
called for the protection of civilians and warned against acts
of revenge and recrimination, or abuse. I might digress by
saying it is worth reading his 20 point Code of Conduct that he
issued last month with regard to the fighters in the field to
liberate Iraq. It also means protecting the schools, hospitals,
and water treatment facilities and securing antiquities and
libraries. These measures begin the process of reunifying Iraq
and building trust between liberated communities and the
Government of Iraq.
These critical stabilization efforts were at the center of
my consultations last week in Baghdad. On the first day of
meetings, we heard from the Iraqis about the need to plan for
IDP returns, support IED removal, and provide services and
expertise to assist with stabilization efforts. On the second
day, a team of experts and coalition members met with their
Iraqi counterparts and discussed Iraqi plans in greater detail.
Throughout my meetings, I emphasized that Iraq's stabilization
efforts will be the most important signal of the intentions of
the Abadi government to fulfill its goal of rebuilding an Iraq
for all Iraqis.
We know from experience that these essential services are
delivered more efficiently and effectively when they are
sequenced and planned early on with military and civilian
cooperation. We also know this: Stabilization operations
require significant resources.
We, as a coalition, will work together to assist and
support Iraq as we are able to, but we do not have the
resources to support all of Iraq's needs. Nor can money alone,
whether from the Iraqi budget, from a trust fund, or from any
number of partners, achieve full effectiveness without
appropriate prioritization, planning, and sequencing.
From Baghdad, we traveled to Berlin for the first meeting
of the coalition's Stabilization Working Group. There, under
the leadership of German and Emerati Governments, we convened
more than a dozen coalition partners to identify specific areas
where the coalition can support the Iraqis and establish a
shared understanding of what we hope to achieve.
The Working Group on Stabilization is just one of five
coalition working groups coordinating coalition activities on
specific lines of effort, including military support, counter-
finance, counter-messaging, and efforts to stem the flow of
foreign fighters.
Among coalition members, disrupting the flow of foreign
fighters is an urgent concern and rightly so. Partners are
working together to make it more difficult for their citizens
to fight in Syria and Iraq through criminal justice reform,
enhanced border control, and better intelligence sharing.
Eighteen coalition partners have passed new Foreign Terrorist
Fighter legislation over the last 6 months in order to stem the
flow of fighters traveling to the region. More action is being
contemplated. In fact, just this week, the Italian Government
broke up a ring of smugglers of foreign fighters operating
between Italy and Albania. The CT operation flowed from the use
of information as a result of our coalition actions, and
prosecution of those individuals will flow from legislation as
a result of our Coalition actions.
We must continue to improve how we harmonize border and
customs processes, track potential and actual fighters en route
to the battle, and share intelligence with partners. This kind
of information sharing and creative thinking between partners
is also vital in meeting a related and similarly urgent
challenge: Constraining ISIL's access to financial support.
Here, the coalition has made gains in synchronizing
practices to block ISIL's access to banks, both in the region
and globally. This includes stemming the flow of private
donations and limiting ISIL's financial options by restricting
its ability to generate oil revenues. We are now expanding
these efforts to counter ISIL's access to local and informal
financial networks.
There is also broad consensus among partners in the
Coalition's Counter Finance Working Group, which met for the
first time in Rome last week, that we must closely examine any
financial ties between core ISIL and terrorists linked to ISIL
throughout the region.
We are also beginning to better prepare ourselves to
counter ISIL's violent messaging. Last month, the President
announced the creation of a new Joint Online Operations Center
with the UAE, where we will collaborate with regional partners
to take on ISIL in the online information space. Efforts like
these, to counter violent messaging, or to take on ISIL's
recruitment capabilities and efforts to generate revenues, will
endure long after we defeat ISIL, and will support long term
U.S. counterterrorism goals.
The United States and coalition partners are also
supporting the United Nations' efforts to provide food aid and
supply critical assistance to protect vulnerable women,
children, and men and attempt to limit the suffering caused by
ISIL's excessives and advances.
Ultimately, the best way to protect vulnerable communities
from ISIL's barbaric campaign of death and terror is to degrade
and defeat the organization, militarily and ideologically, over
the course of several years.
The President has outlined a framework for the authorities
he believes will be necessary to pursue this campaign with his
formal request of the Congress for the authorization of the use
of military force against ISIL. The AUMF request foresees using
our unique capabilities in support of partners on the ground
instead of through the long-term, large-scale deployment of
U.S. ground forces. At the same time, the President has asked
for the flexibility to fight an adaptable enemy, one that hopes
to expand its reach and capabilities well beyond the borders of
Iraq and Syria.
As the President has said, the world needs to know we are
united in the effort against ISIL. We are strongest as a nation
when the administration and Congress work together on issues as
serious as the use of military force. A new AUMF will prove
that we stand united against this threat. A powerful message of
support for our leadership with our allies and our coalition
and a powerful message of defeat for ISIL.
Taking the fight to ISIL also requires our close
coordination with this committee and with the Congress, so that
we can constantly evaluate our tactics and strategy, and that
we are resourcing them appropriately.
This hearing presents an opportunity to continue that very
important dialogue with the Congress and coordination and
consultation. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking
Member Engel for calling this hearing and permitting us to
appear before you today. I look forward to taking your
questions. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of General Allen follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Smith [presiding]. General Allen, thank you very much
for your testimony. We now go to General Fantini

STATEMENT OF BRIGADIER GENERAL MICHAEL FANTINI, USAF, MIDDLE
EAST PRINCIPAL DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE

General Fantini. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Engel,
members of the committee, thank you for having me here today. I
will briefly describe our efforts that we are undertaking to
counter ISIS in Iraq and Syria.
As General Allen mentioned, the U.S. strategy to counter
ISIL is a whole of government effort, supported by a broad
international coalition. It includes multiple lines of effort
across the government to counter this threat. The Department of
Defense has lead responsibility for denying ISIL safe haven and
building partnership capacity. This means conducting strikes
against critical ISIL assets and supporting our partners on the
ground, principally the Iraqi security forces and vetted Syrian
opposition.
Under the denying safe haven line, to deny ISIL safe haven,
the coalition has conducted approximately 3,000 air strikes
including more than 1,600 in Iraq since August 8, 2014.
Additionally, over 1,200 strikes have occurred in Syria since
December 23, 2014. We have taken out ISIL's fighters and
commanders, more than 1,000 vehicles and tanks, over 200 oil
and gas facilities, the infrastructure that funds this terror,
as well as over 20 training camps, and more than 2,000 fighting
positions, checkpoints, buildings, and barracks in both Iraq
and Syria. As a result of this effort, the coalition has
arrested ISIL's momentum, degraded its ability to mass and
maneuver forces, and pressured or eliminated its leadership
cells, and disrupted its command and control and supply lines.
Overall, we have put ISIL on the defensive in Iraq.
Under building partnership capacity, countering ISIL will
not be possible without our local partners in the lead. To
build partnership capacity in Iraq, the U.S. and coalition
partners are supporting the Government of Iraq in its efforts
to strengthen and reconstitute the Iraqi security forces by
assisting with training, equipping, and advising the Iraqi
security forces. This includes Kurdish fighters as well as
Sunni tribes. Last summer, we stood up our ``advise and
assist'' team to partner with local forces, and earlier this
year, we began training Iraqi security and Kurdish forces at
four sites across Iraq. I was able to visit Taji site recently
and see firsthand the partnership that we have undertaken with
the Iraqi forces. With the help of Congress, the Iraq Train and
Equip Fund will enable us to train and equip the 12 brigades,
to include three peshmerga brigades and 9 Iraqi brigades that
was mentioned by General Allen as well as tribal and Sunni
forces.
Under the Syria train and equip, in addition to our efforts
in Iraq, we are working with our coalition partners to build
the capabilities of the moderate Syrian opposition, with
training of the first class set to begin later next month in
April. The goal is to train vetted Syrian recruits to defend
the Syrian people; stabilize areas under opposition control;
empower trainees to go on the offensive against ISIL; and
promote the conditions for a negotiated settlement to the end
of the conflict in Syria. Our partners in the region, including
Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Qatar, and others have offered strong
support to host and quickly stand up the program. U.S. forces
in the region strengthen our partners' abilities to fight
terrorism locally, but it will be Iraqi forces and Syrian
fighters who will secure the gains against
ISIL and inflict a lasting defeat.
We look forward to working closely with you and we will
continue to keep you and your colleagues informed. I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of General Fantini follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------

Mr. Smith. Thank you very much. Let me begin first of all,
General Allen. From a purely military point of view, is the
current military strategy to defeat ISIL deficient in any way?
General Allen. Well, obviously, as the strategy unfolds, we
know it is a long-term strategy. We will keep a very close eye
on the progress. We will evaluate the resources against our
expectations, again, as the strategy unfolds. As I watched the
pieces of this come together with respect to the training, with
respect to our enabling, with respect to our fire power and
fire support provided to the Iraqi security forces, it seems to
be unfolding in a manner which I think will be successful in
Iraq. So we will keep a close eye on this and obviously, we
will remain in close consultation with the Congress on the
issue of resources.
Mr. Smith. Let me ask you if I could, 2 days ago, I chaired
a hearing on the increase of anti-Semitism in Europe and
Ambassador Ronald Lauder, who was obviously a former Assistant
Secretary of Defense for European and NATO policy testified. He
is also the President of the World Jewish Congress. And he said
there were ``thousands of young European Muslims that have left
to fight with Islamic radicals in Iraq and Syria. And there is
a real fear that they could return bringing the bloodshed with
them. Some have already returned and we have seen the
consequences.'' He referred to increased attacks on Jews
throughout Europe especially where radical Muslim elements
appear.
To what extent is the administration examining the threat
of returning Muslim extremists from the United States, a threat
not just to Europe, but also to the United States? I noticed in
your testimony, General, you talk about how the coalition
members are trying to disrupt the flow of foreign fighters. You
made a very cursory reference to some of the things. I know you
can expand upon it. You mentioned 18 coalition partners have
passed new foreign terrorist fighter legislation and so on. But
this is a rear guard, the likes of which I think we have never
seen before. Your thoughts on that and what can we do to
mitigate the threat here in the U.S.?
General Allen. You have put your finger on one of the
greatest threats ultimately of ISIL as it exists today. It is a
threat to Iraq. It is a threat in Syria. It is a threat in the
region. But the return of foreign fighters is a direct threat
to our homeland. Not just our homeland, but the homelands of
our partners as we have seen tragically in such places as
Ottawa and in Sydney and in Paris, Copenhagen, and Brussels and
other places. So you are correct. This is a real issue for us.
That is why there is, in fact, not just a working group, but an
entire line of effort within the U.S. strategy as well to stem
the flow of foreign fighters. And it begins by dealing with
issues at home where we have encouraged, through best practices
and consultation and the exchange of information, nations to
work with at-risk populations at home, with clerics and
teachers, with family members, with tribal leaders in our
coalition partners' homes.
Mr. Smith. Is there recognition, if I could interrupt,
among our partners that Jews are at heightened risk?
General Allen. Absolutely. This is, of course, an issue.
The anti-Semitism that has arisen from this, this is an issue.
The Jewish population is at risk. But more broadly than just
the Jewish population, it is the security of these countries,
so they are fixated on this, gentlemen.
Mr. Smith. If I could, many of us have noted with a great
deal of dismay the President's earlier dismissal of ISIS as a
JV team or the equivalent of, and we have seen this happen on a
number of fronts. I held a whole series of hearings on Boko
Haram and tried desperately to get the administration to
declare Boko Haram a Foreign Terrorist Organization. Went twice
to Nigeria. Went to Jos where a fire bombing was occurring in
churches. It was as clear as the nose on my face that Boko
Haram had more of a regional terrorist mindset. And we seem to
have not adequately assessed the scope, tenacity, and lethality
of the threat. And as part of this coalition of the 60, is
Nigeria a part of that?
Again, to my dismay and shock and many others, all of a
sudden we walked away, last December, from helping the Nigerian
Government combat the very real threat that they are facing
with training, with vetted, Leahy vetted individuals. It all
can be done as a matter of political will, if you might speak
to that.
And finally, very quickly, because I am almost out of time,
General Dempsey had pointed out that the security of the Iraqi
forces and the Iranian support, I should say, is a positive
thing in military terms. He then said that we have got to think
what happens when the drums of ISIL stop beating and what about
this idea that we need an inclusive government in Iraq? That
seems to me to a very far-away dream, not likely to happen. But
if you could speak to the Boko Haram especially.
General Allen. Boko Haram is obviously a great concern. It
has put its hand in the air to be what they call distant
province of the caliphate and they have ultimately established
a relationship. So I certainly commend your having held
hearings on this issue because it is a very serious issue.
Nigeria is not a member of the coalition, but I am traveling to
nations around the world and trying to explain the nature of
ISIL and the nature of this threat of local franchises
expanding.
Mr. Smith. If you could look to include them as well as
other countries in Africa with al-Shabaab and all the other
threats that are being faced, we would deeply appreciate it. I
yield to Mr. Engel.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Smith. I want to talk a little
bit at the beginning about Iran. We are negotiating a deal with
them. They continue to be a bad actor all over the Middle East
and Yemen.
It appears that the Iraqi security force is with the help
of outside militias including Shia militias. We are making
gains in Tikrit. What has been Iran's role in this operation
and what is the United States' current role in this operation?
General Allen. I don't think we have a full and complete
picture on Iran's role. There seems to have been some
organizational support to the Shia elements in the Popular
Mobilization Force, potentially some direct fire support as
well. How much command and control they were exerting as
opposed to how much the Shia militia elements, the PMF, were
exerting, I think remains ultimately to be determined.
The U.S. role with regard to Tikrit has to be considered in
the larger U.S. role across all of Iraq. But your question is
an important one. As we watch the operation unfold in Tikrit,
we continued our close relationship with the Combined Joint
Operations Center. Our conversation with the Iraqi military
leaders and political leaders continued. As the operation
unfolded, Prime Minister Abadi and members of the Iraqi
security forces requested U.S. and coalition support for the
final phase of the operation ultimately to liberate the city of
Tikrit. I don't want to get into a lot of the operational
details, to the benefit of the enemy, who is listening to what
we are saying, it began by the provision of information and key
intelligence. But as I think Mr. Engel, you saw last night, a
large number of well-targeted and precise air strikes went in
and are beginning to support the Iraqi security force
operations that are unfolding right now. That is, I think,
where we would leave the level of operational detail.
The United States is deeply involved in this operation now.
And we are deeply involved because it is consistent with our
relationship with Iraq, overall inside Iraq, but it is also
specifically as a result of the request of the Iraqi Government
and the Iraqi security forces to assist them in Tikrit.
Mr. Engel. Well, is it in the United States' interest to
save what I would call a failing Iranian strategy? I worry
about Iran's role in Iraqi military operations because what
does that portend for the political future of Iraq?
General Allen. I don't believe at all that we are in our
efforts at this moment saving or attempting to salvage a failed
Iranian strategy. The intent, of course, is to support the
Abadi government and to support the Iraqi security forces and
the liberation of a not insignificant urban center and
population center with the idea ultimately of driving Daesh out
of the province of Salah ad Din.
I recently met with senior leaders from that province and
last week across Iraq met with senior Iraqi leaders, and they
are very keen on our role, our role across Iraq, our role in
the restoration of Iraq's territorial integrity and
sovereignty. They are also very keen on our role now to support
the Iraqi security forces in the final assault on Tikrit and
the liberation of that population center and that aspect of
Salah ad Din province.
Mr. Engel. Let me turn to the AUMF because I think that is
very important. The administration sent an AUMF. I was one of
the few people who thought it was a good AUMF. I didn't look at
it as a finished product. I looked at it as a jumping off point
and I thought it provided some very important things.
Now some in Congress have called for a broad AUMF that
would allow for U.S. ground troops. Let me ask you about that.
How would the introduction of U.S. ground troops be perceived
in the countries in the Middle East and by our other coalition
partners? Would a large deployment help or hinder our ability
to achieve our goal of degrading and defeating ISIS?
General Allen. That is an important question. As I try to
respond to questions like that, I always try to start by saying
the operational environment will clearly dictate the
recommended or the decision making with respect to what the
force will look like. If it is a major emergency, one that
requires some significant number of troops, then that
operational environment, I think will be one that is clearly
discussed with the Capitol Hill and our congressional partners,
obviously to ensure that we are all of one mind on this issue.
Absent a specific emergency or absent an operational
environment that would seem to require a large infusion of
American troops, I think we have learned now over many years in
the region that the presence of foreign troops from outside
that region often ultimately creates a reaction within that
region that is focused on those foreign troops, that may have,
in fact, a destabilizing effect.
We also are actually quite good at training indigenous
forces and employing very precise special operations forces,
either in support of indigenous forces or if necessary, in
terms of direct action. So there are many options for the
Commander in Chief, whoever that will be. There are many
options that can be discussed and consulted with the Congress.
But I think we now know after many years of experience in the
region, that the presence of large numbers of ground forces can
sometimes have the reverse effect of our intention, which is to
stabilize. It can sometimes destabilize the social fabric. So
we need to be very conscious of that. That is why I think the
AUMF is important in that it gives us the ability to empower
and enable and support indigenous, national forces, to achieve
the goals which otherwise foreign ground forces might have to
undertake. And it is a very important question.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. Thank you very much.
General Allen. Yes, Mr. Engel.
Mr. Smith. Chairman Rohrabacher.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much and I would like to
thank our witnesses. Thank you all very much for being with us
today.
General Allen, your last point about large deployments
sometimes actually destabilize rather than stabilize the
situation was very well taken. And I hope that my colleagues
understand the significance of that point. And to the degree
that you have outlined a strategy that does not require a large
deployment of American troops on the ground is something that I
think we should all take very seriously, take a look and see,
make sure--see how it works. Because this is a strategy that
does work in the long run.
Let me ask you about letting the--mobilizing the local
forces which is what you are outlining for us today. You were
involved with the Anbar province and the efforts there.
General Allen. Deeply involved, sir.
Mr. Rohrabacher. So are the Sunni tribal forces that
enabled you to succeed there, are they currently involved in
the struggle against ISIL?
General Allen. Of course, Anbar remains, as you know, sir,
a very contested area at this particular moment.
Mr. Rohrabacher. That is correct.
General Allen. And I have met with many of the sheikhs of
Al Anbar. Some of them have their tribal sons in the fight
right now. Without exception, however, the sheikhs that I have
met from Al Anbar have said that when the opportunity presents
itself, they will, in fact, join the Iraqi Government to oppose
ISIL.
Mr. Rohrabacher. General, weren't these forces that you
were talking about the most effective forces that we had when
we actually had a large deployment there? Weren't they actually
the best forces? And what you are telling me now is those
forces are not at play. Isn't that correct?
General Allen. Well, I like to think that the Marines were
the best forces that we had, but I take your point.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I second that.
General Allen. The environment was really dramatically
different at the time. It was a contested area where once the
tribes were properly supported by us, they were able to turn on
the enemy.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Let me, General, pardon me, my time is
limited here for questions.
General Allen. Of course.
Mr. Rohrabacher. However, let me just note for the record
that looking from a distance, it seems to me the reason why
these tribal forces that were so important to your success with
an earlier strategy are not at play now is because the
administration is insisting on a strategy that is based on
keeping Iraq together rather than working and deploying the
forces within that region into the fight against ISIL.
General Allen. If I may comment?
Mr. Rohrabacher. Yes, sir.
General Allen. I have been to Al Asad Airbase just recently
where I saw U.S. and coalition special operators training the
tribal forces. It is the full intent of the Iraqi Government to
leverage and they now have about 7,500 or so tribal fighters on
the payroll to leverage the tribal fighters ultimately to do
much of the same thing that we were successful in doing in '07.
It is an intent of the Iraqi Government.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I understand it is their intent, but the
fact is that these tribal leaders don't trust the intent of the
Iraqi Government and because of this--and by the way, I
wouldn't either, if I was in their spot.
What about the Kurds? You mentioned that there are Kurdish
fighters that you were very high on, level on. Then you
mentioned, of course, the Sunni tribal leaders that we are
talking about. Where are the Shi'ites? Isn't this really the
problem is that when we come down to it, the Shi'ites are not
doing their part in this?
General Allen. That is a really important question, and it
is a bit complex. I am going to take a stab at it, recognizing
the time.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Yes, sir.
General Allen. Last year, when Daesh entered Iraq, ISIL
entered Iraq, and we began to see the route and ultimately what
looked like the potential loss of Baghdad and points south, the
Grand Ayatollah Sistanti called for the rallying of all Iraqis
to the flag. Not Shia, but all Iraqis to the flag, ultimately
to help to defend the country. At the time, for obvious
reasons, many of those individuals who were able to get to the
flag frankly were the Shia elements. And they were organized in
something called the Popular Mobilization Committee of which we
see in the field today, Popular Mobilization Forces.
They are not Asa'ib Ahl al-Haq. They are not Kata'ib
Hezbollah with close ties to Iran. I think we need to be very
nuanced in how we look at them because these are organizations
that were filled last year with young men that came from the
tribes in the south. They were teachers one day, and they were
fighters the next day. They were bakers one day. They were
infantrymen the next day. They came to defend their country.
The fact that they were organized in Shia organizations and
there are about 80,000 of them or so, the fact that they were
organized in Shia organizations has been ultimately to
stabilize the situation and then participate conceivably in the
counter offensive.
It is not an intention, sir, that these groups remain
permanently established and it is the intention, ultimately, of
the Iraqi Government that elements would be subsumed under the
national guard concept or they would be disbanded and go home.
They have already ceased paying about 20,000 of them to go
home. So the Shia are, in fact, involved here as an irregular
force in a military organization that has played a role.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Has played a role, but again, underscoring
the basic point that we just went through, these are not the
ultimate fighters that we have to rely on, are really the Kurds
and the Sunni tribal people. I believe in the strategy that you
have set out. I believe it will work, but only if we are not
hampered by the idea that we are going to keep Iraq which was
an artificial entity created by the British a long time ago,
make that our number one goal rather than defeating ISIL which
is what supposedly our goal is.
Thank you, General, very much and I thank all of you very
much.
Mr. Smith. The Chair recognizes Mr. Deutch.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wanted to continue
this line of questions about the Shia and Iran and Sistani's
Popular Mobilization Forces. And I want to actually start with
the news about our strikes in Tikrit. The coverage in The New
York Times today included a paragraph that said, ``if the
Americans did not engage, they feared becoming marginalized by
Tehran in a country where they had spilled much blood in the
last decade, the official said speaking on the condition of
anonymity.''
If you could speak to the strikes in Tikrit, the air
support that the United States is providing. Is it different
than the support we have provided in the past? And is it being
offered in part because there were concerns about being
marginalized by the Iranians and in answering that question
that gets to the broader point of the again, same article, the
preponderance of the 30,000 fighters on the Iraqi side are the
members of the militias fighting alongside the Iraqi soldiers
and policemen. Of those 30,000, how do we, General Allen,
following your last response, how do we view it in a nuanced
way to distinguish between the Iranian-backed militias and
Sistani's Popular Mobilization Forces?
General Fantini. Congressman, I think the answer to your
question is no. We work by, with, and through the Iraqi
Government, and so through the Iraqi Government and the Iraqi
security forces. The Iraqis came back and asked for support and
we adjudicated that decision to the highest levels and decided
to engage there. It is within the Iraqi interest and the
coalition's interest to be successful in Tikrit because we
don't want to have another success for Daesh or ISIL.
And we anticipate that the support that we are providing
the Iraqi security forces with the minister of defense, with
the Ministry of Defense in charge of the command and control of
that operation that we are in a position that we can provide
that support to be successful.
General Allen. With regard to the command and control,
there is a difference between the role of the traditional Shia
elements that are aligned directly with Iran and supported
directly by Iran, and those elements of the PMF that have
provided a larger force posture and a larger force generation
capability. They are not--they don't intend to be or are not
intended to be a permanent part of the Iraqi security force
entity. They are viewed as a temporary organization that has
played the role ultimately of blunting and halting the forward
progress of Daesh. As we continue to build out the capabilities
of the Iraqi security forces across the board, we can provide
you, I think, significant detail about the forces that are
engaged right now in Tikrit. It is actually quite encouraging.
To give you a sense of when the PMF elements are going to
be in play and when they won't be in play and as we continue to
force generate the regular forces, they will play an increasing
role ultimately in the counter offensive, ultimately to
liberate the populations.
Mr. Deutch. General Allen, are you confident that the Iraqi
people view this action in Tikrit as one taking place against
ISIS by the United States through air strikes and Iraqi
security forces, or is it viewed as one that is a combination
of U.S. air strikes and Iranian Shia-backed militias?
General Allen. That is a good question. During my time on
the ground just last week there, I made an effort to meet with
the provincial leadership in Salah ad Din Province, in which
Tikrit is the largest population center.
At the time, the leadership in Salah ad Din and even
recently, have talked about focusing on the liberation of
Tikrit and have applauded the role of American forces in
supporting the central government and the Iraqi security forces
and liberating Tikrit from Daesh. My sense is that on the
ground in Salah ad Din their view is that the United States, as
we have done in multiple other places in Iraq, is providing the
kinds of information and support to command and control and
ultimately fire power that will facilitate the Iraqi Government
and Iraqi security forces in accomplishing the mission of
defeating Daesh and liberating this population center.
So my sense that at least the Sunni leadership, key Sunni
leadership, the Speaker, the Vice President and others, but
also the Sunni leadership of Salah ad Din have been clear that
they support the role of the United States in this particular
fight, sir.
Mr. Deutch. Mr. Chairman, I just hope that translates then
down to the Iraqi people as well. I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Deutch. Chair recognizes the
gentleman from Alabama, Mo Brooks.
Mr. Brooks. I pass.
Mr. Smith. The Chair recognizes David Cicilline.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you very much
for being here, General. You said, General Allen, in response
to a question, you said I think we will be successful and you
said in Iraq sort of emphatically. And it caused me to wonder
whether you had a different assessment with respect to the
region or outside of Iraq.
General Allen. The pieces as we have assembled them in
Iraq, I foresee those pieces achieving the strategy that we
have laid out for ourselves which is ultimately to facilitate
the Iraqi Government's restoration of the territorial integrity
of Iraq and the sovereignty of the country.
With respect to Syria, obviously, that situation is going
to take longer. The training and equipping program, with the
great support of the Congress, is just beginning to receive
trainees and begin the process formally of training elements of
the new Syrian army. And as those elements are introduced into
the battle space, as we continue the work of working closely
with the Syrian moderate opposition. I just met the president
of the Syrian Opposition Coalition last week. There is not the
clear partner in Syria that there is Iraq. There is not the
governmental entity in Syria that there is in Iraq. And so it
is going to take more time, obviously, and we are going to have
to evaluate that strategy as time goes on.
Mr. Cicilline. General, according to a recent human rights
report, a Shia militia destroyed a Sunni village they had
retaken from ISIS which was methodical and driven by revenge,
according to the record. It indicated that dozens of other
villages were similarly targeted. And considering the
increasing efforts to combat ISIS by Iranian backed Shia
militia sort of building on Congressman Deutch's question, how
can we monitor Iranian retaliatory actions and will the Shia
militias' punitive actions cause Iraq's disenfranchised Sunnis
to view ISIS as really their only protectors and what are we
doing to mitigate that and also what are the implications for
fostering reconciliation between Shia, Sunni, and Kurdish
communities in Iraq because of Iran's involvement?
General Allen. It is an extraordinarily important question,
both yours and Congressman Deutch's. There have been excesses.
They have been horrible. We saw very quickly that the Iraqi
Government condemned those excesses, and the Iraqi Government
has initiated investigations into those excesses, ultimately to
hold those who perpetrated them to be accountable.
That is an important first point. Those excesses have been
condemned by the Iraqi Government. Those excesses have actually
been condemned by the Grand Ayatollah Sistani and it was part
of--because of that, it was part of the reason for his issuance
of the 20 Point Code of Ethics, Code of Conduct which would be
recognizable to all of us in uniform as something that would be
admirable to be followed by anyone who is involved in combat
operations. That is what I would say is the first part.
The tribes, the Sunni tribes that I still remain in close
contact with, I just had a conversation with one just this
morning, a sheikh, have made it clear that they are willing to
give this government in Iraq a chance. Prime Minister Abadi has
reached out to the sheikhs. He has reached out to the tribes.
Unlike his counterpart who, in fact, victimized the Sunni
tribes and victimized the Sons of Iraq, he has also established
in an unprecedented way, relations with the Sunni governments
in the region. He has been to visit the King in Jordan. He has
developed a close relationship with the Turks. He is going to
be invited ultimately to visit the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia very
shortly. He and his government have had close relations.
There is a regional relationship with the Sunni
governments. There is an outreach through his own government,
through his national security advisor and through his own
personal actions, to the Sunni tribes in an effort not just to
recruit them into the fight against Daesh, but also to
establish the mechanisms and the environment in which
reconciliation can occur.
I speak frequently with the sheikhs of these tribes and
there isn't one of them who sees ISIL as, in some form or
another, an alternative to the central government in Baghdad.
There just isn't any. That may have been an issue last year. It
may have been an issue in and around the invasion by Daesh in
June 2014. But among the tribes with whom I have long relations
and the sheikhs with whom I maintain contact, there isn't a one
of them that sees the presence of Daesh in Iraq as preferable
to the central government. In fact, they have told me that they
believe that Prime Minister Abadi and this government in Iraq
is something that they can give a chance to.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, General. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Smith. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas,
Randy Weber.
Mr. Weber. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. General Allen, how many
of those tribes and sheikhs are there?
General Allen. I will take the question, sir. There are
many. In Anbar, I think we tracked in '08 there were as many as
60 tribes and subtribes. There are multiple tribal
confederations, the Shammar Confederation, the Dulaimi
Confederation, the Zobai. There are multiple tribal
confederations.
Mr. Weber. How many of them do you stay in contact with?
You said you have talked to a number of them?
General Allen. I have talked to 10 or 12.
Mr. Weber. 10 or 12, okay.
General Allen. And they have significant populations.
Mr. Weber. Okay, and earlier you said that Grand Ayatollah
Sistanti had a Code of Conduct, I believe that had 20 items on
it?
General Allen. Twenty points, yes, sir.
Mr. Weber. Twenty points. Where do you----
General Allen. I will leave one with the committee.
Mr. Weber. Perfect. Do you view--what do you think the
chances are that when this is all said and done, however long
that takes that Iran winds up with the spoils of the country of
Iraq and that actually, they will be in charge?
General Allen. I don't think that that is going to be the
case.
Mr. Weber. You do not?
General Allen. I do not think that is going to be the case.
In the end, Iraq is an Arab country. And while a large element
of the Iraqi population shares a confession within the faith of
Islam with the large population in Iran, they are a different
people.
Mr. Weber. What percentage of the fighters would you
guesstimate is Iranian Guard or Iranian and then let us go to
Shia and Sunni and even the Kurds? Can you divide that up for
us?
General Allen. No, I can't. We will take the question. The
preponderance, the majority of Shia militias now in the battle
space are of the Popular Mobilization Force I described before.
Some smaller number of them are the direct Iranian-allied
Asa'ib Ahl al-Haq, Kata'ib Hezbollah, and that type of group.
But we can provide you, I think, some pretty good fidelity on
that. And then of course, our focus is the Iraqi security
forces, their counterterrorism service, and the training of the
tribes as well.
Mr. Weber. Would you guesstimate that that is the total
force of 100,000 or 200,000 or what would you guess the
fighting number?
General Allen. I will ask my military colleagues to get you
the number.
Mr. Weber. Okay. General Olson?
General Olson. Congressman, there is about 90,000 fighters
in the ministry of peshmerga. There have been as many as 80,000
mobilized in Grand Ayatollah Sistani's call to arms for Shia
militia, some of whom have been enrolled as Popular
Mobilization Forces, some of whom have not. And for Iraqis
under arms, there is a significant Shia population in the Iraqi
armed forces, both the counterterrorism services, and the
regular armed forces. About 80 percent of the Iraqis in uniform
are Shia.
Mr. Weber. And what number would you put on that?
General Olson. I will have to get back to you with an exact
number of the Iraqis under arms.
Mr. Weber. Would you guess 10,000 to 80,000?
General Olson. It is upward to that, sir.
Mr. Weber. It is upward to that.
General Olson. I can get a number for you.
Mr. Weber. And what is our current guesstimate on ISIL
forces in Iraq?
General Olson. The numbers vary, sir. I would defer to
Intelligence Committee colleagues about their best guess
estimate of the current figures. I have seen figures as high as
a couple dozen thousand. I have seen figures much lower than
that. I think that is a better question that we can back to you
with a detailed classified answer.
Mr. Weber. Okay. And are you guys watching the budget
negotiations up here? It is okay to admit that you are watching
them.
General Olson. My portfolio on the Joint Staff does not
include being mindful of budgetary restrictions.
Mr. Weber. Do you feel like you have enough to--well, first
of all, how many--we don't call them boots on the ground. I
think we call them advisors. But how many advisors do we have
in Iraq?
General Olson. The total force in Iraq is a little bit
upwards of 3,000 uniformed Americans. They are divided between
the efforts of building partner capacity, advising and
assisting the Iraqi counterparts and then providing the basic
security and life support that come with that.
Mr. Weber. Are you confident that we have enough money in
the budget to prosecute this war now and the next 2 to 3 years?
General Olson. Currently, the operations are being funded
through a level that is appropriate for our current level of
effort.
Mr. Weber. Okay, and if you could come to us with an AUMF,
would you want it for 3 years or longer?
General Olson. Chairman Dempsey has testified that the
current AUMF is sufficient to support the strategy as designed.
Mr. Weber. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Weber. The Chair recognizes the
gentlelady from Florida, Lois Frankel.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you,
gentlemen, for your service to our country.
I have a couple of questions. First relates to the
underlying conditions that led to the rise of ISIL. Would you
agree that ISIL is not the cause of the turmoil in the region,
but a symptom of much deeper problems. I would like to get your
opinion. Is it unstable governments, poverty, desperation,
radical religion? I would like to get your take on that.
And secondly, I think the American public somehow thinks
that you can simply get rid of ISIL by bombs or dropping drones
and could you just explain the difficulty of their
assimilation, let us say, into population and so for the
terrain?
General Allen. One of the, I think, real benefits of the
counter ISIL Coalition which numbers at 62 entitles now,
countries and entities, is the recognition that Daesh is, in
fact, not the disease, it is the symptom of something bigger.
And that broad recognition includes the base societal factors
that have given rise to the attractiveness of an organization
like this. And they are societal issues. There are political
issues, inclusiveness, participation, social issues associated
with economic opportunity, the ability ultimately to have the
opportunity to put food on the table for families. And often
the result of the absence of all of those or some of those in
these countries and among these populations have created the
conditions of despair and desperation which has made those
populations susceptible to radicalization and then recruitment.
Ms. Frankel. Excuse me, General, I assume there are efforts
being done to try to respond to those conditions.
General Allen. I think so. We just had this week, in fact,
we ate dinner together the other night with the President of
Afghanistan, Ashraf Ghani, where I personally saw because we
are beginning to see the emergence of the potential for ISIL
and we have the presence of the Taliban which is its own
entity, where we have seen, I believe, some real progress with
regard to the underlying issues that gave rise to some of these
organizations: The rights of women and the opportunity of women
to have a far more prominent role in society, the dedication to
institutions of democracy, and to build capacity within those
institutions, all of which, of course, has stemmed from the
security efforts that we have put into the building of that
force which is holding now. So that country is a good example
as are other countries in the region. It is a good example of
how they are attempting to address and embrace an absence of
capacity, whether it is social or economic or human rights or
democratic institutions or governmental institutions. An
absence of capacity, as I said before, the combination of which
has given rise to despair and radicalism and extremism and then
violence.
Ms. Frankel. Which sounds to me why Syria is so difficult
because there really is no government there to work with at
all.
General Allen. Syria is very challenging, ma'am.
Ms. Frankel. And could someone just respond to the question
about how ISIL has integrated into the society? They are not
standing in a corner waiting to be bombed, so if you could just
maybe explain the difficulty of rooting them out.
General Fantini. Yes, ma'am. ISIL is an ideological entity
that through the use of terror is able to co-op to the society.
And that is why when we look at the number of strikes that we
have done to halt ISIL and put them on the defensive, it is
very precise and we have done it with forethought with the
understanding that this conflict is not a major force on
another major force, more traditional if you will.
From a counterterrorism perspective, we are in a
counterterror fight and when we engage a target, we want to
ensure we engage the enemy and don't create more enemies by
hitting the wrong target if you will. And so that is why it
will take time and the fact that we have conducted over 3,000
strikes in the 6 months has positioned us to continue to push
for success as we move forward, but it is a very challenging
environment and a distributed enemy. Our coalition tactics
engender the support of the society and the government and that
is how we will continue to pursue. Yes, ma'am.
Chairman Royce. [presiding.] We will go now to Mr. Salmon.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you. I just ask for any of your thoughts
on Clapper not designating Hamas and Iran now has threats to
our national security. I was kind of shocked that in his most
recent report that they are not included in the threats to our
national security and I am curious about your thoughts.
Also, when it comes to dealing with the fight against ISIL,
we are also seeing Iran and its allies continue to invade other
countries and become more of a threat to our national security.
So this muddled mess, one day the Shi'ites are our allies and
the next the Sunnis are our allies. Depending on what country,
if you are dealing in Yemen, the Iran-backed forces are our
enemy and they are a problem, but yet when we are fighting
against ISIS, they are our allies. It is a very confusing mess.
And for us in Congress to end up developing an AUMF, it becomes
very, very complicated and I am just curious of your thoughts
on that.
General Allen. Confusing mess is actually a good term for
the environment that we find today in the region. It is a very
difficult environment. It is one that is characterized by long
term social difficulties as we explained to Congresswoman
Frankel. It is one where there have been long-term insurgencies
and destructions of the social fabric that have been leveraged
by political entities within the region. Iran has been
prominent in that. It is a state sponsor of terror. It has been
a disruptive influence for a very long time and I think that we
haven't in any respect changed our view that Iran is one of the
central destabilizing influences throughout the entire region.
Not just in the context of its destabilizing of our partners
and allies in the region, but certainly as a direct threat to
our ally Israel as well.
So Iran remains a state sponsor of terror. We still
perceive it to be. I don't think that there has been any back
peddling by the administration in that regard.
Mr. Salmon. Why did Clapper then leave them off of the
list?
General Allen. I don't know. I don't know that he did, sir.
We will do some research on his comments to ensure that we
provide the clarity that you desire on this issue. I am not
going to speculate here. I didn't see his comments. So you
deserve an answer and we will get you one. But Hamas and
Hezbollah remain FTOs, foreign terrorist organizations, and
have been duly designated by the U.S. Government and remain on
that list, sir. Nothing has changed in that regard.
Mr. Salmon. Okay. The other question I would have is why
has the administration not designated additional Shia militias
or their leaders under Executive Order 13438 blocking property
or persons who threaten stabilization efforts in Iraq since the
onset of operations against ISIS?
General Allen. I can't answer that. We will get an answer
for you, sir.
Mr. Salmon. Okay, that would be really helpful. I will
yield back the balance of my time.
General Allen. Thank you for the questions.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. I thank the congressman for yielding and we
will go to the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Alan Grayson.
Mr. Grayson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. General Olson, trying
to piece together information from public sources, it appears
to me that we are spending roughly $1 million for every ISIS
fighting that U.S. forces kill. Does that sound right to you?
General Olson. The figure that we understand for the
operational costs per day is about $8.5 million.
Mr. Grayson. But am I right to think that we are spending
approximately $1 million for every single ISIS fighting that
U.S. forces kill?
General Olson. I haven't done the math, sir.
Mr. Grayson. All right, let us assume for the sake of the
argument that that is correct. Does it make sense, does it make
sense for us to be deploying the most powerful military force
that the world has ever seen and spend $1 million to kill some
man standing in the desert 6,000 miles from the closest
American shore holding a 40-year-old weapon? Does that make
sense?
General Olson. The military strategy as designed provides
U.S. support to a coalition that will degrade, dismantle, and
ultimately defeat ISIL.
Mr. Grayson. What about you, General Fantini? Can you think
of ways that we can spend less than $1 million and still keep
America safe for every gentleman standing in the desert 6,000
miles away when we kill?
General Fantini. Congressman, I can't address the math that
you are presenting. I don't know if that is accurate or not.
From the perspective of continuing with the strategy of
developing local forces, to enable those local forces with
coalition support, to degrade and defeat ISIL, I would submit
that that is a worthy expenditure of resources.
Mr. Grayson. Well, let us talk about that. You, of course,
are all very, very familiar with what General Powell said about
what makes for a good, effective war and what doesn't. General
Powell said that we need a vital national security interest
that is pursued by a clear strategy. We need overwhelming force
and we need an exit strategy.
So let us start with you on that, General Allen. What is
our exit strategy?
General Allen. The exit strategy is an Iraq that ultimately
is territorial secure, sovereign, an ISIL that has been denied
safe haven, and ultimately has been disrupted to the point
where it has no capacity to threaten at an existential level
the Government of Iraq and the nation of the Iraqi people. And
it ultimately ends up in a state that does not permit it to
threaten the United States or our homeland.
Mr. Grayson. General Allen, that doesn't sound like a
strategy to me. That sounds like a wish list. You certainly
understand the difference between a strategy and a wish list.
General Allen. And I do and the strategy, in fact, has a
whole series of lines of effort that converge on Daesh to
prevent it from doing the very things that I just mentioned.
Mr. Grayson. But what is our strategy?
General Allen. Strategy is to pursue a series of lines of
effort from defense of the homeland to the stabilization of the
Iraqi Government to the countering of the Daesh message to the
disruption of its finances to the impediment of the foreign
fighters to the empowerment of our allies to the leadership of
a coalition ultimately aimed to the defeat of Daesh. That is a
strategy.
Mr. Grayson. But none of those are exit strategies, right?
General Allen. There is no exit strategy for this. This is
about dealing with Daesh. This is about defeating Daesh. The
success of the strategy is not about exit. The success of the
strategy is about empowering our partners so that they can
ultimately restore the territorial integrity and the
sovereignty of a country and deny Daesh the ability ultimately
to do that.
If you are looking for an exit strategy with respect to our
presence in Iraq, when we have successfully concluded that
aspect of the strategy, we have said from the beginning that
our forces will redeploy. The Coalition has said from the
beginning that our forces will redeploy. So if that is the term
that you are seeking in terms of an exit strategy, then I would
say that is the mechanism by which we redeploy our forces from
Iraq.
But the strategy is oriented on an effect that we hope to
achieve with respect to Daesh.
Mr. Grayson. General Olson, you will agree that we are not
using what Colin Powell would have considered to be
overwhelming force, correct?
General Allen. We are using an appropriate level of force--
--
Mr. Grayson. Which isn't overwhelming force, right? Not as
Colin Powell would see it, right?
General Allen. I don't want to speak for General Powell. I
believe that the resources that we are applying to the strategy
to achieve our ends through matching ways and means are
appropriate for the strategy as designed.
Mr. Grayson. General Fantini, yes or no, are we using what
you would consider to be overwhelming military force?
General Fantini. Congressman, I would submit that American
air power against an AK-47 could be construed as overwhelming.
I agree with General Olson that the use of the resources and
the force applied to support our coalition partners to enable
these ground operations are appropriate for the strategy and
for success in this fight that will take a clear eyed and long-
term commitment. And we have stated at least 3 years.
Mr. Grayson. My time is up. Thank you all very much.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Grayson. There is just one
vote on the floor, so we will keep this hearing moving. Some of
the members have left to cast that ballot and they will be
back. And those members waiting to ask questions, if some of
you want to vote and then come back, we will work right
through.
Empowering our partners is sort of the theme, General
Allen, that you have used successfully in the past with the
Anbar awakening. One of the real questions here though is which
partners end up stepping up to the plate and will they do more
harm than good? And I am speaking right now of the militias,
the Iranian led or encouraged militias here because that is my
concern in all of this.
Many of our partners in that theater are already frustrated
about our Syria policy. We hear from these Ambassadors in the
Gulf states and through the region. And I wonder how much
longer the Sunni states will stick with the coalition once
these Shia militias go on the rampage. And that is the part I
am concerned about.
In some areas, these Shia have burned and bulldozed
thousands of homes in Sunni villages. You see the reports in
the front pages of the papers about some of the atrocities
committed. And this is our concern about the Iranian trained
and equipped fighters stepping into Iraq. I will just give you
what I recently heard about the breakdown. This is how General
Dempsey described the Tikrit operation. A thousand Sunni tribal
folks, a brigade of the Iraqi security forces, that would be
about 3,000, well, that is what we want to see happening. But
then approximately 20,000 of the Popular Mobilization Force
which in this count seems that they are Shia militia. And so
given that some of those militia are the same militia that in
the past attacked U.S. forces during the height of the Iraq War
and some are known to have targeted these Sunni Iraqi citizens
during the same period.
Given Iran's involvement in this, how do we reconcile their
role, then and now? And to what extent are Iranian forces on
the ground taking part directing these militias? I see some of
it in the interviews and certainly coming from the region. The
Iranians are trumpeting this.
General Allen. Prime Minister Abadi has been pretty clear,
very clear actually, that it is not his intention that there be
developed in a parallel security structures in Iraq. To that
extent, the Popular Mobilization Forces have generally been
organized in a manner that ultimately they will either be
disbanded or will be subsumed under the national guard
organizations once the national guard legislation is passed and
they become a reality.
I think your question and your concern is very well placed.
We are attempting to ensure that we understand what it is that
the Iranians have done and what they have not done with respect
to the militias in general and with regard to Tikrit in
particular. And you are also correct that there are elements of
these militias which are the ones that we have seen before that
we saw during our period of time in Iraq in large numbers,
Kata'ib Hezbollah, Asa'ib Ahl al-Haq and others that have the
potential of creating a long-term security problem for the
central government in Iraq.
So we are watching this closely. We are working closely
ultimately with the central government on the assimilation of
those Popular Mobilization Forces, those Shia elements that
came forward in the aftermath of the attack on Iraq last June
to try to preserve the integrity of Iraq. And ultimately, it is
the intention of Prime Minister Abadi that those forces either
be disbanded or go home.
The longer term issue, your question I think implies we are
going to have to deal with Kata'ib Hezbollah and those elements
that are directly supported by the Iranians over time. And I
think that is a security issue that the Iraqis are going to
have to address. And I think that their time will come as this
campaign continues to unfold.
Chairman Royce. Yes. I think some of this talk about Iran
being a very successful regional power, long term, if it does
this nuclear deal, the choice of words here by the
administration, I think is concerning to others on the ground
who have noticed the Iranians were bragging the other day about
four Arab capitals now being under their control and talking
about maybe taking a fifth, you know? And this kind of rhetoric
coming commensurate--of course, I am bothered by 3 days ago the
``Death to America'' quote from the Ayatollah. And in the
middle of all of this, pushing the envelope and saying we
control four Arab capitals now and we are on our way to
controlling a fifth and we are talking about Saudi Arabia. And
they are trying to support a low-level insurgency among the
Shia there.
I think the Sunni tribes will be central to this fight in
terms of turning back ISIS. And they have been squeezed between
the terror of ISIS on one hand and the brutality of the Shia
militia on the other. And because of your experiences on the
ground in Anbar during the awakening and the fact is that
helped turn the tide, I just look at the resources and the
capabilities that were deployed then versus what we are doing
to work with them now. And we have got to do more, I think, to
fully engage the Sunni tribes in this struggle against ISIS as
an alternative to having Iran bringing in as they are doing,
you know, today in Syria and in Lebanon and Yemen and frankly
trying to do in Saudi Arabia and trying to do in Bahrain as we
know to the extent that you can succeed at this, I think it is
going to be essential.
General Allen. I agree with that 100 percent, Chairman. The
unfolding of the counter offensive in Iraq needs to liberate
large numbers of the Sunni population, numbers that have really
very few options with respect----
Chairman Royce. My time has expired. I need to go to Mr.
Meeks, but he has enough time to make that vote.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Generals, I want to
thank you. What I appreciate is I think is what I am hearing is
some honesty in the sense that I hope we are playing, even if
it is short term or having short-term pain for long-term gain.
You know, when we were in Iraq we thought that after the shock
and awe just a few days later that it was all over and we then
were in Iraq another 10 years. And from what I am hearing from
you, we know that it is going to be a long-term fight. This is
complicated. And we are going to have at least, I think you are
saying at least 3 years. And I hope that then means that a lot
of these regional entanglements that we try to figure it out
because unfortunately have to run out, but I am told that yes,
some of our troops on the ground, if you have troops on the
ground that is not going to help. It could exacerbate the
situation. In larger numbers, right, in large numbers. We have
our special forces in training and doing what we have to do in
that regard and bringing them together. Because in my
estimation it is going to take everybody in the region working
together and not just the United States by ourselves. And it
has got to take the cooperation of a number of individuals in
the region.
So with that in mind, my questions would be, I have two-
fold. One is with reference with Qatar and them and are they
cooperating with us? There have been some differences in their
approach to Syria which complicates things and whether or not
they are able, have the ability or the desire to cut off the
financing to the terrorists and what their authority is.
And the second question then would be in reference to
Turkey and whether or not they are cooperating with us in the
region and how they add in because it is very important, I
think, that we have those two countries intricately involved
with us if we are going to really win this thing. So those are
my two questions.
General Allen. Mr. Meeks, you are 100 percent correct in
your observations on both of those. They are both critical to
the outcome. In the case of Qatar, the Emir has recently
visited here. He has reinforced something that we have heard in
the last couple of years which is that Qatar has taken measures
to begin to stem the flow of donations that come from Qatar and
obviously the enormous wealth that many of the individuals have
there. Not the government, but individuals to stem the flow of
that money ultimately to organizations like Daesh or other
organizations. The Emir has been clear on that issue. We have
seen, in fact, that that money has diminished, whether it still
flows in any form or not, I can't answer today. But Qatar has
been very clear that it does not intend to tolerate the funding
of those kinds of organizations. That is a positive trend with
regard to Qatar and it is also a very positive public statement
by the Emir.
It is also important to understand that Qatar has flown air
operations with us as on the wing of U.S. Air Force aircraft in
Syria. Qatar also hosts Al Udeid which is one of our largest
air bases in the entire region. The forward headquarters with
CENTCOM, the combined air operations center for the region, and
the headquarters, forward headquarters of our Special
Operations Command in the region. So Qatar is a very important
partner, not just in dealing with Daesh, but also dealing and
helping us to continue as a platform for preserving regional
stability.
With respect to Turkey, Turkey is an old friend of the
United States and we are an ally through our relationship with
NATO. I have been to Ankara now four times in the last 4 months
where we have had a number of conversations with the Turkish
leadership, one of which specifically late one evening with the
Prime Minister resulted in the Turks, my direct conversation
with the Turkish leadership resulted in the Turkish decision to
permit the peshmerga to reinforce the defenders of Kobani by
moving through Turkey to do that.
Turkey has made a series of additional decisions ultimately
to expand its support to our coalition efforts. We continue to
have productive conversations with Turkey. We have more to
cover, more ground to cover in terms of how Turkey might
participate, but it is not just in the military context. Turkey
is now co-leading the Coalition Working Group on stemming the
flow of foreign fighters. It is in Turkey's interest to do that
and they have embraced that as a responsibility within the
coalition.
So we will continue to work very closely with both of those
countries and as your question implies, they are critical to
the outcome.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, General.
General Allen. Yes, sir. Thank you.
Mr. Zeldin [presiding]. Thank you, Mr. Meeks. I now
recognize myself for 5 minutes. I wanted to start off by
thanking all of the generals who are here for your service to
our country, dedicating your entire life to protecting our
freedoms and liberties, being responsible for making critical
decisions that not only impact the welfare of the men and women
under your commands, but also their families back home. So
thank you for a lifetime of service to our country.
I was in Iraq in 2006 with the 82nd Airborne Division and
toward the end of that year, General Petraeus was taking over
part of this surge strategy, was taking over all of the surge
strategy and I remember a counter insurgency model coming out
at the time where a lot of his vision for what we need to do in
Iraq was articulated really in written form. You can find on
the internet.
He would say things like ``Give flexibility to local
commanders so they can adapt to changing circumstances.''
Trying to tackle the conflict of Iraqi military and law
enforcement in many cases not even showing up to work. How do
we embed forces to ensure that they are going to be there in
the morning?
My first question is and I apologize if it was answered
while I was away, who is in charge on our side on the ground in
Iraq?
General Olson. United States Central Command is ultimately
responsible for the campaign, in the campaign fund that has
been written. There is a three star general who is the
commander of the Joint Task Force, combined Joint Task Force
for Operation Inherent Resolve. He is headquartered in the
Central Command AOR.
On the ground in Iraq is an American two star commander who
commands the joint combined land forces effort there.
Mr. Zeldin. General Austin is the three star?
General Olson. General Austin is the four star Central
Command.
Mr. Zeldin. The four star, right. Okay, so who is the two
star?
General Olson. Major General Funk.
Mr. Zeldin. Major General Funk. Now so I remember----
General Allen. The 82nd is coming in behind by the Big Red
One, by the way.
Mr. Zeldin. Good decision. As far as Major General Funk
goes, or the three star that is over him, whose vision? One of
the things in my analysis and the analysis of others is who is
in charge and are they being given the flexibility and
resources they need to accomplish their mission?
When the President sent the authorization for the use of
military force, the Congress accompanied with that was a five
paragraph letter from the White House to Congress. And in one
of those paragraphs it is indicating an understanding that the
use of special operations, the use of ground operations would
be important. The White House was careful not to word it where,
you know, specifically saying it was going to be U.S. special
forces or U.S. ground operations. But one of the things in my
analysis of whether or not we are actually going to be able to
defeat ISIS is that we are driving the recommendations from the
ground up.
When you have a very talented two star or three star or
four star with multiple combat tours, a lot of combat
experience, they understand the enemy. They understand the
government, the culture. Without their hands being tied behind
their back, they are able to say exactly what we need to do to
defeat ISIS. Is that two star, does he have the flexibility he
needs? In his mind, if he wants to send an Army Ranger Unit or
Marines or Navy Seals or Delta Force or Green Berets to do a
night mission in Syria or some part of Iraq, when they come
under the cover of darkness. They take out a high-value target
or they get very important actionable intelligence, does that
two star have the ability to execute that kind of a mission?
General Olson. Being cautious about operational security,
what I would say, Congressman, is that the chain of command has
been empowered both by the chairman and by the Central Command
commander to make the appropriate recommendations for what we
need to do to carry out the strategy.
Mr. Zeldin. So when Secretary Kerry was here, one of my
colleagues, Mr. Grayson, was trying to interpret whether or not
the authorization included offensive operations. The
Secretary's initial response indicated that it did not
authorize offensive operations. With my question, he had the
opportunity to clarify it that it did not involve--he was not
referring to kinetic air strikes. But the one thing that was
left unanswered from that back and forth due to a lack of time,
was whether or not the authorization for use of military force
allows for the use of U.S. special operations forces to be able
to conduct that kind of a mission. Does the authorization for
use of military force the President gave to Congress, does that
authorize that commander on the ground to execute that kind of
a mission?
General Olson. The President's transmittal letter included
examples of things that are not enduring offensive ground
combat operations such as rescue operations involving U.S. or
coalition personnel. The use of special operations forces to
take military action against ISIL and their leadership, i.e.,
counterterrorism, or the use of U.S. forces in situations where
ground combat operations are not expected or intended such as
intelligence collection and sharing, missions to enable kinetic
strikes, or the provision of operational planning or other
forms of advice and assistance to partner forces.
Mr. Zeldin. So just so I understand, General, and my time
is expiring, just so I understand, would that commander on the
ground be authorized--if Congress was to pass this
authorization for use of military force, will that commander be
authorized to conduct that special operations mission to take
out a high-value target?
General Olson. Again, Congressman, within the bounds of
OPSEC, the commander will be able to make the recommendation
for the appropriate military operation to match the appropriate
means to the appropriate outcome.
Mr. Zeldin. Thank you, General. At this time I would like
to recognize Mr. Sherman of California.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. We are talking about the AUMF. Keep
in mind the President has total power to deploy our forces
outside combat areas for training. The President has under the
War Powers Act the right to engage in a series of ground
operations lasting 60 or 90 days per operation without any act
of Congress. And then finally, unless we repeal the 2001 AUMF,
the President has total power to do just about everything he
wants against not only al-Qaeda, but organizations once
affiliated with al-Qaeda which the President has concluded
includes ISIS.
Our focus is on ISIS because they have forced us to focus
on them through not only their territorial acquisitions. After
all, the Houthi have had some territorial acquisitions, but
because of their gruesome YouTubes. They are the only group in
the Middle East that has, in effect, asked us to bomb them. We
have obliged.
Another area where we--well, I think the Shi'ite alliance
is more dangerous than ISIS. They have killed far more
Americans including the Marines in the 1980s in Beirut. They
have conducted operations on every continent, including
Hezbollah, conducting operations in Buenos Aires and of course,
they are trying to develop a nuclear weapon.
So the total destruction of ISIS is probably not available
to us, but even if it was, we would have to ask who is going to
fill that ideological, that territorial and that cyber space.
And I am not sure that we would see an improvement in the
Middle East.
I would like to focus just a second on Yemen. I will ask
General Fantani, are we assisting the Saudis in the military
actions they are taking by air over Yemen?
General Fantini. Congressman, yes, we are. We are providing
enabling support to the GCC and Saudi Arabia in particular.
Mr. Sherman. And do we know whether former President Saleh
is in the country of Yemen? Do we know whether current
President Hadi is in the country of Yemen?
General Fantini. Sir, because of the classification of----
Mr. Sherman. Do we know in a way that you can disclose in
this room?
General Fantini. No, I would not feel comfortable answering
that.
Mr. Sherman. General Allen, we have all seen the World War
II movies. The French Government in exile didn't exactly send
checks and money to those living under Nazi occupation, but in
Iraq we have got the government in Baghdad paying people in
Mosul. The money then goes to ISIS to the extent ISIS wants the
money. They can grab as much of it as they want. But my concern
here is does the Iraqi Government generate from facilities that
it controls such as Mosul Dam electricity which then goes into
ISIS-occupied areas?
General Allen. I will take that question, sir. There has
been some work on the Mosul Dam just recently and I want to
make sure I get you the most----
Mr. Sherman. We saved the Mosul Dam. We, of course, got no
credit from it in the Iraqi press or from the Iraqi people. At
any time in the last few months has the Iraqi Government
allowed electricity to go----
General Allen. Yes.
Mr. Sherman. They have.
General Allen. That is correct.
Mr. Sherman. Does ISIL pay for it or do they just charge
the civilians for it?
General Allen. No, they don't pay for it, obviously.
Mr. Sherman. So while we are bombing ISIS, we are giving
them free electricity or rather Iraq is giving them free
electricity, sending them money gratuitously, it is an unusual
way to wage a war. One suggestion I made at the last hearing, I
would like to run it by you, is should there be a change in the
color and design of Iraqi currency so as to make invalid and
worthless the currency that ISIS was able to seize? Now this
will anger those who are corrupt, those who are evading taxes,
pretty much those in control of the government in Baghdad.
Is there serious discussion of making all that currency
that ISIS seized worthless by doing a currency replacement?
General Allen. Sir, you have posed these questions before.
Mr. Sherman. Yes.
General Allen. They are, I think, very important questions,
actually for how we would envision this counter offensive
ultimately. What I would ask is you permit us to either come to
you in a closed session or permit us to provide you a
classified response.
Mr. Sherman. I look forward to getting the classified
response, but this isn't sources and methods of intelligence.
This is what color will the currency be? But you are right, we
wouldn't want to disclose those plans in advance.
General Allen. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Sherman. I look forward to getting an answer to these
questions which as you note I have been posing for quite some
time and I yield back.
General Allen. Thank you.
Chairman Royce [presiding]. And General Allen, if we could
plan on doing that after we return here in the House, how much
time do you think it would be necessary for you to access that
information so that we could have a briefing with the members
of the committee?
General Allen. When you return from your--we could do that
pretty quickly, if you come back, sir.
Chairman Royce. That would be my request.
General Allen. It would be helpful, I think, as well, to
update you on how the Tikrit operation has unfolded.
Chairman Royce. We have appreciated the prior briefings.
General Allen. Yes, sir. Be glad to do that.
Chairman Royce. I would follow up on that. We go to Mr.
Darrell Issa.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. General Olson, Marines
are pretty straight forward and so I heard your answer to the
earlier question when asked does a two star have the ability to
perform X, Y, or Z combat mission, you answered the chain of
command has the ability to beg for the opportunity through the
chain of command. You answered, do I have the ability to ask?
Is that correct that you have the authority to ask was your
answer to do--you have the authority to do?
General Olson. The commander on the ground's mandate in
Iraq right now is to advise and assist and build partner
capacity.
Mr. Issa. Right, so he has the ability to ask.
General Olson. Yes, sir. He does.
Mr. Issa. Okay, I just want to make sure that we got that
sort of clear that they really don't have combat command
authority. What they have is the ability to go up the chain of
command and ask, something similar to the way Vietnam was
fought where you had to go practically back not just the
Pentagon, but to the coffee table in the White House sometimes
before you could get a go ahead.
Do you think that is the way the war should be conducted?
In other words, do we need to in short order provide our combat
leaders, whether they are in an assisting role or quite frankly
it is air strikes and targets of opportunity and so on, the
normal ability within a combat arena to make decisions based on
predetermined if then rather than almost always having to go up
the chain which can cause a target or an opportunity to
disappear?
General Olson. The way I would characterize the strategy is
that we are executing by, through, and with our Iraqi partners.
Mr. Issa. Okay, we are executing by, with, and our Iraqi
partners are Shia partners who are on the ground with Iranian
operatives, correct?
General Olson. We are not directly advising or assisting
any force that is not under the control of the Government of
Iraq.
Mr. Issa. Right, but if Shia zone individuals under the
control of Iraq with Iranian operatives next to them call for a
strike or assistance, ultimately you are responding as an Iraqi
response, correct? I don't want to get too far in the weeds,
but we will just take-you know what? I think I will give up on
that because I think the Associated Press has made it clear you
are doing it.
So let me get back to this committee's primary
jurisdiction, the use of military force. Currently, the
President is asking to retain one and get rid of one prior use
of force. Additionally, he wants world-wide ability to go after
ISIL, correct? ISIL, ISIS, Daesh, depending upon what name you
want to use. That is essentially what it is. Just tell me if I
am wrong?
General Fantini. That is accurate, Congressman, in terms of
geographic limitations.
Mr. Issa. So that begs the real question. In Yemen today,
the President is currently, and I think appropriately,
assisting Gulf allies led by Saudi Arabia in trying to
stabilize the situation which Iran-backed dissidents, not
dissidents, Iran-backed opportunists, the Houthis, are in fact,
trying to take that country by force, turn it into a Shia-
controlled nation similar to Iran. That is not in the use of
force request. It would not be covered. Is that correct?
General Fantini. Yes.
Mr. Issa. Okay, so as we speak we are, in fact, in a
situation which we have combat operations support that is
likely to need--it certainly doesn't fall under the normal
global war on terrorism, as a matter of fact, unless I missed
my prep for this. We just took Hezbollah and Iran effectively
off the terrorist list, didn't make them good guys, but took
them off the list. And we now are in a situation in which we
are using them in Iraq, maybe not as directly, we are using
people in Iraq, we are using people in Syria that are formerly
on a terrorist list. We are then fighting them in Yemen and the
President has not clarified under what authority he plans to do
that and for how long. Am I missing anything there?
General Fantini. Sir, I think first, we believe that
Hezbollah still remains on the list. Number two, you highlight
an excellent point. It is an extremely complicated environment.
And we are pursuing this counterterrorism strategy with the
precision strikes to halt ISIL and additionally as you
highlight to support our Gulf partners as best we can because
of the threats in the region.
Mr. Issa. My time is expiring, but based on the fact that
we have essentially but two distinctly different groups, ISIS,
Sunni extremists, and a myriad of Shia extremists in different
areas, mostly if not all backed by Iran. We are now as a
committee being asked to consider the authorization for use of
military force only against half, well, in fact, we would have
to rely on vague past authorizations for the future and we do
not have a plan for situations like Yemen.
So I will close with don't you believe that any
authorization use of military force has to envision the ability
and a plan to deal with the fact that in some places we have
two enemies, ISIS and Iranian-backed groups, and that we will
be effectively on the ground fighting them in places such as
Syria and that there currently is no new authorization for
that. Shouldn't there be an authorization for that or shouldn't
it be included in the authorization that we are being asked to
render to the President?
General Fantini. I believe the intent of the AUMF was to
afford the geographic flexibility, as well as the flexibility
to respond across the globe to these types of threats. The
issues that are associated with Yemen, I would estimate further
need to be adjudicated in terms of exactly what the Houthis
truly mean in terms of--or what they truly represent in terms
of their affiliation and to ISIS, Daesh, and the Shia
challenges within the region.
Mr. Issa. So General Clapper, former General Clapper's
list, worldwide threat assessment did not list Iran or
Hezbollah where they were near the top at the last time. I just
want to make sure the record is clear. We know they are still a
terrorist, a nation backing terrorists. We know Hezbollah is
still a terrorist organization. But they dropped from the list
and I always assumed that there are too many good people double
checking things for that to be a clerical error.
So Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for your indulgence. I
yield back.
Chairman Royce. Yes, and we are going to go to Mr. Grayson
for questions and then we are going to go to Mr. Jeff Duncan.
Mr. Grayson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. General Allen, how
many countries have we asked to provide air support in the
sense of offering to actually execute strikes against ISIS in
either Iraq or in Syria? How many questions have we asked for
that kind of support?
General Allen. Well, when we talk to--I just have to--we
would have to CENTCOM on that.
Chairman Royce. You know what I am going to suggest here is
a second round of questions, but first let us go to Mr. Jeff
Duncan and then we can come back to our second round. That is
probably the most efficient way to do it.
Mr. Grayson. Certainly, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
Mr. Duncan. I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to reset
the clock here, I hope.
First off, General Olson, I was appalled when I heard about
elements of the State Department asking the United States
Marines to leave their weapons behind to be destroyed in Yemen.
I told Secretary Kerry in this hearing a couple of weeks ago
never to disarm the United States Marines ever again. And I
apologize that that happened. And that is how I feel about it.
I want to make sure that the men under your command have the
weapons to defend their colleagues and defend this nation and
our liberty.
So thank you all for what you do.
I visited Iraq in November 2012 on CODEL McCaul. And I will
say that General Austin executed the withdrawal of U.S. forces
from Iraq in a very professional manner. And I am a huge fan.
His goal was to not lose another American life in our
withdrawal. But while we were there, we were concerned about
the premature withdrawal of U.S. forces. I say premature
because there was a lot of uncertainty about the readiness of
the Iraqi security forces, the readiness of their border
security. There was concern that Iran would fill the void after
U.S. troops left. ISIS wasn't on the radar screen then but al-
Qaeda was. And al-Qaeda was still in Iraq and I believe al-
Qaeda was just waiting for the U.S. forces to leave to fill
that void.
So I disagree with letting the enemy know a time line of
when American troops are going to withdraw from any theater.
There is a 3-year deadline in the AUMF which I disagree with. I
want to--I personally want to make sure that we give commanders
the ability, the commanders on the ground the ability to do
their job, the ability to, with the rules of engagement, to
defeat the enemy.
But we still have a lot of threats in the region and we
have seen what happened in Libya. We now see what is going on
with terrorism in Tunisia, training elsewhere in North Africa,
what is going on in Yemen, the Iranian-backed Shia militia
there just opposing a legitimate regime in Yemen. We still have
AQAP, Boko Haram, Hezbollah, Hamas, Abu Sayyaf and a lot of
other terrorist organizations around the globe. I am concerned
that they are all going to join forces. We are already seeing
that with Boko Haram.
Let me ask what are we doing with the Kurds? This question
may have already been asked, General Allen, but how do the
Kurdish militia play into our overall goal? Because they are
the only ones doing the heavy lifting in Iraq right now on the
ground in my opinion with air support and I appreciate that,
but how do they fit in to this dynamic?
General Allen. Well, the Kurds play a very important role.
They are a force for stability. They are an example of an area
where the social factors and the relationships between and
among the people within the Kurdish element of the Iraqi
population have been able to achieve a level of stability and
prosperity that are an example for the region. So the Kurds
play a very important social role, I think, both for Iraq, but
more broadly for the region.
At a military level, peshmerga and Kurdish forces have been
successful, as you correctly point out, through the use of
coalition air power in recovering all of its previous holdings
and then a bit more. In that respect, without getting into
specific operational plans, with regard to the counter
offensive, my very strong suspicions are that the peshmerga and
the platform of Kurdistan or the KRG will play an important
role ultimately as the counter offensive unfolds in the North
and in the Northwest. So we would anticipate that they would
play an important role in that.
Mr. Duncan. I think they should. I have been impressed. Did
any of the weapons from Libya make their way to Syria and then
in the hands of ISIS, specifically MANPADS or any of that?
General Allen. Let me take that question and come back to
you with a classified answer, please.
Mr. Duncan. Okay. Let me--my time is about up, so I will
let you answer that question or we can answer it in a
classified.
General Allen. I prefer to answer that in a classified
environment.
Mr. Duncan. Let me ask you about Yemen. How does Yemen play
in this scope of combatting ISIS? Is ISIS part of the driving
force in Yemen or is it a completely different group? Are they
interconnected? And I will expand on that because I mentioned
all the other terrorist organizations around the globe. How
does that fit in to what we are trying to do here to defeat
this enemy?
General Allen. We have three principal forces at work. We
have the Houthis which are a Shia element that is in some form
or another supported by Iran. We have the regime which is
failing and we have al-Qaeda which has been a problem for some
period of time, AQAP it is often called, al-Qaeda in the
Arabian Peninsula. Those three forces are in contention at this
particular time, obviously, to restore the territorial
integrity and the sovereignty of the state.
So to your point, at this juncture, al-Qaeda which is not
ISIS, in fact, they are at odds with each other. Al-Qaeda is
the principal Sunni element, extremist element that is on the
ground in Yemen. The Houthis are the Shia element on the ground
with regard to Yemen. And then we have the state which we still
support.
We are calling on all parties, obviously, to come to an
agreement that supports the central government and it is a
central government that the Saudi-led 10 nation coalition is
now supporting with military operations. So those are really
the three contending parties at work.
Mr. Duncan. Wouldn't you agree the Arab Spring combined a
lot of those different Shia Sunni elements?
General Allen. I think the Arab Spring was a catalytic
effect that created instability in Yemen in particular.
Mr. Duncan. Right.
General Allen. One of the realities, I know, with respect
to Yemen is that as the Houthis grew in prominence and
capability, it drove Sunni elements into the arms of al-Qaeda.
It is a very real issue. And al-Qaeda, of course, by virtue of
its Sunni dent is by no means an ally of the Sunni states in
that region that we support as well. So that is one of the
reasons that Yemen is so important to us in terms of dealing
with the dynamics there. And Yemen, of course, geostrategically
is located at the southern end of the Bab-el-Mandeb which is
the exit of the Red Sea which is a major shipping region.
So Yemen is a very important area for us geopolitically,
and of course, our long-term relationship with the central
government is important to us.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, General Allen.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Chairman. I would ask for a
classified hearing as well.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Duncan, we will do exactly that. As a
matter of fact, we will incorporate those together.
Mr. Duncan, do you think that makes sense to you?
General Allen. Let me just say, Chairman, this is about
ISIL. We will come ready to talk about ISIL, but tell us what
you want and we will make sure we have got the right people in
the room.
Chairman Royce. I will work with Mr. Duncan and others to
submit those questions in advance, General, in addition to what
he has already raised today.
General Allen. Great.
Chairman Royce. Before the committee.
General Allen. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. We will go now to Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, our
chairman emeritus.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. And
thank you, gentlemen, for your service to our country. Thank
you very much.
Brigadier General Fantini, you testified that the Syrian
opposition train and equip program is set to begin later next
month. In the past the administration has said that the purpose
of this Syrian opposition train and equip was to have the
forces fend off ISIL, not to go on the offensive.
What will the mission be and will it include fighting
Asad's forces and will the Syrian opposition fighters be Leahy
vetted?
General Fantini. Congresswoman, yes to Leahy vetting. The
vetting process is very rigorous and essentially continuous.
To your question of--I am sorry, can you repeat your first
question?
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Yes, will it be to fend off ISIL?
General Fantini. Oh, pardon me.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Or will it be not go on the offensive or
what exactly will the mission----
General Fantini. The mission is to train and equip to
defend their territory, provide security in their territory,
counter and engage and go offensive toward ISIL.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. It will be to go on the offensive against
ISIL?
General Fantini. Eventually, right. But that won't be until
we can develop enough combat power that they see the conditions
are right to move. But it is a counter-ISIL force, not a
counter regime.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you. And one of the most important
issues that this committee and the entire Congress can consider
is the AUMF, the authorization for use of military force. But
ISIL isn't the only threat that we and the people of the region
face. And if we are going to defeat ISIL, we need a
comprehensive approach that addresses ISIL, al-Nusra, other
terror groups that are fighting in Syria and Iraq, Assad and
Assad's allies which include Iran, the IRGC, and Hezbollah.
Does the AUMF give the authority to use force against
Assad's regime, al-Nusra, Hezbollah, any other fighter, actor
fighting in Syria and Iraq or is it just limited to ISIL and
anyone fighting with or alongside that terror group?
General Fantini. I think it does not give the authority to
use force against any regime. It is a complicated battle space
in the Syrian area. But we believe that the AUMF, the
combination of the 2001 and this new AUMF would afford and
provide the authority and the flexibility for our forces and
friendly forces to the U.S. Government to be successful.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And General Allen, it was reported in the
news earlier this week that Hezbollah is preparing a major
offensive against ISIL while the Lebanese Armed Forces, the
LAF, may not participate in Hezbollah's offensive against ISIL.
There is certainly going to be some level of coordination with
Hezbollah and as a result, the patron of the terror group which
is always Iran.
What can you tell us about Hezbollah's alleged planned
defensive? Are there any known ties between Hezbollah and the
Lebanese Armed Forces? Can you confirm that any intelligence we
share with the LAF will not be shared with Hezbollah? Can you
confirm that Iranian generals and tanks are being used in the
Iraqi campaign in Tikrit? And can you confirm if the United
States is on any level directly or indirectly coordinating our
efforts against ISIL with Iran?
General Allen. Your last question I can confirm that we are
not coordinating with Iran. And there is no intention to. To
the other specifics of your question, you deserve a specific
answer. Let me take that, please, and come back to you with the
details that you have asked.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. I look forward to that because we want to
work with our allies, but if those allies are sharing
information or they are in cahoots with terror organizations,
we end up unknowingly doing more harm than good in getting
valuable information and intelligence to our enemies. So I know
that you will be handling that in a careful manner.
General Allen. Yes, ma'am. That is a very important
question. Thank you.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much and thank you for
your service again, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. We go to Ted Yoho of Florida.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I think that is a
great idea having that classified briefing and I look forward
to being there.
Generals, General, General, and General, I appreciate you
guys being here in the service to our great country. Without
the service of you and the leadership of you guys and the
military, our service men and women, we would not appreciate
the liberties and freedoms we experience every day. And we
don't ever want to forget that. So thank you.
You being the experts and I am glad to see the step up in
the sorties because when this first started, there was only
like single digits in the beginning a month, going on to
degrade ISIS in the beginning. And I am glad to see you have
stepped that up. And you being the experts, the recommendation
as far as a tactic that we should pursue to reduce and zero out
ISIS to where it is no longer a threat, and I look at Nazism
where you had nation states and nation leaders, this is more of
an ideology without a nation state. What is your
recommendation? Can we pursue it with what we are doing and I
am glad to see the Coalition that is building up and we had a
classified briefing with you and you were telling me how you
were doing some of the----
Chairman Royce. Remember, it was a classified briefing.
Mr. Yoho. Right, and we shouldn't talk about those things.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Yoho. So I won't. That is why I look forward to the
next one. Can it be done with what we are doing without U.S.
assistance in your opinions?
General Allen. Well, U.S. assistance is being applied, sir.
Mr. Yoho. How much do we need of U.S. assistance? I know we
need to have some in there. With that coalition, if we are
directing it and kind of strategizing or as President Bush
would say the strategery, how much can we rely on the coalition
partners?
General Allen. That is a really important question. The
coalition partners in ways that I think we should all be very
proud of, have stepped up to the plate in many areas that are
obvious. Some of their airplanes are flying and dropping
ordnance every day. Some of their trainers are training, some
of the special operators are risking their lives just by being
in the battle space. Those are obvious ways in which the
coalition has stepped up. There are other ways that are less
obvious, but really important as well in combining their
capabilities with us to go after Daesh's finances, to squeeze
its ability to have operational flexibility.
Mr. Yoho. And we have cooperation with all these other
countries doing that same thing, correct?
General Allen. We do and it is actually quite impressive.
It is foreign fighters. It is counter finance. It is counter
messaging. It is building stabilization capabilities. It is
quite impressive.
Mr. Yoho. I guess the question I have is how do you break
that ideology? Why do people want to get into that? How do you
break that? And I know we can do it militarily and you guys,
nobody is better than what you guys do than you. But on the
diplomacy side, thinking about that because what I see and this
goes back to reading stories to my kids, The Cat in the Hat
with the green spot that you couldn't get rid of. You put it
here, you could try to get rid of it. It pops up over here. And
that is what I see ISIS doing with all the different countries
it is going into because of that ideology that people are
bringing into. From a diplomatic standpoint, is there anything
that you would recommend we do differently?
General Allen. You said countries that ISIS is going into.
I think it is a very interesting point. What we are discovering
is that it is less about countries that ISIS is going into than
it is the movements locally are seeing an opportunity to
leverage a relationship with ISIS to accomplish their own
objectives.
Mr. Yoho. And that is what I mean.
General Allen. And that is a really important point.
Because it gets to the larger issue here. This coalition has
come together to deal with Daesh as a symptom of a bigger
problem. But the coalition has also evidenced real interest in
getting after the broader underlying factors that give rise to
this. So it is about political capacity. It is about democratic
process. It is about human rights. It is about the rule of law.
It is about economic opportunity. It is about having a hope of
being successful in your lives. And in many of these countries,
many of these countries where we find organizations like Ansar
Bait al-Maqdis in the Sinai Peninsula or Boko Haram or Abu
Sayyaf in the jungles of the Philippines it is because they
have no hope. People have no hope and they are easily
susceptible to radicalization and ultimately recruitment for
the purposes of extremism in these kinds of groups.
So the coalition is really seeking to understand what these
underlying factors are so that as individual states and as a
coalition, we can begin to move toward resolving some of those
underlying factors that have given rise to organizations like
Daesh or Boko Haram.
Mr. Yoho. I have got one more question that I will submit
and I am out of time. And I thank you for your service and your
direction. You are our best hope. Thank you.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen [presiding]. Thank you, Dr. Yoho. Mr.
DeSantis of Florida.
Mr. DeSantis. Good morning. General Allen, how many U.S.
service members were killed when we were in Iraq by Iranian-
backed forces and Shi'ite militia?
General Allen. I will have to get that number for you. It
is not insignificant.
Mr. DeSantis. At least hundreds at a minimum.
General Allen. Yes.
Mr. DeSantis. And I have seen estimates by one of your
colleagues that said maybe up to 1500.
General Allen. We will get the number for you.
Mr. DeSantis. And Qasem Soleimani, the Quds Force
commander, he was involved in directing a lot of those
operations during that time period. Is that correct?
General Allen. That is correct.
Mr. DeSantis. So we know that Qasem Soleimani is now
directing some of these Shi'ite militia who are fighting ISIS.
I know it has been discussed about our air strikes and how that
may be working with the Shi'ite militias even though we are not
doing it explicitly.
My question is if we were conducting air operations would
somebody like Qasem Suleimani be a target?
General Allen. We don't at this time intend to target it.
Mr. DeSantis. And why is that?
General Allen. We are in this to assist the Iraqi
Government in dealing with Daesh. That is the reason that we
are there, not to go to war with Iran. I think it is very
important for us to keep that in mind. I will just leave it
there.
Mr. DeSantis. When the Shia forces are clearing areas, how
are they interacting with the Sunni population who is left
behind? Are they oppressing them or are they trying to have a
unified country?
General Allen. That is a very important question. We have
seen reports of massacres and atrocities. Those reports are
under investigation. They have been condemned by us. They have
been condemned by the Iraqi Government. They have been
condemned by Grand Ayatollah Sistani. But I was just in Iraq
last week and as Tikrit was kicking off and we did know that
there were Shia elements that were part of the clearing force,
I met with the Sunni leaders from Salah ad Din, the province in
which this is undergoing, under way, and specifically asked the
question, what do we know about the potential repetition of
these kinds of atrocities, or these kinds of acts?
At the time, they were satisfied that this was not
happening. But they also recognized that in the end when you
transition from a clearing operation to a holding operation so
that the clearing force can keep on going, the holding force
has to look like the population or derive from the organic of
the population that ultimately is going to be held. To that
extent, the Minister of Interior, Minister Ghabban, has asked
for assistance in helping to recover the Sunni police of the
three provinces, Salah ad Din, Ninawa, and Al-Anbar, ultimately
to follow behind the clearing forces to become the hold force
on top of the Sunni population so that we don't end up with
that dynamic of a Shia irregular clearing force sitting on top
of and holding a Sunni population. The Iraqis are very
conscious of that.
Mr. DeSantis. In fact, a Sunni Arab who sees the
alternative to ISIS to be oppressed by the Shia, they are going
to be more likely to want to side with Sunni backed terrorist
groups if they don't think there is a future for them apart
from being oppressed by Shi'ites. Do you agree with that?
General Allen. In the abstract, I would, but I think that
there have been measures that this government has taken to Iraq
that fundamentally give the Sunnis and the Shia an opportunity
to coexist inside the government, inside Iraq, under the
leadership of Prime Minister Abadi.
That is why a Shia Minister of Interior, by the way, is
very interested in reconstituting the Sunni police of the Sunni
provinces. I think that is a very positive thing.
Mr. DeSantis. I do, too. Do you believe that Iran has
provided arms to the Government of Iraq or any of its
affiliates?
General Allen. I will take the question. I don't--we will
take the question. I want to give you the answer you deserve on
that.
Mr. DeSantis. And if they are, we do have authorities on
the books, both at the U.N. and under U.S. law that I think
would be implicated. So if you can let us know what the status
of that is and then if we do think that Iran has been doing
this, then what would the administration's response be, I would
definitely like to know that.
General Allen. Thank you for the question. We will take it.
Mr. DeSantis. Thank you, General. I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. DeSantis. And we
will recognize Mr. Smith for 3 minutes. We are sorry about
that, but our witnesses have until 11 a.m.
Mr. Smith. Thank you for the second round, Madam Chair.
General Allen, as you know, as all of you know, all of us
now, President Obama touted Yemen as a significant success
story, yet today it is imploding, rapidly imploding so much so
that there has been an intelligence loss of U.S. information,
according to several news outlets, including the LA Times. And
I was wondering if you could tell us how serious that breach
might be? Is it serious? The intelligence services of Yemen
were just overrun and apparently the files were not destroyed
fast enough. That could have an impact, certainly on our fight
against ISIS, but also on all issues relevant to the war on
terror.
And also while I deeply appreciate and I am encouraged by
your statement by the allure of the so-called caliphate has
been shattered, it is hard to make predictions. I would hope
that the word diminished might be used because every time we
think we are making progress, some other moving part comes to
bear. So I just offer that unsolicited as I hope it is
shattered, but I am very concerned that it has not been.
You also testified about disrupting the flow of foreign
fighters as an urgent concern. I asked you about that earlier,
but I wonder if you might elaborate very briefly on what new
best practices are being contemplated so these killers, these
terrorists, who become hardened in this battle don't return to
the United States and of course, to Europe, to kill Americans
and to kill Europeans?
General Allen. To your first point on the intelligence,
potential intelligence lost, we will take the question.
Obviously, the answer would be classified. So we will want to
come back to you with that. It is a very good question.
With regard to foreign fighters, the commitment by the
coalition, I think, has been very impressive in that regard. We
are not where we want to be because that momentum was developed
before we began to build our own momentum against it. But it
operates at several different levels. It is countries adopting
their own legislative approaches, as I just described. The
Italians will be prosecuting these traffickers of foreign
fighters under legislation that is derived directly from Daesh
and directly from our coalition activities. So we are beginning
to see countries across the region, we are beginning see the
activities of the EU helping to create a unity of purpose and
vision on this issue. We have seen and will continue to see
best practices being applied on border control measures, the
sharing of information and intelligence, the sharing of
personnel name, passenger name records. And that will improve
over time.
We all, of course, are nations, especially the Western
European states and along the United States and Canada, are
states where privacy is an extraordinarily important aspect of
who we are as a nation and our population.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, General Allen. I know that
since your time is limited, if you could finish that thought.
General Allen. Well, we will continue the best practices
associated with working with indigenous populations and at risk
populations to reduce the attractiveness of Daesh and similar
extremist organizations, legislative approaches, individually,
and across the entire effort, the coalition, and also to
strengthen the work of the Counter Foreign Fighter Working
Group which is chaired by The Netherlands and Turkey. And we
will be meeting next week in Ankara for the first time.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr.
Smith.
Mr. Engel.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair. I want to
build on a question that I asked before about the AUMF. Finding
the right AUMF language is obviously difficult. Finding one
that can pass Congress is difficult. Republicans and Democrats
have each attacked what the White House sent up for different
reasons, for polar reasons.
How important is it for Congress to pass a new AUMF and
what would be the consequences if we did not do so? And how
would our troops and our coalition partners view such a
development if we did not do so?
General Allen. A very important question, Mr. Engel. There
are, as you know, three major areas of discussion within the
AUMF and we obviously welcome the robust conversation
associated with those which is the size of the force that could
be committed, the nature of the force, the duration that that
force might be committed, and where that force might be
committed. So those are all issues that deserve a very thorough
conversation and coordination.
But there is a fourth area that is really important about
the AUMF and that is that whatever it looks like at the end,
wherever the administration and the Congress have ultimately
agreed that this should--whatever the measure should be
fulfilled, a strong bipartisan support of the AUMF is an
extraordinarily important outcome of this because it reinforces
the reality and the appearance of American strategic leadership
and it also sends a very clear message to Daesh that its days
are numbered. That is why the AUMF is so important. We will
deal with the issues about the size and the duration and the
location and that is an appropriate platform for us to have the
kind of conversation with the Congress that the American people
deserve.
But an approved, with a strong bipartisan vote of an
improved AUMF preserves and strengthens America's strategic
leadership and also puts Daesh on notice that its end is in
sight.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, General. I couldn't agree with you
more. I want one final question about Syria and about Assad. In
an interview with ``Foreign Affairs,'' Syria President Assad
asserted that any fighter not working with the Syrian military
should and I am going to quote him, ``be fought like any other
illegal militia fighting against the Syrian Army.''
So when the U.S. trained Syrian opposition fight is
reintroduced back into the battlefield, will Assad target these
fighters and obviously this isn't a hypothetical, it is a real
situation which Members of Congress need to have information
on. Will the U.S. or other members of the coalition target
Assad?
General Allen. I would like to present that comment or the
answer to that when we have the closed session if we may. It is
very much on our minds, obviously.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, General. Thank you, Mr. Engel.
We now to Mr. Rohrabacher who is recognized for 2 minutes and
then 2 minutes for Mr. Sherman and then our witnesses will have
to depart.
Mr. Rohrabacher is recognized.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I have got 2 minutes, let me just note
that I did some work in Vietnam in 1967. I was not in the
military, but my father was a retired lieutenant colonel in the
Marines. And when I got back I was dismayed and I remember
talking to him about what a confusing mess that was in Vietnam
and which to parrot your words we used earlier to describe the
challenge that you face.
And my father told me, he said, ``Well, if you think that
is a confusing mess, you should have seen what it was like when
I landed the first DC-3 into the Pusan perimeter.'' So we have
faced these confusing messes before. It was important for us,
as my father described, had we not been successful in Korea,
Japan would have been neutralized. It would have changed the
whole nature of the Cold War and the Soviets may have won.
I think what we are doing right now to confront Daesh will
either basically eliminate our deal with a challenge that is of
that magnitude because if we don't and if President al-Sisi
does not win in Egypt, does not overwhelm those people who are
trying to destroy him and replace him with a caliphate
government and if you folks don't succeed, we may have a world
in which a huge chunk is controlled by radical Islamists who
want to destroy Western civilization. So we wish you success. I
believe that the strategy of using insurgencies as we did in
Afghanistan with the Northern Alliance works. Your success in
Anbar Province reaffirms that.
I would hope that our commitment to assist the Iraqi
Government in this challenge does not get in the way of
successfully implementing that strategy that we know that will
work. So thank you all very much.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Rohrabacher. Mr. Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. I know that we will get into it in
closed session, but I will reiterate that I am confused that on
the one hand we tout the failure of ISIS to provide governance,
their inability to provide for the people under their control
and then at the same time the Iraqi Government helps them
provide governance with free electricity, sending salaries,
etcetera.
What I want to deal with in open session is whether the
AUMF should include Assad or whether it should be limited to
ISIS? Now in the absence of ISIS and before the beheadings,
this country wanted to have as little military involvement in
the Middle East as possible. Now Americans see this as a
problem that we have to confront, but we have to confront it
carefully.
On the one hand, we have to go after ISIS for what they
have done. On the other hand, there is this war between
Shi'ites and Sunnis and it is not our role to be on one side of
that or the other. The most evil element of the Shi'ite
alliance is Assad. He hasn't beheaded anybody on YouTube, but
he has killed close to 200,000 innocent people.
Should, and General, I realize there will be others at the
State Department that will give us some input on this, but
should the AUMF authorize the President, should he wish to, to
go after not only ISIS, but also to go after Assad, perhaps not
with the goal of destroying either, but at least confining
mowing the grass of both of these evil elements?
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much. We have 10 seconds.
General Allen. The answer is that this--at last if the
State Department permits me to speak about this, the AUMF was
submitted as a counter Daesh measure. It does not envisage
provisions to deal with Bashar al-Assad, but that is an
important and a separate conversation to be had, but in the
context of the provided and draft legislation, that is about
Daesh.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much.
Mr. Issa. Madam Chair, I would ask unanimous to then have
just 1 minute to plant a question so it could be dealt with
later?
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Yes, Mr. Issa asked for unanimous consent
to put something on the record and make a statement.
Mr. Issa. Very quickly, Generals, when we go into
classified session in 2 or so weeks, the President has called
for regime change in Syria. He also has refused to participate
in a no-fly or a buffer zone even for humanitarian relief in
Northern Syria. As a result, Turkey is very well known not
cooperating with us in providing the normal air cover that
would shorten our distances for attacks both in Syria and in
Iraq.
So during the classified session, I would ask that you be
prepared to provide us with the information on what is going,
what the impediments were, what the logistical changes would be
if we were to come to an agreement with the Turks to provide
that no-fly zone and a buffer zone and the humanitarian relief
in Syria rather than the millions that are in Lebanon, Jordan,
Turkey, and even a few scattered around Europe. So if I could
ask and get an agreement that you would include that in the
material brought to the classified briefing, that would be
helpful to me.
General Allen. I would be glad to.
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Issa, and we
certainly appreciate the time of our witnesses today. These are
critical issues. We look forward to following up when we
return, particularly in the area of the Tikrit mission and
Iran's role. And with that, Chairman Royce's committee is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:05 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
