- RETREAT OR REVIVAL: A STATUS REPORT ON DEMOCRACY IN ASIA

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

RETREAT OR REVIVAL: A STATUS REPORT ON DEMOCRACY IN ASIA

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 11, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-71

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
94-942PDF                         WASHINGTON : 2015
_________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific

MATT SALMON, Arizona Chairman
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         BRAD SHERMAN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   AMI BERA, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

The Honorable Tom Malinowski, Assistant Secretary, Bureau of
Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, U.S. Department of State...     3
The Honorable Scot Marciel, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary,
Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, U.S. Department of
State..........................................................     5
The Honorable Jonathan Stivers, Assistant Administrator, Bureau
for Asia, U.S. Agency for International Development............     6
Ms. Kelley Currie, senior fellow, Project 2049 Institute.........    35
Mr. Murray Hiebert, deputy director and senior fellow, Sumitro
Chair for Southeast Asia Studies, Center for Strategic and
International Studies..........................................    44
Mr. Peter M. Manikas, senior associate and regional director for
Asia programs, The National Democratic Institute...............    52
Sophie Richardson, Ph.D., China director, Human Rights Watch.....    59

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

The Honorable Tom Malinowski, the Honorable Scot Marciel, and the
Honorable Jonathan Stivers: Prepared joint statement...........     9
Ms. Kelley Currie: Prepared statement............................    38
Mr. Murray Hiebert: Prepared statement...........................    46
Mr. Peter M. Manikas: Prepared statement.........................    54
Sophie Richardson, Ph.D.: Prepared statement.....................    60

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    70
Hearing minutes..................................................    71
Questions submitted for the record to Panel I witnesses by the
Honorable Matt Salmon, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona, and chairman, Subcommittee on Asia and the
Pacific........................................................    72
Written responses from the Honorable Jonathan Stivers..........    74
Questions submitted for the record to Panel II witnesses by the
Honorable Matt Salmon..........................................    82
Written responses from Mr. Murray Hiebert......................    85
Written responses from Mr. Peter M. Manikas....................    89
The Honorable Alan S. Lowenthal, a Representative in Congress
from the State of California: Prepared statement...............    92
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in Congress
from the Commonwealth of Virginia: Prepared statement..........    96

RETREAT OR REVIVAL: A STATUS REPORT ON DEMOCRACY IN ASIA

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 11, 2015

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 3:10 p.m., in
room 2171, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Matt Salmon
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Salmon. The subcommittee will come to order. Given the
timing of votes this afternoon, we are expected to go back in
for votes again pretty soon, I am going to keep my remarks very
short and submit my entire statement for the record.
Supporting human rights and democracy has long been a
central component of U.S. foreign policy. Promotion of
democratic values facilitates security, stability, and economic
prosperity throughout Asia and the world. This year the Asia-
Pacific region is entering a critical period for democracy with
a number of elections, government transitions, and internal
developments planned in numerous countries.
As the United States continually refines its efforts to
ensure peaceful, transparent transitions of power and adherence
to international law and norms, we must also ensure that our
efforts are practical and leave meaningful results among Asian
democracies, that our efforts leave them very robust. Our
hearing will provide oversight on our Government's activities
to support democracy abroad and ensure that while our focus is
on military and economic rebalance, that we are not going to
overlook the importance of democracy and human rights.
Today we are going to pay special attention to Hong Kong,
Burma, Thailand, and Cambodia, and the rest of my remarks I am
just going to submit for the record. We have got such a short
amount of time, I really want to hear from the witnesses.
Mr. Sherman, I am going to yield to you.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. Thank you for holding these
hearings.
For the most part, our Government programs aren't designed
to focus on democracy in China, but the thing that I think will
be even more important to bringing democracy to China is if we
are able to expose to the Chinese people the incredible levels
of corruption in their own regime. We have the capacity to
ferret out proof of their top government officials and mid-
level government officials with enormous assets both in and out
of China. And I don't think there is much that would do more to
bring democracy to China than exposing this level of
corruption.
We are in a stronger position to push for democracy in
other countries. In Burma, we face two issues: One, getting the
military or military-flavored regime to agree to democracy;
and, second, trying to get both the democracy advocates that we
have sheltered and supported for so long, and the military
regime to understand the importance of minority rights. I am
especially disappointed that Aung Suu Kyi and others who we
have supported so fervently have not spoken out and acted to
protect the rights and the physical existence of the Rohingya.
In Thailand, we need to support democracy even if there
are, I don't know, more yellow shirts than red shirts or more
red shirts than yellow shirts and even if the more numerous
shirts may represent a policy that we regard as a little too
redistributionist or adopting economic policies inconsistent
with majority economic thought here in the United States.
I look forward to learning what we can do to bring both
development and democracy to Cambodia. And as to Hong Kong, the
Chinese Government is obviously doing less than promised, and
we need to expose and pressure that. At the same time, the
people of Hong Kong do enjoy something closer to democracy than
the rest of the PRC. And I think that the example of Hong Kong
is one that the rest of China may choose to emulate.
I, like the chairman, want to keep my opening remarks
short, and this is the first time I have concluded them in only
3 minutes.
I yield back.
Mr. Salmon. Some world records. Maybe with that miracle,
maybe the Republicans might actually win a baseball game
tonight, I doubt it, but--just kidding. We have a wonderful
panel today. I would like to introduce Tom Malinowski, the
Assistant Secretary of the State Department's Bureau of
Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor.
And, Tom, we really appreciate the opportunity while we
were over in Asia to meet with you and get some of your
wonderful thoughts. It really helped our trip very much as we
interfaced with some of the leaders over there to get your
insights, and I just have full support for everything you are
trying to accomplish.
Scot Marciel is the Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of
the Bureau of East Asia and Pacific Affairs at the Department
of State.
And a frequent flier here at the committee, Jonathan
Stivers, USAID's Assistant Administrator of the Asia Bureau.
And we are so grateful for the time this decorated panel
has made for us today.
And, without objection, the witness' full prepared
statement will be made part of the record. Members will have 5
calendar days to submit statements, questions, and extraneous
materials for the record.
Mr. Malinowski, I will start with you.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE TOM MALINOWSKI, ASSISTANT SECRETARY,
BUREAU OF DEMOCRACY, HUMAN RIGHTS, AND LABOR, U.S. DEPARTMENT
OF STATE

Mr. Malinowski. Thank you so much Chairman Salmon. Very
good to see you again.
And, Mr. Sherman, who is also a member of the DRL human
rights family, thank you so much for inviting us.
Let me start with some general impressions. Promoting human
rights and democracy in Asia is something we do because it is
the right thing to do. It also advances our strategic
interests. It helps to build more stable societies. It advances
our economic goals in a number of ways.
Perhaps most important from my point of view it aligns the
United States with the aspirations of everyday people across
this region with--it aligns us with the values that they
admire. We sometimes get into arguments with governments on
these issues, but we are fundamentally in agreement with the
people of China, with the people of Vietnam, with the people of
Burma about the basic human aspiration to be treated with
dignity and fairness and with full respect for rights. And that
agreement is a strategic advantage for the United States we
need to preserve.
By the same token, the flip side of that is that our
strategic presence in Asia, our alliances, our trade
agreements, our ability to provide security and reassurance
also enables us to promote democracy and human rights more
effectively. To advance our values we need to be the great
power that is shaping the agenda, and that our allies look to
as their most reliable partner because there are alternative
visions out there. There are alternative agenda setters out
there. So, to be effective, we have to be present and
principled at the same time.
With that in mind, you have asked us to address a few
specific situations. I am going to say a few words about Burma.
I am going to throw in a little bit about Vietnam where you and
I met recently, and my colleague, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Marciel, will cover some of the other countries that you asked
us to focus on.
So, first, Burma, which is, it is first of all a country
that has come a long way from the absolute military
dictatorship that it was just a few years ago but is not yet
where we need it and want it to be. It is undergoing an
evolution, not a revolution. Everything is being negotiated. It
is still operating under the old military constitution. There
is still armed conflict, religious tension, the tragic
situation of the Rohingya minority.
Our policy has been to support a democratic transition but
with realism about how far Burma has to go and caution about
not moving too fast ourselves. So we have eased sanctions. We
haven't fully lifted them. We have encouraged U.S. investment
but not with military industries. We have welcomed the progress
we have seen, but we have also continued to speak out about the
problems.
This is a very important year. There will be elections in
Burma later this year, the first nationwide competitive
elections there in a very long time. Those elections will have
inherent flaws because of the system in place. They do, if they
reflect credibly the will of Burmese people, they do offer a
chance to take a step forward.
If the democratic forces do well, for example, they will
form the next government. They will select the next President.
They will have the leverage to press for the next stage of
reform. So we are going to support the elections as best as we
can. But we will be looking not just at the credibility of that
process but at the credibility of the democratic transition
that we hope will follow, including, we hope, changes to the
constitution that empower civilians over the military and that
give Burmese people the right to choose the President they
want.
And we are also going to continue to press to right the
wrongs being committed against the Rohingya minority, which
President Obama, when he was in Rangoon recently, called
Burma's most urgent matter.
Now, let me say also just a few words about Vietnam, and I
want to talk about this in the context of the choice that
Members are going to have to make very shortly on TPA and
eventually on TPP because that choice is going to have a huge
impact on what we are going to do going forward.
And I recognize that it is not an easy choice for many
Members, especially those who are concerned about human rights
and labor rights in Vietnam.
We see exactly what you see in that country. It is still a
one-party state. It is still a country in which people are
persecuted for political opinions. And it is, again, a country
that is not where we yet want it or need it to be.
But going back to the point I made at the outset, we have
to be present, and we have to be principled. I think the TPP
meets both of those tests. First of all, it is an example of
strategic presence of the United States trying to play the
leading role in shaping the norms and institutions of Asia for
a generation to come. If we cede that role to others, that is
not going to be good for the cause of human rights and
democracy.
Second of all, it is principled because built into TPP are
a set of requirements and expectations unlike in past trade
agreements. Those requirements and expectations feed into a
debate that is underway in Vietnam already between those who
want to open up the society and those who want to keep it
closed. And those who want to keep it to make it more open are
using the prospect of membership in TPP as their number one
argument for moving forward. And under the spotlight of that
debate, there has been progress, more releases, vastly fewer
convictions for political offenses, ratification of human
rights treaties and the beginning of comprehensive legal
reform. And most important, a requirement built into the treaty
that Vietnam allow for the very first time freedom of
association, the creation of independent trade unions, breaking
the Communist Party's monopoly on trade union organizing, which
would be a huge deal if we can get it. And those changes will
have to be made in Vietnamese law before they can enjoy the
benefits of TPP.
So is this enough? No, it is not, but it will be
significant. It will be necessary in terms of what we are
trying to achieve. And, without the prospect of TPP, it would
not be happening. And TPA, which is what you all are being
asked to vote for in coming days, is what keeps that prospect
open and thus gives us the leverage to keep pressing for more.
I have focused on this as much as any other human rights
issue in the world. And I can tell you that this is the entree.
This is the reason why the Vietnamese Government is willing to
listen to us on these issues. So I ask you to consider this,
not as a leap of faith, but as an exercise in leverage in
trying to achieve the kind of progress that we have been hoping
for in Vietnam for a long time, but only now I think have a
chance to achieve.
With that, I will turn the rest over to my colleague, Mr.
Marciel.
Mr. Salmon. Mr. Marciel.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE SCOT MARCIEL, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY
ASSISTANT SECRETARY, BUREAU OF EAST ASIAN AND PACIFIC AFFAIRS,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Mr. Marciel. Thank you, Chairman Salmon, Ranking Member
Sherman, and members of the committee. It is a privilege to
testify before you today. Promoting democracy and human rights
is not something we do on the margins. It is an integral part
of our daily diplomacy in Asia, particularly, of course, in
countries that either are not democracies, or where democracy
is fragile. My generation joining the Foreign Service and
heading to Asia three decades ago, went to a region where
democracy were few and, in the case of Southeast Asia, were
nonexistent. Now, a majority of Southeast Asians live in
democracies in places like the Philippines, Indonesia and
Timor-Leste. South Korea, Taiwan, and Mongolia have
democratized as well, and others have made progress along the
democratic path.
In all of these places, the people of those nations deserve
the credit. They are the ones who made democracy happen. But
the United States strongly supported all of these democratic
transitions, and we are not stopping. I will talk about what we
are doing in three very different places, Cambodia, Thailand,
and Hong Kong.
But, first, if I could, I would add a few words to
Assistant Secretary Malinowski's review of Burma. And I just
want to stress there that our engagement in Burma and with
Burma is all about their efforts to achieve a successful
democratic transition. That has been and remains the focus of
our work at all levels.
On Cambodia, after the 2013 parliamentary election, we, and
particularly our Embassy in Phnom Penh, were instrumental in
helping bring the government and opposition together in direct
dialogue to resolve a year-long standoff. There is still much
work to do, but now the two sides sit in Parliament together.
And we are supporting the Cambodian people as they work to
build on these gains. We are supporting civil society. We are
connecting directly with Cambodia's next generation of leaders.
And we stand with the Cambodians who are pushing for a voice as
new laws are drafted. This sends a reminder that democracy
isn't only about free elections. It is also about citizens'
ability to hold their governments accountable.
Next, Thailand, a long-time friend and treaty ally. We have
stood for democracy there through a decade of political
turmoil, and our message to the government since the coup just
over a year ago has been clear. We are eager to see our
bilateral relationship restored to its fullest potential, but
this can happen only when democracy is restored.
Until then, we will hold back certain assistance that has
been suspended since the coup. But we will continue, however,
to operate closely with the Thai on regional and global issues,
that serve U.S. interests such as health, law enforcement,
trafficking, climate change, regional security. In our
interactions with the Thai, we continually stress that it is
important for Thailand to have an inclusive political process
and to fully restore civil liberties. This is essential to the
open debate the country needs to have about its political
future.
My third example is Hong Kong, where we have consistently
voiced our core belief that an open society that respects the
rights of its citizens and fundamental freedoms is essential to
Hong Kong's continued stability and prosperity. We expect the
legislative council to vote this month on an electoral reform
package. While Hong Kong has never selected a chief executive
through universal suffrage, we continue to voice our
longstanding position that the legitimacy of the chief
executive and of Hong Kong's overall governance can be enhanced
through a competitive election that features a meaningful
choice of candidates who represent the will of the voters.
Our position is a matter of principle, so we don't take a
position on any particular draft law. We leave that question to
Hong Kong's legislators in consultation with the people of Hong
Kong. Irrespective of the outcome of any single legislative
vote, we will keep supporting Hong Kong's continued high degree
of autonomy, under ``one country, two systems'' and the basic
law.
We admire all that so many people in Asia have done to
promote democracy and good governance. Their work is never
complete, but in our everyday diplomacy, we will continue to do
all we can as a friend and as a reliable partner to support
efforts to build and strengthen democracy.
Finally, let me emphasize that trade and investment,
especially TPP, are important, are key to supporting a U.S.
economy and to our efforts to promote democracy in the region.
Thank you and I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you. Mr. Stivers.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE JONATHAN STIVERS, ASSISTANT
ADMINISTRATOR, BUREAU FOR ASIA, U.S. AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT

Mr. Stivers. Chairman Salmon, Ranking Member Sherman,
distinguished members of the subcommittee, and Mr. Crowley,
thank you for the opportunity to testify today on the role of
USAID in strengthening democracy, human rights, and governance
in Asia. The vital importance of these areas has always been
close to my heart and the forefront of my nearly two decades of
work as a staffer in the House of Representatives.
The House Foreign Affairs Committee has long been at the
forefront on democracy and human rights issues, and some of the
strongest voices on human rights in U.S. history have done
their best work on this panel.
Mr. Chairman, this hearing is in furtherance of that
tradition, so thank you for your leadership in holding this
hearing.
Dr. Martin Luther King once said that ``The arc of the
moral universe is long, but it bends toward justice.'' This is
certainly true in Southeast Asia which has made significant
progress over the last 30 years. There is a unique situation in
each country of the region to either preserve, consolidate, or
build democratic institutions.
The United States stands as a partner in helping the people
in Asia live in freedom and prosperity, including in countries
with significant democratic challenges such as Burma and
Cambodia.
In the fight to alleviate extreme poverty, it is essential
to effectively address the underlying structural problems with
governance that hold back many developing countries from
realizing their potential. The solutions to challenges will
ultimately come from the people of the region themselves, and
our best chance in promoting democratic change is to empower
the reformers in these countries by helping them build
resilient institutions that are transparent and accountable to
the people.
The promotion of democracy, human rights, and good
governance is front and center in our development assistance to
the region. And efforts not necessarily branded as democracy
promotion, help advance that goal as we build systems and
capacity to address overwhelming development challenges,
including support for health and food-security sectors.
Our development assistance engages directly with the people
and helps give them a voice in determining their own
livelihoods and future. For the purposes of this hearing, I
will focus my remarks on the countries of Burma and Cambodia.
In Burma, this is a pivotal year. Closely calibrated with
our diplomatic efforts, our assistance is intended to
strengthen institutions of democracy. USAID is helping to
prepare for the November elections by building the capacity of
the election commission; training domestic election observers;
supporting voter registration and education; and strengthening
the capacity of political parties.
USAID continues to provide humanitarian assistance to
vulnerable communities, including significant assistance for
the Rohingya population, refugees, and displaced people along
the Thailand-Burma border and other conflict areas of Burma.
Over the past 2 years the U.S. Government has provided more
than $109 million in humanitarian assistance to vulnerable
people in Burma and the region. And we continue to provide
lifesaving humanitarian assistance to internally displaced
persons, refugees, asylum seekers in the areas of health,
nutrition, water, sanitization, and hygiene.
An emphasis on civil society is prevalent through all of
our work, from media freedoms to land policy to health and
agriculture. And we are supporting organizations that are
holding the government accountable to continued reform;
advocating for local needs and priorities; and resisting
discrimination and violence.
To date, USAID has supported over 300 vocal civil society
organizations who are empowering ordinary citizens to bring
change to their country.
In Cambodia, promoting democratic governance and human
rights continues to be our highest priority. U.S. assistance to
human rights NGOs have strengthened their skills necessary to
advocate effectively for change. While not fully respected by
the Cambodian Government, Cambodian civil society has grown in
strength and inclusiveness. Since the 1990s, we have supported
civil society, and we continue to prioritize assistance to this
sector. Cambodian civil society, with USAID support, has
pressed for action on key issues, such as support for human
rights, by providing legal representation, trial monitoring,
and advocacy support to over 1,000 jailed activists.
Our longstanding support for anti-trafficking is paying
dividends with a new report finding significant decreases in
trafficking of underaged girls. The reduction was achieved in
large part by civil societies' sustained efforts.
In part, due to U.S. support, garment workers negotiated a
28-percent increase in minimum wage that was approved last
year.
Community mobilization and legal support resulted in the
government returning land to more than 700 families in Siem
Reap Province, providing them with land tenure security and
improved livelihood options. And advocacy resulted in a pardon
and release of 10 female land activists recently who had been
imprisoned for protesting their community from being evicted
due to real estate development projects.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, democracy, human rights, and
good governance are not only central to the Asia rebalance
policy but to our development approach in Asia. I appreciate
the opportunity to testify today. I look forward to hearing
your thoughts and any questions.
[The prepared joint statement of Mr. Malinowski, Mr.
Marciel, and Mr. Stivers follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Salmon. Thank you. I have a question for anybody on the
panel that feels adequately prepared to answer the question: An
Irrawaddy news article from 2014 highlighted that U.N.
agencies, USAID, and some of AID's contractors were spending
millions of dollars a year on rent payments to members of
Burma's military elite, their families, and their cronies. And
the case has highlighted the USAID contractor Development
Alternatives International, DAI, reportedly renting a home from
the family of Khin Nyunt, the former head of Burma's military
and intelligence, and UNICEF was spending approximately $87,000
a month to rent a mansion owned by another former junta leader
and minister in the current government.
These rents amounted to direct transfers of U.S. assistance
funds into the coffers of people who thwarted democracy, abused
human rights in Burma for decades. What are the steps that
USAID and its contractors have taken to address the rent
problem as well as issues with individuals who are on the SDN
list that the USG inadvertently paid money to during Secretary
Kerry's visit to ASEAN Summit in 2014? And please also share
with the committee the current monthly rate USAID is paying for
its own rented space outside the Embassy compound, including
the resident of the chief of mission, and who the property
owners are. We would also appreciate if you could provide
similar information for the 10 largest contractors USAID is
funding in Burma this fiscal year.
And Mr. Stivers I know you may not be prepared to throw
down on all of that right now, but if you want to answer in
writing afterwards, then that is fine too. But if you have any
statements or anybody on the panel wants to address that, I
would love to hear what your thoughts are.
Mr. Stivers. Sure, thank you, Mr. Chairman. In terms of
that situation from 2014, I remember it back then. It is my
understanding that that situation was resolved, but let me
check on that and get you the facts on that. But I agree with
you that it is absolutely essential that all of our contractors
and all of our contracts have the highest standards in terms of
where they are getting rent from and the buildings that they
are occupying. And I can assure you that in our contracting, we
take a very close look and make that a high priority. But I
will get you more details.
Mr. Salmon. And Mr. Stivers, if you could look at, you
know, just the question that I asked. We would be happy to give
that to you in writing, too. Just get us an answer back. I
would really appreciate it. It would be very helpful.
[The information referred to appears in the appendix.]
Mr. Salmon. One other question and then, in the interest of
time, I want everybody to ask their first question. But one
other question is regarding China. It frames issues regarding
political developments in the area where it considers itself
sovereign. Whether elections in Hong Kong, the DPP's projected
win next year in Taiwan, and the protests for rights in
Xinjiang and Tibet, and in terms of its core interests.
For the United States, each of these issues reflects our
own core interests in the advancement of democracy, civil
society, and human rights across the People's Republican of
China, particularly in Hong Kong, where its history and special
``one country, two systems'' status has allowed for a degree of
freedom, liberalism, and pluralism to take root and flourish.
What are the administration's plans to express solidarity
with Hong Kong's democracy activists as part of a principled
approach to summitry with China this year? Can Congress and the
American people expect a public expression of support that will
be heard by democracy activists in Hong Kong, China, and
elsewhere?
Mr. Marciel, you made some great opening comments about the
whole universal suffrage issue in Hong Kong. We were there. We
met with several of the activists. And I am very, very
concerned that the freedom fighters over there are feeling a
little bit lonely. And I just want to know what we can do to
further embolden democracy there?
Mr. Marciel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think, broadly speaking, in our relations with China and
our very regular conversations with China, human rights and
democracy issues come up. We raise them often, certainly, about
human rights concerns in China itself to begin with.
In terms of Hong Kong, as I said, we have been strong
supporters of the ``one country, two systems'' and the basic
law, as you know. We have said that Beijing's decision last
August in terms of the way of nominating potential candidates
for the chief executive office, we said could have gone further
in providing Hong Kong's 5 million potential voters a
meaningful choice of candidates. So we have said that publicly.
And we have said that the legitimacy of the chief executive
will be greatly enhanced if the chief executive is elected by
universal suffrage in accordance with the basic law, and the
aspirations of the Hong Kong people, and the election provides
for a genuine choice of candidates. So I won't try to predict
exactly when we will say things, but that has been our
consistent position privately and publicly, and I expect we
will continue to express it.
Mr. Salmon. Well, I, for one, am really pleased that you
said it in your opening statement, and I am pleased that you
have reiterated that in relationship to my question. And it is
not just my question for you. I think we are all kind of
grappling as Members of Congress, too, walking that fine line
of not, you know, we certainly don't want to upset the apple
cart with our one-country policy that we would adhere to,
really, for decades, and decades, and decades.
But by the same token, I think that there were certain
representations that were made in 1997 when the transition
occurred that haven't completely been realized. And I met with
stalwarts when I was over there like Anson Chan and Martin Lee.
And, you know, they believed that certain things were going to
happen and they are still waiting. And I think that any voice
that we can give collectively as a Congress, as the
administration, to keep that idea alive as far as universal
suffrage and selection of their chief executive, I think that
that is really, really important to them. And so thank you very
much for that.
And I am going to yield to Mr. Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I didn't think we would be talking about fast track here,
but I do need to make a few comments.
Mr. Marciel, when you say this will strengthen the American
economy, I think you are a little outside of your expertise.
The trade policy of the United States the last 30 years has led
us from being the greatest creditor nation of the history of
the world, the greatest debtor Nation in the history of the
world. We have lost well more than 5 million jobs. We have
eviscerated the middle class, and now we are being asked to
double down on what is a trade policy so bad that it is able to
stagnate wages in the greatest country, to the greatest workers
in the world; a trade policy that is able to do all that to
what is otherwise the greatest economy and the greatest workers
in the world.
As to Vietnam, obviously, they are going to show the
greatest, nicest human rights face right up until the ink is
dry. Labor leaders, I am sure if this deal goes forward will
not be arrested for being labor leaders. They will be arrested
because drugs are planted on them. They will be arrested, if
you really want to scandalize the world, because they will
plant child pornography on them. And Vietnam, certainly, does
not have the judicial independence to defend its rights regime
sufficient to expose a well-designed regime conspiracy to jail
a labor leader. And I think the labor leaders there will surely
understand that.
As for the United States being able to do anything right
now, you can do as much as you will ever been able to do
because we are in negotiations. Your successor will soon
realize that as powerful as DRL is, the Nike lobbyists are far
more powerful. And once profits from Vietnam hit $10 billion,
$20 billion, $30 billion, your successors will find it more
convenient to talk about Thailand and Burma.
I saw this happen with Iran where administration after
administration refused to apply the Iran Sanctions Act because
of commercial interests right up until the time when they were
close to a nuclear weapon. I will agree with you, if Vietnam
develops a nuclear weapon, then we may be able to generate more
interest.
But let's focus on China. What undermines totalitarian
regimes often is the sunlight of information. Mr. Marciel, is
it our policy or should it be to acquire information relevant
to Chinese citizens and to publish it, whether that be about
the real levels of pollution in Chinese cities or the real
level of foreign assets owned by Chinese leaders?
Mr. Marciel. Thank you, Congressman.
I guess I would start by saying that, you know, in China,
as elsewhere, we are strong believers in and advocates for
freedom of expression, freedom of information, transparency.
Mr. Sherman. Well, I am asking you, would we do more and
that is use the CIA to expose--to gather the information that
needs to be exposed? I am sure that we are going to advocate
for the Chinese journalists. The Chinese journalist doesn't
have the CIA's investigative power. The Chinese, arguably, just
hack us pretty badly. Certainly, the CIA could publish a report
a week about the Swiss chateaus owned by this or that comrade.
Mr. Malinowski, do you have a comment, Deputy Assistant
Secretary?
Mr. Malinowski. I would point to a different agency of our
Government because I am not sure in----
Mr. Sherman. When I say ``the CIA,'' I mean all of our
information-gathering capacities.
Mr. Malinowski. Yeah, I am a very big believer in the
general principle that you just outlined, that the greatest
weakness of authoritarian states writ large around the world is
corruption. That is the thing that units the most people in
demanding the rule of law, demanding democratic government,
ordinary people, as we have seen everywhere.
And we do have tools in our Government that we--that are in
some cases not as well developed as they should be, but that
are becoming better developed to try and fight corruption
throughout the world. I am not just going to make this about--
--
Mr. Sherman. I am not saying we should fight it. China is a
strategic adversary. We should be using it. The more corruption
in China, the less likely it is that China surpasses us or
intimidates us.
Mr. Malinowski. And where I was heading with this is that
we have, for example, anti-kleptocracy unit in our Justice
Department, which I would think could use more resources to do
this kind of work all over the world, whether it is FIFA or
whether it is Russia or whether it is China or the Middle East.
It is apolitical, and so no one can accuse it of serving a
particular foreign policy interest of the day, and that is
important because it is more credible. But it is very, very
powerful.
Mr. Sherman. I want to get to one other question, but if
you think that the average Chinese citizen will regard one
agency of the U.S. Government as being more apolitical than
another, you give them and us an awful lot more credit than I
think.
And the democratic activists in what the State Department
still calls Burma, we protected them. We used sanctions. We
were effective. They now share some degree of power. What have
we done to call in a chit or two, and say that we need to see
those who advocate for democracy and majority rule also
advocate minority rights in the area of the Rohingya?
Mr. Malinowski. We, all of us at this table, and many
others in the administration, have had that conversation with
them repeatedly, from the level of Aung San Suu Kyi--I have
spoken to her personally about this, as have others, including
President Obama--all the way down to the rank and file
activists.
Some of them have done the right thing. And my bureau,
among the programs that we support in Burma are programs that
work with democratic activists who are trying to promote
tolerance in that society, including with respect to the Muslim
minority and the Rohingya minority. You have seen just what we
are up against in terms of the deep-seated social prejudice and
the discrimination that flows from it. It is a much harder
problem to deal with than if we just had an evil government
that was repressing people.
But it is, as President Obama said, in many ways the most
urgent problem because if I can think of anything that could
derail this entire democratic transition over time, it is the
ability of irresponsible forces in that country to divide
people on the basis of religion and race. So we are absolutely
seized with it. I will not claim to you that we have solved the
problem because, obviously, we have not. But it is our, I would
say, top priority.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you, Ms. Meng.
Ms. Meng. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member.
Welcome to all of our witnesses who are testifying here
today.
Assistant Administrator Stivers, thank you once again. I am
losing track of how many times you have come to testify before
us.
Mr. Stivers. Four.
Ms. Meng. I applaud USAID for making great strides and
prioritizing and focusing on gender equality and women's
economic empowerment. As I listened to you discuss USAID's
democracy work, while democracy, gender equality, and women's
economic empowerment go hand in hand, but USAID-funded mission
programs targeting democracy and human rights in Asia have
dramatically decreased over the past several years with funds
instead directed to Presidential initiatives.
While we understand that some democracy funding may be
attached to the initiatives, those programs don't deal directly
with the democracy and human challenges that many countries now
face. Does USAID have plans to increase human and labor rights
funding, and democracy support in the region and how is USAID
integrating these democracy priorities with your gender
equality and women's economic empowerment agenda?
Mr. Stivers. Thank you for that question. The Fiscal Year
2016 budget request includes increases in democracy and
governance funding for almost every country in East Asia. And
the requests over the last few years have done the same.
It is not a secret that the overall cuts to foreign
assistance in recent years have had an impact on overall
discretionary funding, which is primarily democracy and
governance funding, and economic growth funding. And so there
are a number of issues in the final budget that is concluded by
the administration and both Houses of Congress that have
affected our discretionary spending and our flexibility to
provide the democratic and governance funding that does so
much, especially in support of civil society.
In Burma and Cambodia, for example, we are doing so much to
support civil society including promoting gender empowerment
and fighting against trafficking. We are supporting many
organizations that work on those sorts of issues. But the
funding is an issue when we consider the budget.
Ms. Meng. You mentioned Burma. There are many, many
concerns. There is a sense that the situation is getting out of
hand. I believe that the State Department has called for a free
and fair elections in Burma this year. My understanding is that
25 percent of the seats in the future Parliament are explicitly
reserved for members of the military, and those seats are
filled by military appointments. Even more concerning is that
the military can effectively veto any major changes because
those changes require 75 percent of parliamentary majority. How
do you reconcile this setup with the call for free and fair
elections and have you raised this with Burmese Government?
Mr. Malinowski. Sure. As I mentioned in my opening
statements, there are inherent flaws in this--in these
elections, inherent flaws in the system. You mentioned a couple
of them, the 25 percent allocation to the military, so it is an
election for 75 percent of the seats, not for 100 percent. I
would add that the Parliament that will be selected in these
elections will not be fully empowered vis-a-vis the military
because the military still has the ability to appoint some of
the most important ministers in the country, interior, defense,
so they control the muscle.
And all of this is--and of course, the problem that Aung
San Suu Kyi, by virtue of her foreign birth is barred--I am
sorry, the foreign citizenship of her sons, is barred from
seeking the presidency, which is also a provision in the
constitution.
So these are inherent flaws, and they are not likely to be
resolved before the election takes place. That said, it is
possible, not guaranteed, but it is possible that the elections
will allow the people of Burma to express their will and to
elect candidates of their choice in a very competitive process.
The democratic forces in the country, including Aung San Suu
Kyi's party, are all in. They are going to compete in these
elections. If they do well, if they end up with a majority in
the Parliament, which they can do if they win two-thirds of the
seats--that is how the math works, and they are capable of
doing that--then they get to pick the next President, which
will not be Aung San Suu Kyi under the system, but they will
get to choose who it is. They will form the next government.
And you can see in that scenario that they will have a lot
of political leverage to be able to negotiate changes to that
constitution to fix the problems that we have just been
discussing.
So that is the hopeful scenario. It is not by any means
guaranteed. But that is what we have been encouraging, not just
credible elections but a credible, democratic transition
following the elections to fix those structural problems in the
system.
Ms. Meng. Thank you.
Mr. Salmon. Mr. Lowenthal.
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Malinowski, I want to thank
you personally for your tireless work on human rights,
especially in Vietnam. I generally appreciate the open dialogue
that we have had, and the work that you have done, and I went
along with the chair, visiting Vietnam, and getting a chance to
see you.
I want to talk about something that you mentioned in your
testimony here that I think has--and, you know, the thing that
we will be actually looking at and voting on very soon. And
that is the--although you talk about the TPP, right now, we, as
you know, we will be voting on the TPA, the promotion
authority. But you say in your submitted testimony that the TPP
agreement will include a requirement that Vietnam guarantee
freedom of association by allowing workers to form genuinely
independent trade unions.
Can you expand to us on what that cause really will look
like, and how are we going to be able, the United States and
others, to hold Vietnam accountable? And has there been--has
Vietnam taken any steps today, before the TPP goes into effect,
to actually develop independent trade, or is this something
that they are saying they will do in the future?
Mr. Malinowski. Thank you, Congressman.
Those are very, very important questions that we have been.
Mr. Lowenthal. That is right, those are the critical
questions for me in terms of labor issues.
Mr. Malinowski. In terms of where they are now, let me
start there.
Mr. Lowenthal. Yes.
Mr. Malinowski. Vietnam, as you know, does not have
legally--does not legally recognize independent trade unions.
There is one Communist Party affiliated trade union that is
supposed to represent all of the workers of the country and
that, you know, puts on shows, and helps with vacations and
doesn't really do very much, although they are now beginning to
feel a little bit of pressure.
Interestingly, in the last few years, there has been a
growth of unrecognized.
Mr. Lowenthal. That is right, labor strikes.
Mr. Malinowski. There have been many strikes which have
been organized by, you know, what we would call a local trade
union. It is just not recognized as such. And then in a number
of recent cases, the government has reacted appropriately. They
have negotiated with the workers. They have in some cases given
into their demands. And I think this is partly because of the
spotlight of TPP, but I think it is also because there are deep
changes within the Vietnamese society that the government is
trying to understand and keep up with.
So there is free associating going on in Vietnam, but there
is not freedom of association in the sense that what people are
doing is not yet guaranteed, recognized, protected within the
law.
So what TPP requires, not just of Vietnam but all of the
members, is compliance with the internationally recognized
labor right of freedom of association. In the specific
negotiations we are having in terms of how to effectuate that
commitment, the details of that are being hammered out. And it
is not an easy negotiation because what we are asking of
Vietnam is meaningful. If it weren't meaningful, they would
have agreed to it months ago, but they know that what we are
asking them to do would be, in effect, revolutionary in that
system.
Mr. Lowenthal. That is right.
Mr. Malinowski. It would be, and you know, you will see the
details when it is agreed, and it is not yet agreed.
But it will have to include, we have said this, a legal
guarantee that workers in factories and enterprises around
Vietnam will be able to form their own unions, elect their own
leaders, set their own policies, decide on their own whether,
and when, and how to go on strike, communicate with each other,
factory to factory. And, again, all of this will have to be--it
can't be a promise. It is going to have to actually get done in
law.
All of that said, I have got no illusions, and I agree with
Congressman Sherman that if all of that is done, we are not
going to be in a place where this is settled. Of course, it is
going to remain unsettled precisely because it is meaningful.
There will be forces on the other side that push back. What I
asked myself is as somebody who is promoting this change, which
by definition will take time in Vietnam, are we going to be
better off? Are the Vietnamese workers going to be better off--
civil society--a year or two from now if this right is
guaranteed in Vietnamese law or not?
Absent this process, TPA now, if we get it, TPP, it will
not be guaranteed because the political incentive to do this
revolutionary thing, absent the benefit of joining TPP, is not
great enough for the Vietnamese Communist Party. So will we be
better off in that stage? Will they be empowered to demand even
more rights? Will we be empowered to demand more of the
Vietnamese?
My answer to that question is yes, which is why what I am
urging you to do. And I am actually not asking you to vote for
TPP because there is no TPP. I am asking you to keep this
process going and to keep the prospect of TPP alive by voting
for the authority, which will then allow us to spend the next
few months, not only negotiating the agreement with the labor
chapters as strong as possible, but also trying to get more
people out of prison, trying to get reforms to the criminal
code and other things that are needed to take Vietnam two or
three steps further down that road. And then we are going to
have to keep on fighting, absolutely.
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you, and I yield back, Mr. Chair.
I will submit the rest of my questions in writing.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you very much. I am going to ask one more
quick question and I will allow everybody else to ask another
quick one. We probably don't have a lot of time, but how well
is State coordinating with DOD on Thailand, which has
historically played a major role in managing the U.S.-Thailand
relationship? In March, the U.S. Pacific Command indefinitely
postponed what was to have been the first planned meeting for
next year's Cobra Gold exercises? Was this a signal to ruling
junta? What do you think about using Cobra Gold to encourage
the military government to move toward elections? And what
options exist to hold multilateral exercises elsewhere in the
region?
Mr. Marciel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We actually have a
very good coordination with DOD, with the Pentagon, as well as
with the NFC. So our policy on Thailand is decided through an
interagency process, including a meeting this week that we
already had where we touched on this. So it is an interagency
process.
And on Cobra Gold, specifically, we decided, as you know,
for this Cobra Gold earlier this year, we decided last year to
hold it because of its importance to us. But also, frankly,
regionally, it is a multilateral exercise. So we decided to
hold it in a scaled-down version with an enhanced focus on
humanitarian assistance, disaster relief.
At this point, what we decided going forward is to go ahead
with the preparation for 2016 Cobra Gold. For the same reasons,
also would be scaled down in light of the political situation
in Thailand.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you.
Mr. Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. Yes. The news reports show refugees fleeing to
Malaysia, Indonesia, and they say it is a combination of
Bangladeshis and Rohingya. But do we have any view as to is it
more one or more of the other that are on those ships? And,
also, why would Bangladeshis be fleeing their homeland at this
particular time?
Mr. Marciel. Thank you, Congressman.
I will say a couple of things first. I don't think we have
exact numbers--nor the U.N.--have exact numbers yet. But
overall----
Mr. Sherman. I mean, is it 10 percent Bangladeshis or 80
percent Bangladeshis?
Mr. Marciel. I think somewhere in between. The best
information we have is that it is a mixed, probably majority
Rohingya from Burma but a significant minority Bangladeshi.
Again, we don't have exact numbers, but that is our best sense.
And, also, our best sense is that those leaving Bangladesh
tend to be looking for better, more economic opportunities
whereas those leaving Rakhine State in Burma, it is a
combination of, you know, a bad economic situation, but also
discrimination, persecution, lack of rights.
Mr. Sherman. Why would Bangladeshis be leaving Bangladesh
at this particular time and be willing to take these enormous
risks?
Mr. Malinowski. Yeah, I mean, the particular time has to do
actually with the weather. There is something----
Mr. Sherman. Well, this particular year.
Mr. Malinowski. There has been a traditional outflow of
Bangladeshis who are fleeing for poverty, who are seeking
opportunity and willing to take some risks.
I think one reason why it is difficult to answer this
question is because there may be Rohingyas from Burma who, when
asked where are you from, will say they are Bangladeshi because
they fear they are going to be sent back somewhere, and they
would rather be sent back to Bangladesh. It is very
complicated.
There are also, I think among the Rohingyas, there are
people who have voluntarily fled because the situation in their
country is so intolerable, but we have also seen reports
including from Human Rights Watch--and maybe you will be able
to ask them in the next panel--that some have actually been
seized by traffickers, that, you know, these trafficking
networks that are at the heart of this, colluding often with
corrupt officials in various countries, will actually go and
nab people because they can sell them down the line.
Mr. Sherman. And they are nabbing people in Bangladesh?
Mr. Malinowski. In Burma. I have seen testimonies that
suggest that some of the--testimonies of people who have landed
in Malaysia, Thailand, suggesting that that is what happened to
them.
Mr. Sherman. So we hear reports that they have to pay
thousands of dollars to get on the ships, and they are saying,
in other cases, they not only pay nothing, but they are
literally captured. A significant number are coming from
Bangladesh, where they don't face religious persecution. It is
just bad economics in Bangladesh.
Mr. Malinowski. Yes, so it is a complicated mix. But I
think, you know, what it comes down to for us is, what do we do
about it? And the initial, obviously, our initial instinct was
we had people on the high seas who are at imminent risk of
death. At that point, we are not distinguishing where they are
from. Our focus was getting the Indonesians, the Malaysians,
and the Thais to allow boats to land and to be proactive, to go
out and do search and rescue, which we, I think, in a
relatively short period of time, managed to convince many of
them to do. We did our own search and rescue in the form of
surveillance flights.
Mr. Sherman. I think you have gone beyond my question, and
I have gone beyond my time, but thank you very much.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you.
I think we are going to adjourn this panel and bring the
next one up. Thank you very much, gentlemen. I appreciate it
very much.
Mr. Salmon. I thank the panel for coming today.
We are very fortunate to be joined by Kelley Currie, a
senior fellow with the Project 2049 Institute, where she has
worked on democracy, human rights, and rule of law in the Asia
Pacific for over 6 years.
Murray Hiebert--did I pronounce that right, Murray?
Mr. Hiebert. Yes.
Mr. Salmon. He is a senior fellow and deputy director of
the Sumitro Chair for Southeast Asian Studies, Center for
Strategic and International Studies.
Peter Manikas has served as senior associate and director
of Asia programs at the National Democratic Institute for the
past 20 years.
And Dr. Sophie Richardson is Human Rights Watch's China
director.
And Ms. Currie, we will start with you. Let me just explain
the situation. We are going to probably have votes in about 10
to 15 minutes. I am going to try to get through all of your
testimony. We probably won't get to questions today, which
disappoints me, but maybe if we could have members submit
questions to you in writing, that would be very, very helpful.
And Ms. Currie.

STATEMENT OF MS. KELLEY CURRIE, SENIOR FELLOW, PROJECT 2049
INSTITUTE

Ms. Currie. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member,
and members of the committee for giving me the opportunity
today to speak about the state of democracy in Asia,
specifically with regard to the situation in Burma.
There is no denying there have been changes in Burma over
the past 5 years. When I started working on human rights and
democracy in Burma 20 years ago as a young congressional
staffer working on the Congressional Human Rights Caucus, I
could not have imagined that I would be sitting here today,
having spent time in Burma and meeting with the people I was
trying to get out of jail at that time, people like Min Ko
Naing and Aung San Suu Kyi and others.
Likewise, when I was running the International Republican
Institute's Burma program with shoestring funding, operating
out of safe houses on the Thai-Burma border, I can't imagine--I
couldn't have imagined that IRI and NDI and other organizations
would be operating from offices in downtown Rangoon today with
the permission of the government and working openly with
political organizations to--in advance of an upcoming election.
So while these relative economic and political changes
certainly have taken place, it is tempting, after so many years
of brutally repressive military rule, to use the negative
standards of the bad old days to judge the current situation.
But doing this would communicate to the Burmese that they
don't deserve the same kind of genuine democracy, real economic
opportunity, or real human rights that we take for granted.
Instead, we must measure Burma's progress both against the
democratic aspirations of the Burmese people, flagrantly denied
since 1990, and against the objective standards of genuine
democratic governance.
Unfortunately, the same countries, including the United
States, that spent more than two decades supporting those
democratic aspirations and standards seem to have decided that
the reforms to date are good enough, despite how far they fall
short of what we would accept for ourselves.
Let's be clear, they have fallen short. Just 1 month prior
to the outbreak of violence in Rakhine State in May 2012, the
Burmese nation and the world celebrated the sweeping victory of
Aung San Suu Kyi and the NLD in by-elections.
In the wake of this historic event, the United States
lifted its sanctions on Burma. And President Obama made the
first trip to Burma by a sitting President of the United
States. Yet since that trip, reforms have stopped cold. The
situation has steadily worsened for civil society, political
activists, and those who refuse to accept the government's
terms for their transition to discipline flourishing democracy.
This is the big concern, I think, that many of us have. What is
this transition going towards? It is not really the
government's intention to have a transition to genuine
democracy. They want to transition to an electoral
authoritarian system with a thin veneer of democracy on top of
it.
As we look to the elections planned for this fall, there is
no prospect that they can be genuinely free and fair. Because
the constitutional and bureaucratic framework under which they
are being held is so heavily tilted toward the military and the
incumbent regime, even if the NDL ``wins,'' as Assistant
Secretary Malinowski laid out, and captures a majority of the
votes, they will not be able to form a government and take
political control of the country and the government. Their
political leader cannot be elected President. Regardless of the
election results, the military will remain in control of
Burma's political, bureaucratic, and economic powers. This is
why the country's democratic forces have been so focused on
reform of the 2008 constitution. But there has been no movement
on that. And that is totally at the discretion of the military
and the government.
When Burma began liberalizing in 2010, many thoughtful
Burmese democrats expressed concerns about becoming ``another
Cambodia,'' a donor or China-dependent, electoral authoritarian
backwater. Today, these same people are equally concerned about
not emulating Thailand, the country next door that has the
superficial trappings of economic development and democracy,
but which is actually controlled by an elite with shallow
commitments to liberal values. Among Burmese Democrats, the
seemingly cyclical military interventions in Thailand's
democracy point out the dangers of contemplating a long-term
similar role for the Burmese military. When it announced the
pivot to Asia, the Obama administration declared its intent to
strengthen U.S. Ties with all the governments of the region.
The 2010 reforms in Burma created new opportunities to
fulfill that rhetoric. Unfortunately, the Obama administration
has de-emphasized democratic values in its policy approach in
the misguided belief that this will facilitate improved
relations. They have replaced a policy of principled
disassociation with Burma with one of unprincipled engagement.
This pragmatism in the service of a transactional relationship
may seem rational in the short term. But the situation in
Thailand show that, ultimately, there is no shortcut. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Currie follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Salmon. Thank you.
Mr. Hiebert.

STATEMENT OF MR. MURRAY HIEBERT, DEPUTY DIRECTOR AND SENIOR
FELLOW, SUMITRO CHAIR FOR SOUTHEAST ASIA STUDIES, CENTER FOR
STRATEGIC AND INTERNATIONAL STUDIES

Mr. Hiebert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I was asked to speak about Thailand. Obviously, Thai
democracy took a big hit on May 22, 2014, when the military
ousted Prime Minister Yingluck following 6 months of protests.
Hence, the National Council for Peace and Order, as the new
government was called, moved quickly to prohibit political
activities, censor the media, try dissidents in military
courts, et cetera.
Analysts basically think Thailand, especially the Thai
elite, view themselves as going through a historical political
transition that has existential stakes for Thailand. The
military, analysts say, has assumed military control to ensure
that it manages the royal succession when that takes place down
the road. And these people also say that it is unlikely we are
going to see real elections in Thailand until there is this
succession.
So when the military took over, it replaced civilian courts
with military courts. It ordered newspapers to stop writing
articles critical of the military. Satellite, television, and
radio stations were shut. And access to many Web sites were
blocked, as were meetings of more than 500 people--excuse, more
than 5 people. On May 22, when they commemorated the first
anniversary of the coup, officials arrested over 40 activists
in various parts of the country for staging peaceful rallies to
mark the military takeover.
The military has come out with a draft constitution, which
is now being circulated. I think most Democrats would say that
it falls far short of what observers would consider minimally
credible for democracy. And the military also keeps pushing
back the date for new elections. Elections that had been
scheduled for early 2016 are now said to be delayed at least
until August or September.
The other thing which was alluded to previously was the
whole issue of human trafficking, human smuggling. I know it is
not directly a democracy issue, but it is critically a human
rights issue. The Thai military, after being put on the Tier
III list last year, has started an investigation. They have
arrested some people. They found bodies in makeshift camps
along the Thai-Malaysia border. And this is obviously a
situation that has been going on for years and an issue that
will need to be addressed.
Thailand is a country that has had very long relations with
the United States, dating back to 1833. It is a key country in
Southeast Asia, ASEAN, it is very central. The U.S. And
Thailand cooperate in so many areas. Thailand has the biggest
U.S. Embassy in the region. The U.S. does much of its regional
activity from Thailand.
So you have to try and think of a country that had
democracy quite a bit of the time over the last four decades,
you know, whether we can criticize the democracy, but it is at
least an attempt, and then it has been interrupted by military
coups. So trying to think about how the U.S. can respond and
try to engage the Thais when they are in the midst of what they
see as a very difficult transition that goes far beyond
democracy and a military coup is to try assign a high-level
Thai envoy. This would be somebody who would represent the
administration but would travel frequently to Thailand to
consult with them, to keep them, not to say we concur and agree
with everything but that we are trying to deepen our
understanding of your concerns and listen to the perspectives
of Thailand's key players.
The other thing we absolutely have to keep doing is
continue pressing the military to rescind the orders
restricting freedom of expression and freedom of assembly and
those kind of issues, and also revoke the Penal Code article
112 on lese majeste.
And then the other one, which I already alluded to, is
really the military has to put an end to human trafficking,
establish an independent investigation, release the results,
and bring justice to those perpetrating these abuses.
And then in trying to find ways to support the democratic
principles of governance, one of the ideas that we have talked
about in my office is whether it would be useful to try to put
together a private eminent persons group of senior former
officials, maybe private sector people, very prominent people
who could talk to the Thais. They would talk to prominent Thais
not in the military right now, about 5 years down the road,
what they would like to see U.S.-Thailand relations look like.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hiebert follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Salmon. Thank you.
Mr. Manikas and Dr. Richardson, I am going to have a very
truncated time frame. We just got buzzed for votes.
Is there a way that you could maybe abbreviate your
comments? Because I just have one question that I would really
like to get out there. Would that be all right?
Mr. Manikas. Sure.
Mr. Salmon. And I am so sorry for the way things operate
sometimes around here. But I know you are used to it.

STATEMENT OF MR. PETER M. MANIKAS, SENIOR ASSOCIATE AND
REGIONAL DIRECTOR FOR ASIA PROGRAMS, THE NATIONAL DEMOCRATIC
INSTITUTE

Mr. Manikas. Thank you. I have submitted written testimony,
so if I could just make a few brief points about Hong Kong,
Thailand, and Burma in the context of the region as a whole.
Mr. Salmon. That would be great.
Mr. Manikas. Mr. Chairman, I don't think that any single
trend, neither retreat nor revival, defines the direction of
democracy in the region.
We have recently seen a military coup followed by a ban on
political activity in Thailand. In Hong Kong, the government in
Beijing has remained intransigent, insisting on its version of
universal suffrage. In Burma, progress toward political reform
has stalled as critical elections approach, although
constitutional reform remains a possibility.
However, more positive and I believe a longer term trend
has seen citizens demand more open and competitive political
systems in countries such as Cambodia, Malaysia, and Singapore.
Recent elections in those countries saw entrenched ruling
parties face significant challenges by a reinvigorated
opposition.
In Indonesia, there was a historic change in leadership
which could deepen the nation's regional influence as a model
for democracy. In demographic terms, urbanization, the
existence of a youth bulge, and the rapid growth of social
media will also likely increase demands for greater democratic
accountability.
One important challenge that has emerged is the
restrictions being placed on activities of civil society
organizations. For example, in Cambodia, the new election law
limits the ability of election-monitoring groups to criticize
the government during the election period. And a proposed NGO
law is under consideration that would deny registration to
organizations that would harm national unity, culture, and the
traditions of Cambodia.
In mainland China, a proposed law would limit the ability
of local groups to receive foreign funding and would place the
regulation of foreign NGOs under the ministry of state
security.
In Burma, many NGOs are unsure of their legal status and
uncertain of what activities they can engage in without
violating the law.
In Hong Kong and Malaysia, civil society groups are being
intimidated and accused of promoting American values.
Some international groups which work in the areas of human
rights and democracy too have been accused of exporting an
American model of democracy. I am not sure why it is referred
to as an American model. The people of Indonesia, Japan,
Mongolia, the Philippines, South Korea, and Taiwan have
embraced democratic governance and demonstrated that democracy
is fully compatible with Asian values.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, I think that the response of the
international community to the changes that are occurring
should be a persistent engagement to support democratic reforms
and to assist those who are advancing the democratic process,
in the high hopes that the international community will
continue its efforts to support reformers inside and outside of
government in pursuing the goals and aspirations of people
throughout the region who are seeking to improve their lives by
improving their governments. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Manikas follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Salmon. Thank you.
Dr. Richardson.

STATEMENT OF SOPHIE RICHARDSON, PH.D., CHINA DIRECTOR, HUMAN
RIGHTS WATCH

Ms. Richardson. Sure. I will take Peter's 2 minutes. I am
going to be really quick here.
Chairman Salmon, I think it is manifestly the case that the
arc of history is not bending toward justice in mainland China.
And I think the jury is really out on the direction that Hong
Kong is taking.
The core issue here is not complex: The right to vote and
the right to run are equally important. And you don't get to
claim democratic reform by giving one while undercutting the
other.
We can have a much longer discussion about this. But since
I was asked to comment specifically on how the U.S. is doing, I
think it is fair to say that while the U.S. has diagnosed the
correct problems, I think it has been deeply reticent about
being very forceful about those. If you compared, for example,
the forcefulness and the frequency of American rhetoric,
democracy in Hong Kong to democracy to other parts of the
world, you would see a pretty significant gap.
And I think that if the U.S. is willing to say, as the
previous panel did, that chief executives in Hong Kong lack
legitimacy because they haven't been popularly elected, I
really look forward to people making that point about Xi
Jinping. I think there are many steps that the U.S. could take:
Speaking of more frequently; being seen to be meeting with a
full diversity of actors in Hong Kong; I think having codels
visits helps enormously.
And I certainly hope that you will take from this hearing
your concerns and formulate them to the administration in
advance of the S&ED and Xi Jinping visit. Thanks.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Richardson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Salmon. You really hit on the issue that I wanted to
ask the question on anyway. And anybody is free to give me
their thoughts on it. But some observers think that the U.S.
Government should do a lot more to promote democracy in Hong
Kong.
Every time we do, China says: Hands off, it is a domestic
issue.
What are some of the things that you think that the U.S.
Government should do? And what kind of concrete steps? I mean,
it is great that we make statements in hearings like this and
when we have private meetings with them. But the needle isn't
really moving. And can we step things up?
Ms. Richardson. I think the reality with China is that you
could, the U.S. Could, in theory, throw everything and the
kitchen sink at it and the Chinese Communist Party might not be
moved. I do think that is a reality.
That said, I think there is a great deal more that the U.S.
can do. And if you think comparatively, you know, when you look
at, for example, the initial photographs of Occupy, all I can
think of, for example, was Ambassador Victoria Nuland at Maidan
Square handing out bread to demonstrators. Or you read a
jointly penned op-ed by the President and the President of
Tunisia talking about democratic reform. And you wonder how
many people the administration even tried to imagine a world in
which such an activity could be pursued with a peaceful
government critic from China or from Hong Kong. I think people
have gotten badly ground down by Chinese Government reticence.
But there are plenty of examples of how the U.S. promotes
democracy and defends rights in somewhat less hostile
environments that could very effectively be pursued.
Mr. Salmon. This is something I would like to even put a
little more flesh on the bones with you. Maybe we could
privately meet and talk about some of your ideas. I really
don't want to give short shrift. This is a wonderful panel. And
I am so sorry that we couldn't just spend hours and hours
because I know I would probably learn a lot. Thank you so much
for being here today.
Ms. Currie. On the last question, can I add something to
Sophie's comment?
Mr. Salmon. Yes.
Ms. Currie. Thank you. The fact that we don't really engage
China on democratization in the mainland, actually, it is a
huge problem not just for our engagement with China but it
undercuts our efforts to promote democracy elsewhere in the
region.
The other countries in the region aren't clueless about the
fact that we are not raising this with China. We are putting
pressure on them to do something that we won't even talk to the
Chinese about. And I think that in order for us to really
address this in Hong Kong, it has also got to be part of a
package of addressing it with China writ large. And we don't do
that anymore. It used to be a standard feature of U.S.
diplomacy to talk about political reform in China. And it has
completely dropped off the agenda.
Mr. Salmon. You are a great straight man because that is
exactly what our hearing next week is going to address. Thank
you very, very much. We are thinking alike there.
This meeting is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:26 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Record
Notice deg.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

\\

t
s\
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

\

s

a

t

a

\

[Note: Responses were not received to the above questions prior to
printing.]

\

s

a

t
v

s\
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

\

s

a

t

a

\
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Note: Following are responses received to the above questions prior to
printing.]

\

s

a

b

t\
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

\

s

a

\a

as\
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

\\
w

t
a

\
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

\

\
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
