- NUCLEAR AGREEMENT WITH IRAN: CAN'T TRUST, CAN WE VERIFY?

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

NUCLEAR AGREEMENT WITH IRAN:
CAN'T TRUST, CAN WE VERIFY?

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 22, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-38

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
94-306PDF                WASHINGTON : 2015

_______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
TOM EMMER, Minnesota

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Mr. Charles Duelfer, chairman, Omnis, Inc. (former Chairman, UN
Special Commission on Iraq [UNSCOM])...........................     7
The Honorable Stephen G. Rademaker, national security advisor,
Bipartisan Policy Center (former Assistant Secretary, Bureau of
Arms Control & Bureau of International Security and
Nonproliferation, U.S. Department of State)....................    17
Mr. David Albright, founder and president, Institute for Science
and International Security.....................................    27

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Mr. Charles Duelfer: Prepared statement..........................     9
The Honorable Stephen G. Rademaker: Prepared statement...........    21
Mr. David Albright: Prepared statement...........................    30

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    90
Hearing minutes..................................................    91
The Honorable Darrell E. Issa, a Representative in Congress from
the State of California:
Letter from Members of Congress to the Honorable James R.
Clapper, Director of National Intelligence, Office of the
Director of National Intelligence, dated March 19, 2015......    93
Response from the Honorable James R. Clapper to letter from
Members of Congress received April 9, 2015...................    96
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in Congress
from the Commonwealth of Virginia: Prepared statement..........    99

NUCLEAR AGREEMENT WITH IRAN:
CAN'T TRUST, CAN WE VERIFY?

----------

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 22, 2015

House of Representatives,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 o'clock a.m.,
in room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Edward Royce
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Chairman Royce. This hearing will come to order today on
the nuclear agreement with Iran and we continue our
consideration of the possible final nuclear accord.
Earlier this month, the administration and our negotiating
partners announced the ``framework'' of a final agreement that
has to be hammered out by the end of June. Now, all of the
essential elements of this inspections regime still need to be
negotiated.
But I will mention that it was this committee that passed
sanctions originally in the Senate which brought Iran to the
table and it was this committee last session that passed
unanimously legislation authored by Mr. Engel and myself that
would in fact have given the clerics in Iran a choice between
economic collapse or real compromise on their nuclear program.
That bill passed the House floor 400 to 20 but that bill was
held in the Senate.
So today, the ink isn't even dry on this month's
announcement but we saw 2 weeks ago the chants led by the
Supreme Leader in Iran, ``Yes,'' he said, ``Yes, death to
America'' and then later asserted that Iran would not allow
international inspectors access to Iran's military facilities.
This weekend, the deputy head of the Iranian Revolutionary
Guard Corps reiterated, ``They will not even be permitted to
inspect the most normal military site in their dreams.''
The administration has shrugged off such comments as
Iranian domestic spin but the issue of inspections and
verification will be central to how Congress judges any final
agreement.
Will inspectors have quick, unimpeded, go-anywhere, anytime
access? Who can these inspectors interview? What documents can
they review? Can they take environmental samples? Does the IAEA
have the qualified manpower and resources to take this on? Can
the framework's limited centrifuge research and development
restriction really be verified?
Now, Iran's long history of clandestine activity and
intransigence prevents the U.S. from holding any trust
whatsoever in the clerics who run Iran. Indeed, deception has
been a cornerstone of their nuclear program since its
inception. So when it comes to negotiating and inspections
regime over the next 2 months, the U.S. must gain ground, not
retreat.
A key piece of verification includes Iran coming clean on
its past bomb work. We recall that the IAEA asked those 12
questions about their testing. They got an answer back up half
of the first question and none of the others were responded to.
That still has not happened despite long-overdue commitments on
the part of Iran to international inspectors.
The IAEA remains concerned about signs of Iran's military-
related activities; including designing a nuclear payload for a
missile--a nuclear weapon for an ICBM missile. Iran hasn't even
begun to address these concerns, and last fall 350 members
wrote to the secretary of state expressing deep concerns about
this lack of cooperation. Yet, the framework agreement is vague
on this critical verification step.
Intrusive inspections are even more critical when you
consider a recent Department of Defense study. It points out
that the U.S. capabilities to locate undeclared nuclear
facilities or convert nuclear programs are ``either,'' in the
words of the Department of Defense study, ``inadequate, or more
often, do not exist.''
And, critically, that study also reminds us that,
``verification is principally the political judgment,'' in the
words of the study, ``to which monitoring and other means
contribute.''
The IAEA and its inspectors will play an essential role in
monitoring Iran, but it will ultimately be up to the
administration and its negotiating partners, which includes
Russia and China--likely acting through the U.N. Security
Council or another international body--to decide whether Iran
is complying with its commitments.
And this is another weak link. If Iran is caught cheating,
will this or the next administration be prepared to call them
out? I am not confident. Why? Because during the interim
negotiations when Iran was caught testing an advanced
supersonic centrifuge it faced no consequences. As one witness
will testify, international inspectors can be no tougher than
the countries that back them.
The history of arms-control inspections is that they are
easy for political leaders to tout as a solution, but are
difficult to fully implement. What looks good on the chalkboard
often fails in the real world.
Even if verified, as one witness will note, this agreement
still puts Iran on the path to being an accepted nuclear
weapons state. And beginning in 10 years, the administration's
lauded 1-year breakout period begins to fall away and Iran will
be able to enrich on an industrial scale. At the same time,
Iran's Revolutionary Guard is advancing its ballistic missile
capability under orders from the Supreme Leader to ``mass
produce'' and he has been publicly quite vocal about the need
to ``mass produce'' ICBMs.
In announcing this framework agreement with Iran, the
President boldly declared that ``If Iran cheats the world will
know.'' Today, we will hear from former top weapons inspectors
and nonproliferation experts to learn what it would take for
that assertion to be true and to be credible.
And I will now turn to the ranking member for any opening
remarks he may have.
Mr. Engel. Mr. Chairman, thank you for calling this hearing
and thank you for your leadership of this committee. Let me
also thank our witnesses for their insight and expertise.
As Congress works to address the potential deal with Iran,
it is important that we seek input from all corners of the
policy arena. So I look forward to a good discussion.
Before we hear the testimony of our witnesses, I would like
to outline some of my reactions to the framework that has been
announced and to outline some of my lingering questions and
concerns.
The bottom line goal of these negotiations was to extend to
1 year the so-called breakout period--the time needed for Iran
to acquire enough fissile material to build a bomb and to close
all pathways for Iran to get the bomb.
As I see it, if Iran adheres to the limitations--and by the
way, we all know that is a big if--the announced framework
takes some important steps toward that goal. The plan would cut
by two-thirds the number of centrifuges Iran is allowed to
operate and those would only be able to employ first generation
technology.
Under the framework, the Iraq reactor would be overhauled,
ensuring that it could never be used to produce plutonium. A
strict inspection regime focused on Iran's uranium mines and
mills will allow us to keep a close eye on Iran's supply of
nuclear fuel from the mines to the centrifuges and beyond for
the next quarter century.
That way, if Iran wanted to build a bomb covertly they
would not only have to build a new covert facility, they would
also need to find a new secret source of uranium. And the
inspection and verification provisions of the NPT and its
additional protocol remain in effect for perpetuity.
However, is the deal perfect? Obviously not. I still have a
lot of questions and concerns. First of all, I always said that
at the start of negotiations with Iran we should have demanded
that they stop enriching while we are talking. I don't think
that was a big ask, considering the Security Council of the
United Nations has voted multiple times to tell Iran to stop
enriching.
But we didn't do it. It bothers me--continues to bother me
that while we are talking with Iran about their nuclear program
at the same time Iran continues to be such a bad player on the
world scene.
We hear, just reading the papers today and this week, that
the United States is contemplating intercepting Iranian
missiles if they head to Yemen. To me, there is just something
wrong with our negotiating with them on the nuclear weapons and
they continue to do all these things.
They continue not only to not release Americans from their
jails but the bureau chief of the Washington Post is indicted
and they are talking about bringing him up for trial and
talking about the charges. It just irks me to no end.
So the administration maintains that sanctions relief
depends on Iran meeting its commitments under the comprehensive
agreement. Iran is looking for sanctions relief on day one.
Again, the Iranian rhetoric in this venture is not helpful.
We are told that sanctions will not be removed just upon the
signing of the agreement and yet we hear Iran's leadership
continuing to insist that it will.
Maybe it is just spin. Maybe it is just hype. But it
certainly seems to me that the more you spin, the more times
you say it, the more times there is hype, it becomes more
difficult to climb down from that position.
That really bothers me. So when will Iran indeed have
access to $130 billion in frozen assets? What will they do with
those assets? What will they fund? Whom will they support?
These are all things that are, obviously, important to us.
Eventually, U.N. Security Council resolutions that impose
nuclear-related sanctions on Iran will be lifted. But these
same resolutions also prohibit the transfer of ballistic
missile technology and conventional arms to Iran.
If those restrictions disappear, then we could see even
more Iranian-inspired volatility in the region and pressure on
neighbors. We need clarity on these sanctions issues.
In addition, the IAEA has posed a series of questions, as
the chairman mentioned, on Iran's weaponization efforts, the
so-called potential military dimension, or PMD.
What happened at the Parchin military base, for example?
How far along is Iran in the weaponization process? If Iran
were to enrich enough fissile material to achieve a breakout
how long would it then take them to build a warhead and made it
to missile?
We must have answers to these questions. The proposed
agreement would not allow Iran to use its advanced centrifuges
to produce nuclear fuel but it would permit them to continue
limited research and development on these advanced machines.
What impact would this have on Iran's breakout time after
the expiration of the deal? And finally, we don't know yet how
disputes about potential Iranian violations will be resolved.
What will happen if the U.S. determines that Iran is
engaged in some activity that violates the agreement but Russia
and China disagree? What will be the process for reimposing
U.N. sanctions if Iran is caught cheating?
If these questions are not resolved in a way that satisfies
these concerns, concerns that Congress has outlined repeatedly,
then there are likely to be major, perhaps fatal, flaws in the
final deal.
And that is why Congress must play a role in this process.
I have said this from day one, again and again publicly, and
last week's markup in the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
signaled an important shift in that direction.
I look forward to reviewing what the full Senate passes on
the floor and I hope we can expeditiously consider the Corker-
Cardin compromise.
And let me close by saying that even though Iran's nuclear
program poses a major threat, it is only one part of a much
larger problem. I said that before.
I am deeply concerned about Iran's ballistic missile
program and its destabilizing behavior in the region. Yet,
these issues are outside of the scope of the negotiations. In
my mind, it is difficult to separate the nuclear issue from
Iran's support for Hezbollah--the terrorists of Hezbollah,
Hamas, President Assad, the Houthis in Yemen or the American
political prisoners in Iranian jails.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Engel.
We are going to go 1 minute to Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, chair
of the Middle East Subcommittee, and then 1 minute to Mr. Ted
Deutch, who is the ranking member of that subcommittee.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Today's hearing asks can we verify a nuclear agreement with
Iran. We all know the answer to that--no, we cannot. Allowing
access to Iran's nuclear sites declared or undeclared still
ultimately resides with the regime, and defining and then
enforcing any violations becomes a political matter, not a
matter of fact.
We have already seen Russia rush to do business with Iran
and even lifting its suspension of S-300 surface-to-air
missiles before, as you said, Mr. Chairman, before the ink
could even dry on the four different versions of the framework
agreement fact sheets.
Putin has announced that Russia would begin trading assets
like grain and construction equipment in exchange for Iranian
oil and Iran has announced that China will help build five
nuclear plants in Iran.
So the notion that there will be the political will to snap
back any sanctions is as illusory as the administration's
belief that there will be adequate verification mechanisms in
this deal--Disney's Fantasyland. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
Mr. Deutch.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Chairman Royce and Ranking Member
Engel, for giving us this opportunity to really delve into the
technical details of this deal.
We have experts who know exactly what is needed for a
verification regime to prevent the development of nuclear
weapons and let me just say I would like to see a deal
succeed--I have been clear about that--but only if it is a good
deal.
I want to see a deal that ensures Iran doesn't walk away in
a few years with an industrial-sized nuclear infrastructure but
perhaps most importantly I want a deal that ensures that we
have access to any and every possible avenue for cheating,
including access to military sites, and that we have adequate
and swift measures in place to act if we suspect or find that
Iran is doing so.
I have already laid out my concerns with aspects of the
framework presented just a few weeks ago and I hope today will
offer us the chance to get some clarity on whether there are
technical ways to overcome those issues.
And though this is not the subject of this hearing, Mr.
Chairman, I would say that for Iran to take a step to restore
some credibility and some belief even in these negotiations,
perhaps the best thing that they could do now will be to ensure
that Amir Hekmati, Saeed Abedini, Jason Rezian and my
constituent, Bob Levinson, return home to their families.
I thank you and I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Deutch.
Now we will go lastly, 1 minute, to Judge Ted Poe, chair of
the Terrorism and Nonproliferation Subcommittee, and then 1
minute to Mr. Bill Keating, who is the ranking member of the
Terrorism and Nonproliferation Subcommittee.
Mr. Poe. Mr. Chairman, Iran will lie until the truth will
suit them better. We cannot trust Iran and I see no convincing
evidence that we can verify them sticking to the final deal.
Iran is still lying about its past nuclear activities.
There is no reason to hope or believe Iran will start telling
the truth and being honest once sanction relief comes. This
hope is delusional.
After the deal to make a deal, as I call it, Supreme Leader
Khamenei said there was no deal and still screams ``Death to
the United States.'' The White House said sanctions would be
lifted gradually. President Rouhani publicly demanded that the
sanctions be lifted on the first day of the agreement.
The military has insisted that there will be no inspection
of military facilities. The sides don't even agree on what this
little deal may be. Iran could very well outsource its nuclear
program to North Korea to avoid inspections altogether.
We cannot trust this regime. Iran has proven time and again
to be deceitful and a dangerous state sponsor of terror hell
bent on lying and cheating its way to obtain nuclear weapons,
developing ICBMs to deliver these nukes while being a threat to
the world and their own people.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Keating.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Engel,
for conducting this timely hearing. I would also like to thank
our witnesses for being here today.
It is an important presence that we will be able to discuss
with your expertise the intricacies of this framework and I
know that my colleagues will benefit from your testimony.
The indefatigable work of Secretary Kerry and Secretary
Moniz have helped to advance us to a historical juncture and
yet the history of Iran's actions in the nuclear arena do not
inspire confidence.
For any agreement to succeed, it is critical that Iran's
compliance is verifiable. This will require so-called invasive
inspections and monitoring that, to me, are the key to any
framework.
There remain further details and questions that I am
confident will be addressed this morning and I look forward to
hearing from our witnesses.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
This morning we are pleased to be joined by a distinguished
group of experts. Mr. Charles Duelfer was a top official of the
U.N. weapons inspection organization. Mr. Stephen Rademaker is
the former Assistant Secretary at U.S. Department of State for
the Bureau of Arms Control and Bureau of International Security
and Nonproliferation.
By the way, Mr. Rademaker is a national security project
advisor at the Bipartisan Policy Center and formerly served as
chief counsel to this committee and we welcome him back.
And Mr. David Albright is the founder and president of the
Institute for Science and International Security in Washington,
DC, and has appeared before this committee on numerous
occasions and we welcome him back as well.
And without objection, the witnesses' full prepared
statements will be made part of the record and members will
have 5 calendar days to submit any statements or questions to
them or extraneous materials for the record.
And, Mr. Duelfer, please summarize your remarks.

STATEMENT OF MR. CHARLES DUELFER, CHAIRMAN, OMNIS, INC. (FORMER
CHAIRMAN, UN SPECIAL COMMISSION ON IRAQ [UNSCOM])

Mr. Duelfer. Thank you, Chairman Royce and Congressman
Engel, members of the committee.
I last appeared before this group a decade ago when I was
presenting the results of an outfit which was named the Iraq
Survey Group headed by the CIA in which there were many members
from the military and every part of the U.S.----
Chairman Royce. I am going to suggest that you get that
mike a little closer.
Mr. Duelfer [continuing]. Many members of the intelligence
community. I thank the committee for remembering that work and
for learning from the past because the experiences and the
knowledge that we gained came at a great price.
We lost people in that exercise. I want to note their
names. We lost Sergeant Lawrence Roukey of Maine, Sergeant
Sherwood Baker of Pennsylvania, Sergeant Don Clary of Kansas
and Sergeant First Class Clint Wisdom, also of Kansas.
So the knowledge that we gained was expensive and I am very
glad that this committee is taking that into account in
considering the issues that we face today.
As the chairman mentioned, I spent a lot of time at the
U.N. as the deputy chairman of the Iraqi inspection team and I
am going to draw some points based on that experience, just a
few.
First of all, as some people have noted in their opening
remarks, we had greater authority in those days than anything
which has been contemplated for Iran.
We could go anyplace anytime. We could take things into
Iraq. We could take things out of Iraq. We operated
helicopters. We had U-2 missions. We had sensors. We could
interview anyone. We could seize documents.
We could do all of that, and yet we struggled after 6 or 7
years and we couldn't accomplish the task that was given us. As
it turned out, Saddam Hussein had given, at the end of the day,
more than we expected. But the fact was we could not confirm
that. So even with all that access we could not do the job.
Second point--in the current set of circumstances it is
envisioned that the sanctions will remain off of Iran unless
there is some indication otherwise as reported by the
inspectors. That is upside down with respect to what we had in
Iraq. In Iraq, the sanctions stayed on until and unless the
weapons inspectors reported that Iraq was compliant.
I would suggest that that dynamic makes it much tougher for
the head of the inspection team to report to the Security
Council and to the world. It is a much tougher thing to do to
say something which will cause sanctions to come back in.
Third point--it is a very tough position to be as a weapons
inspector at the intersection of political science and physical
science. There is a lot of pressures which are going to be put
on the director general of the IAEA in the circumstances as
painted out by the current agreement.
He is going to have the Iranians on one side arguing a
case. He is going to have the Security Council on another side
and he is going to have individual countries, all making cases
to him.
Fourth point--evidence is always ambiguous. You are never
going to find something that just is unavoidable. Weapons
inspectors find things which are indicators that suggest
certain things.
So how the weapons inspectors report that is always
flexible. The number of meetings we had in the 1990s with
Council members, with the Council itself, arguing over how we
would characterize the evidence that we found was a very, very
difficult process.
In that light, I would note from the experience we had in
Iraq where we interviewed Saddam, we talked to his top people,
we learned just how aggressive some other countries were in
making sure that favorable treatment was given to Iraq in the
Security Council and elsewhere.
So while there may be unanimity in the Security Council and
among the international community at one point in time, there
is a natural tendency for that--those interests to diverge over
time, particularly once business is going on, when people have
a financial stake in the continuation of the lifting of
sanctions.
Finally, I would just say in Saddam's case he took a long
view. He took a very long view. Yes, he wanted to get out of
sanctions in the short term.
But it is worth recalling--and we learned this from him
directly--that he had every intention of reconstituting his
weapons programs when circumstances permitted.
So, you know, we, in this town, tend to have a short view--
election cycles, business cycles, news cycles. We tend to
discount the future very heavily. I suggest that other
countries don't have that viewpoint.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Duelfer follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Chairman Royce. Mr. Rademaker.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE STEPHEN G. RADEMAKER, NATIONAL
SECURITY ADVISOR, BIPARTISAN POLICY CENTER (FORMER ASSISTANT
SECRETARY, BUREAU OF ARMS CONTROL & BUREAU OF INTERNATIONAL
SECURITY AND NONPROLIFERATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE)

Mr. Rademaker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Engel, members of the committee. I am very pleased to be back
here testifying on this issue.
You may recall I testified in June of last year on the
Joint Plan of Action so I welcome this opportunity to comment
on development since that time in the negotiations with Iran.
I want to note at the outset that the subject of this
hearing is verification. However, the invitation letter I
received indicated, and I will just paraphrase this, but I was
told that the committee will be particularly interested in my
larger analysis of what this deal would mean for Iran's nuclear
program, assuming it upholds the agreement.
So I am taking that as an invitation to not focus so much
on verification issues. We have two bona fide experts here on
the panel who, I think, can do that. I will talk more to the
broader implications of the deal, and I have submitted a
prepared statement which I will summarize.
But I want to note at the outset that I strongly agree with
the opening statements that I heard from all the members--the
chairman and ranking members--and I am very pleased to see that
you are asking all the right questions.
The most important point I make in my prepared statement is
that at a fundamental level what the deal that it appears is
going to be reached between the P5+1 and Iran fundamentally
signifies is acceptance by the international community of Iran
as a nuclear weapons threshold state.
Now, let me just say that again. Fundamentally, this deal
will represent acceptance of Iran as a nuclear weapons
threshold state. Now, I am not saying they are going to--I am
not saying we are accepting that they will have nuclear
weapons. Because they are remaining a party to the NPT they
have a legal obligation not to produce nuclear weapons.
But to use a football metaphor, what we are agreeing to
here is that we are agreeing to a pathway, to a process. But at
the end of that pathway--10 to 15 years--the football line--the
football is going to be on the 1-inch line and, you know, they
are that close to having a nuclear weapon and that is
fundamentally what is being agreed here.
And, you know, this is a radical departure in U.S.
nonproliferation policy because it has been the objective of
the Clinton administration, the Bush administration and the
Obama administration until now not just to deny Iran a nuclear
weapon but also to prevent them from being a nuclear weapons
threshold state because countries that are on the 1-inch line--
that are that close to having a nuclear weapon--for all
practical purposes in their international relations they have
to be treated as if they did have a nuclear weapon because, you
know, honestly, at any given moment they are so close to having
it--a screwdriver turn away--no one knows for sure that they
don't have a nuclear weapon.
So they get the deference of a nuclear weapon state even
without having demonstrably produced a nuclear weapon and that
is essentially what is being conceded here at the end of this
process.
So by any measure this is a huge retreat in U.S. policy and
a big victory for Iran because, you know, for two decades they
have been trying to get to this point and what they are being
promised now is, after two decades of effort, in another 10
years they will have what they have long wanted.
Now, why are we doing this? Well, I think we have all heard
the argument. The main argument made by the Obama
administration is that this is a very good deal because it will
increase Iran's nuclear weapons breakout time from 2 to 3
months today to 1 year.
And that is--you know, I think Mr. Albright and his group
have raised some questions about whether that is really true
but for purposes of my testimony I am assuming that is true and
I will concede that that is an important accomplishment.
I mean, we are uncomfortable with Iran being able to
produce a weapon--a nuclear weapon within 2 or 3 months and
extending that to 1 year would be an important development.
The question I ask in my testimony is if that is an
important victory for us today why does it stop being important
in 10 years. You know, and let me be clear--what happens in 10
years is not that we revert to the status quo, that they go
back to a 2-month or 3-month breakout time.
No. At the end of 10 years and especially after 15 years
they are going to go back to a radically shorter breakout time
than that and that is basically all locked in under this
agreement.
And this isn't just my opinion. I mean, President Obama
conceded this 2 weeks ago in a radio interview. I will just
read what he said. He dismissed concerns that there--you know,
of the type that Mr. Albright is raising about whether the 1-
year breakout time is real.
But then he went on to say what is a more relevant fear
would be that in year 13, 14, 15 they have advanced centrifuges
that enrich uranium fairly rapidly and at that point the
breakout times would have shrunk down almost to zero.
That is President Obama's characterization of the deal, and
let me--let me stress he is talking about what happens after
year 13. The way this deal is structured there are additional
significant restrictions that remain in place until year 15.
So if at year 13 it is already almost down to zero for them
to break out and produce a nuclear weapon it is even less than
zero after year 15 when additional restrictions come off of
their program.
So if anything else--if nothing else, President Obama was
actually understating the effect of this deal ultimately on
Iran's nuclear breakout time.
I think another point we have to understand about this
breakout is that when they break out after year--you know,
today when we are talking about nuclear breakout we are talking
about how much time would they need to produce one weapon--one
nuclear weapon.
After year 15, we are not going to be worried about one
nuclear weapon. I mean, they will be on the 1-inch line for
producing dozens of nuclear weapons--so, you know, an entire
arsenal if they want and that is--that is the situation we are
looking at.
In my testimony, I characterize this as a Faustian bargain
because, you know, it is similar to the German legend about the
man who, you know, wanted magical powers and so he cut a deal
with the Devil where for 24 years he was given magical powers
but at the end of 24 years he loses the powers and he loses his
soul and spends--you know, faces a life of eternal damnation.
That is essentially what is being negotiated here. We get
the benefit, good for 10 years, and at the end of that the
other side gets everything that they have ever wanted and we
lose the right to complain about it. We lose the right to
reimpose sanctions.
If we try to change the terms of the deal, Iran will be in
a position to accuse us of being the lawless nation, the nation
that violates its international commitments.
Mr. Chairman, I see I am out of time. Let me just say, you
know, I do make the point in my testimony that sometimes it
makes sense to enter a Faustian bargain.
If you think--if you think the Devil is going to die before
he is able to claim your soul or if you think he is going to be
radically transformed then maybe it is a sensible thing to do.
And I served on the staff of this committee in the 1990s
when the Clinton administration negotiated a nuclear deal with
North Korea called the agreed framework, and they didn't
advertise or they didn't make this argument publicly but I can
tell you that the Clinton administration officials privately
basically said, you know, don't worry about this being a
Faustian bargain because haven't you--this is 1994--haven't you
noticed what is going on in the world.
You know, communism is doomed. You just saw East and West
Germany just reunified. So yes, we are promising all these
benefits to North Korea but we are going to build nuclear
reactors there and all these things. But, you know, in 15 years
by the time we are done with these nuclear reactors North Korea
is going to be long gone. These are going to be South Korean
nuclear reactors.
And, you know, in 1994 that seemed like a fairly persuasive
argument. Now, we know with the benefit of hindsight that it
was wishful thinking.
I mean, the North Korean regime is still there. They are
still pursuing nuclear weapons. The question I ask in my
testimony is, you know, is there any reasonable basis to
suspect that in 10 years the Iranian regime is going to be gone
or radically transformed and I suggest that actually to the
contrary there is every reason to think that this agreement
strengthens the Iranian regime and makes it much easier for
them to resist pressures to change.
And I, you know, go through some financial numbers. The
amount of cash that Iran is to get at the outset of this deal
and, you know, quickly thereafter--with your indulgence I will
just read the numbers. And this is according to a Wall Street
Journal story that appeared last Friday.
It says that the Obama administration estimates that
implementation of the deal will give Iran access to $100
billion to $140 billion--billion U.S. dollars--in frozen funds
in offshore accounts with $30 billion to $50 billion of that to
be released immediately upon signature.
And, now, understand the Iranian Government budget this
year is about $300 billion, okay, so they are being offered
$100 billion to $140 billion, $30 billion to $50 billion of
that immediately.
Now, to put that in perspective let us--you know,
relative--let us look at what that would mean if--you know, if
it were not Iran but the United States. The U.S. budget in--the
Federal budget this year is $3.9 trillion.
So if we were being offered an equivalent amount of cash it
would be for the United States between $1.3 trillion and $1.8
trillion with $390 billion to $650 billion of that to be
provided immediately upon signature.
So, you know, the question I ask in my testimony is if the
United States Government were being offered, roughly, $1\1/2\
trillion and $390 billion to $650 billion of that immediately,
how much pressure would we feel to scale back our international
commitments to reduce our defense spending? How much pressure
would we feel to implement, you know, political reforms?
Or would we feel like hey, we are in a much better position
to continue doing business the way we wanted to do business.
And, you know, and I am talking here just about the cash
dimension, which is actually the less important dimension.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rademaker follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Chairman Royce. Well, we are going to go to Mr. Albright.
But on that cash dimension, what they are doing with that
signing bonus in today's Wall Street Journal tens of millions
of dollars to--Iran's Revolutionary Guards are transferring
tens of millions of dollars this week to the--to the Hamas
brigades.
So but anyway, Mr. Albright.

STATEMENT OF MR. DAVID ALBRIGHT, FOUNDER AND PRESIDENT,
INSTITUTE FOR SCIENCE AND INTERNATIONAL SECURITY

Mr. Albright. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Engel
and other members of the committee. I appreciate the
opportunity to testify today.
I think Steve has outlined a future that is fairly bleak
and I would like to return to that, if not at the end of my
testimony during the question period.
Most of the points I would like to--will make have
essentially been made before. I mean, I think the--many of the
key verification provisions remain unresolved. I mean, the
parameters have been set but the details matter and there is
great differences between Iran and the United States and its
partners.
And more important, I think the Iranians have taken the
position to be extremely defiant and the United States has
taken the position of problem solving, and I think that has put
us at a disadvantage and it doesn't bode well for finding
solutions that are, in a sense, gain the needed measures.
Now, where Iran has been a problem some of these things
have been pointed out--refusing to allow the IAEA inspectors
into military sites, not resolving the IAEA's concerns about
Iran's past work on nuclear weapons through 2004 and possible
work afterwards.
It has refused to stop illicit procurements for its nuclear
programs. I know of at least one procurement since the JPA was
implemented for the Iraq reactor that was attempted. I am told
my U.S. investigatory officials there have been others.
Iran is resisting U.N. Security Council mandate controls
over the procurement channel, which is an important concession
that has been gained. But here is an example where the details
matter.
Most of us think of the procurement channel run out of the
United States or the U.N. Security Council with IAEA monitoring
active verification of the end use of any goods that goes to
the nuclear program.
Iran prefers a much different method, and at this point in
time which method would be used is unresolved. And as others
have mentioned, Iran is refusing anywhere anytime inspections.
And I think the--at this point in time the United States is
going to have to take steps to significantly strengthen this
deal and end up with the provisions meeting the U.S. conditions
if this deal is to be verifiable.
And as I have mentioned, others have mentioned, there are
legitimate concerns that the U.S. administration will not
succeed and that concern certainly justifies Congress'
continuing strong involvement in the creation of this
agreement.
There needs to be oversight on those conditions and I feel
that the--what I have heard the United States administration is
more willing to share what is going on in this deal with
Members of Congress, and I don't just mean ranking members and
chairman but a broader set of members and their staff so that
people can see the details and be able to react to those
details.
Now, from my organization's point of view, there is certain
conditions that are more important than others and I think
members of this committee share this.
I personally think that resolving the IAEA's concerns about
past and possibly ongoing nuclear weapons research and
development work is critically important and to have concrete
progress on that prior to any key relief of economic and
financial sanctions by the United States or the EU--that there
are many other conditions that also have to be met such as
reducing the number of centrifuges but concrete progress in
this area is necessary.
And what would concrete progress look like? Certainly, IAEA
access to Parchin. But people should think of Parchin as a list
of activities. It is not just a single visit. It is being able
to see the equipment associated with the site. It is being able
to visit the company that made this controversial high
explosive chamber--did it make other chambers. It is the
ability to have access to the people involved in these
experiments and I would argue all of this needs to happen
before the key sanctions are lifted.
Moreover, I think there needs to be time for IAEA to make
an initial determination of whether Iran had a nuclear weapons
program or not. I mean, the IAEA has said it plans to do that.
I think it should be done before the sanctions are
relieved. Another vital area is this question of proliferation
of sensitive goods.
From my own point of view. I would like to see the U.N.
Security Council resolution stay in force until the IAEA has
made a determination that Iran's program is indeed peaceful.
That is not a short process, particularly under the additional
protocol to make that determination.
But, personally, I think that is the way it should be. The
framework envisions perhaps the Security Council resolutions
coming off quicker but a new resolution being established that
would then control these proliferation-sensitive goods.
Whether that is adequate or not I don't know. Part of it
rests on a list of goods that would be provided to Iran that
represent the ones that are explicitly controlled. Is that list
good enough? Our initial indications are that list is not
sufficient and needs to be, in a sense, longer in order for it
to be effective.
Also would like to see Iran commit to not conduct illicit
nuclear trade. President Rouhani himself has said they are
proud of smuggling. Never heard a President of a country ever
say that. They will continue their illicit procurement
patterns.
Without a commitment on the nuclear, at least, it is hard
to see that they are committing to a verifiable regime. And
then again, let me just end that the additional inspection
provisions are critical.
Now, anytime inspections are theoretically impossible and
what Charles Duelfer described in Iraq could never--probably
never be obtained. But what is envisioned by Iran is completely
unacceptable. Even what is in the additional protocol is not
enough.
You have got to have prompt access and the administration
has some proposals. Iran has not accepted those and I think the
administration needs to be pushed to have even more prompt
inspections and certainly they need to be pushed to press Iran
to accept anywhere inspections. That, as several members have
pointed out, is not the case today and Iran has said it has no
intention to do that.
The last thing I would like to say is that this deal, and I
believe it probably will happen, is going to be very tough to
implement and I would argue one of the problems with the agreed
framework negotiated with North Korea in the '90s, as Steve
mentioned, is that the administration kind of didn't do very
much on implementation and Congress mostly focused on some of
the budgetary issues and some of the compliance issues.
But the--but there wasn't active work to ensure that the
deal was implemented and compliance was obtained and/or
punished if it wasn't going to happen.
So I would argue that Congress will have a continuing role
and will need to have a very important role in monitoring the
effectiveness of this deal both in the short term and in the
long term.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Albright follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Chairman Royce. So if I can go back to Mr. Rademaker, as
I--as I mentioned this morning in the press is this report, and
I talked about viewing this sanctions relief as a signing
bonus, basically, what are they doing with the relief they
already have?
And the fact that the Iranian regime is so engaged right
now with the anticipation of getting the relief--the remarks by
one of the ministers that, you know, they control four Arab
capitals today. He was speaking of Yemen as well as other
countries that have fallen under the sway of the Quds Forces.
The Quds Forces is very active and this week, according to
Western intelligence, Iran's Revolutionary Guards during the
past few months have transferred tens of millions of dollars to
Hamas' brigades.
Intelligence reports show that the funds have been
transferred on the direct order of the commander of the
Revolutionary Guards' elite Quds Force who also dedicated an
annual budget to finance Hamas' military operations.
The funds, according to the intelligence report, are being
used primarily to help Hamas rebuild the network of tunnels
that were destroyed, and apart from using Iranian aide to
rebuild the tunnel network the brigades are also replenishing
their depleted stocks of medium-range missiles, according to
officials.
So the consequences of this negotiation--this olive branch,
to put it in the words of the administration, that is being
extended--is not an Iran that is changing its behavior. If we
read anything from attitude, you know, you take a look--and I
am going to quote Dennis Ross this week from something he
wrote:

``The more the Supreme Leader makes specific points
about the content and purposes of the negotiations in
public the more his comments are likely to tie the
hands of his negotiators.''

I think his point is that, you know, that is what has
happened so far. The Supreme Leader insisted in public that
Iran have enrichment and what happened? They got enrichment.
That they not dismantle the facilities, which I thought was
part of the original plan--he succeeded.
That they be allowed to continue R&D, so they succeeded.
That they have an industrial-sized program--on all of these
points, the U.S. negotiators conceded.
So when the Supreme Leader talks, whether it is on negation
positions in terms of the agreement or it is on the position of
death to America, a chant that he still leads every week,
apparently people listen. And I wanted to ask your opinion and
the other panelists' opinion on that point.
Mr. Rademaker. Mr. Chairman, I certainly have to agree with
you that if you look at the declared red lines on our side and
on the Iranian side at the outset of these negotiations and you
look at what appears to be emerging as the final agreement, the
final agreement is pretty much consistent with the Iranian red
lines and bears little relationship to the red lines that were
declared on our side going in.
So what that tells you is that during the course of the
negotiations on issue after issue the Iranians prevailed and we
backed down. And regrettably, we still don't have a final deal
and, I mean, you have watched the spectacle of the dueling fact
sheets--of the U.S. fact sheet and the Iranian fact sheet--and
the Iranians saying that the U.S. fact sheet is all wrong and
the Supreme Leader taking issue with some of the details.
So I think, you know, the testimony we are presenting today
is based on what we understand and most of us are relying on
the U.S. fact sheet. But, you know, from the outset both sides
have said in these--in this negotiation nothing is agreed until
everything is agreed.
So I think it is a fair statement that everything remains
subject to negotiation and I am not sure we have seen the last
of the retreats on our side in the negotiations, regrettably.
You asked about what is Iran doing with the funds and you
are referring to sort of--they are getting it is around $4
billion or $5 billion a month now--as sort of a down payment on
this much larger amount of money that is--it is Iranian money
but it is foreign bank accounts and due to U.S. sanctions that
Congress enacted--the so-called Menendez-Kirk sanctions--the
Iranians are not able to spend that money. They are not able to
bring it back to Iran.
They are able to spend it in India or Japan or China. But
anyway, you know, what we know is that as part of this deal
they will be able to bring that money home. There are no
restrictions on what they do with that money. That is just not
part of the deal and what they----
Chairman Royce. It is funding.
Mr. Rademaker [continuing]. Have been doing with the down
payments give an indication of what they will do with the much
larger sums that are coming in the future.
Chairman Royce. And Mr. Albright, you had a point you
wanted to make?
Mr. Albright. Yes, I want to make a point. I think--I want
to emphasize that the limits for the first 10 years in a
negotiation that is difficult aren't that bad. I mean, it is
really--there is questions--the real question is after that 10-
year about what is going on.
But I think that it should be recognized that Iranians had
to give a lot on that--in that 10-year period and, again, we
can--I have disappointments with Fordow, with centrifuge R&D.
But centrifuge R&D in that 10-year period is pretty
severely limited. I would have liked it not to happen on the--
particularly the advanced ones called the IR6 and the IR8.
But nonetheless, those limitations are in place. I also--
but I also think that where Iran has been very tough is on the
verification issues and that is where I think the real holes in
this deal can show up that are going to affect what happens in
the first 10 years.
Chairman Royce. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Albright.
Mr. Engel.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to read something and then ask any of our
panelists who would care to comment on it to please do so. The
parameters that the United States published in violations of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action states, and I quote,

``The architecture of U.S. nuclear-related sanctions on
Iran will be retained for much of the duration of the
deal and allow for snap back of sanctions in the event
of significant nonperformance.''

I would like to ask you in your opinion what would
constitute significant nonperformance, what would insignificant
nonperformance be, who should determine whether Iran has
violated the agreement and what obstacles should we watch out
for in the execution of this part of the agreement--whoever
would care to answer it. Mr. Duelfer.
Mr. Duelfer. That gets to a point I was trying to make in
my introduction which is that there will be no consensus on
that among the international community.
The pressure will be put on the director of the IAEA to
make a judgment. At the end of the day, there is no--there is
no cookbook answer to it.
He will have to make some judgment about whether, you know,
compliance exists or doesn't exist and he is going to be under
enormous pressure in that case. It is also the case that it
will be very important, however the final agreement is
structured, that noncooperation be equated with noncompliance.
In other words, if the Iranians don't answer the questions,
such as related to Parchin or otherwise, then the secretary
general or the director general of the IAEA can report to the
Security Council that they are in violation. That is the only
way you can really empower him in that--in that dilemma he
faces.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. Anybody else? Mr. Albright.
Mr. Albright. Yes. One is I don't think the snap back
provision has been negotiated.
I think it is going to be extremely difficult to negotiate,
particularly if you then include snap back on U.N. Security
Council sanctions. And also I think it has to be recognized
that it is mostly a deterrent.
I mean, if you do have to snap back and that succeeds,
having Iran change its behavior significantly within a 1-year
breakout period is going to be very difficult. I think you will
be forced at that point to confront a military option and won't
be able to rely on the effective sanctions kicking in and
having an effect.
Now, another point is in the--in the JPA the IAEA has not
been given the mandate to determine compliance. I don't think--
and I don't know if it is going to be given that mandate in
the--in the long-term deal.
And the IAEA reports but it does not determine
noncompliance, and so I think that is a question for this deal
is who is going to do that and I don't know what the answer
would be.
I would suggest it shouldn't be the IAEA. I mean, it is not
the best agency to determine something as important as this.
Another issue is snap back does not touch the--I guess what
Congressman Engel called the nonsignificant nonperformance.
I mean, that is really aimed at fairly major noncompliance
which, again, will have to be defined what that is. One can
imagine. But there is going to be a whole set of probably
noncompliance that is small and but over time could add up to
major noncompliance.
And how do you deal with that? And I am not sure that is
even really being discussed in these negotiations of how do you
deal with minor noncompliance except by putting--let us say the
U.S. would put political pressure on Iran like what it did with
the IR5 when Iran started to operate or feed in uranium
hexaflouride gas and enrich it--and again, it is remixed with
the tails afterward so no enriched uranium comes out in the
process but nonetheless it does enrich and the Iranians see how
well it works.
But in that case, U.S. put political pressure on Iran to
stop and it did. But is that going to work in general? And I
would argue probably not and that there does need to be another
mechanism to deal with these, I would almost call, minor
violations. But over time these minor violations could undo the
deal.
Mr. Engel. Let me ask you then, Mr. Albright, what do you
recommend for proper verification after 15 years when Iran is a
signatory to the additional protocol and will the additional
protocol without some of the other more intrusive inspection
mechanisms be enough to detect breakout?
Mr. Albright. Well, I think the intrusive methods are going
to have to last indefinitely. I mean, I think it definitely
doesn't mean forever but I think there has to be some kind of
review mechanism built into this deal where the P5+1 can decide
at some point in time to take away those intrusive measures.
So I don't think they should sunset. I think it is very
risky, in fact, to have these measures sunset. And so I think
the--and Steve raised this too, you know, this question of
breakout.
From my understanding of the deal is that at year 13 the
breakout time would be 6 months. There would be all kinds of
conditions put on centrifuge types, numbers and within that 6
month breakout criteria.
But after year 13 all bets are off and that is probably not
the best place to be and if it is going to be the place then
there really does need to be some significant review of this
situation so that additional action can be taken and, I would
argue, should be in the deal--should also be in, I would hope,
in any legislation that is created--that there has to be
mandatory review of what is going on with the potential to
change the course.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Ileana Ros-Lehtinen.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
As all of us know, Iran has been--has many years of
experience playing cat and mouse with the IAEA and has learned
from the Iraq model well enough to know that it can stifle even
the most robust and intrusive inspections as the President
claims that he has won from these negotiations.
What makes this whole nuclear negotiations debacle even
more rotten is that President Obama has been disingenuous at
best with Congress and with the American public about what is
really in this deal.
Two of the most egregious examples are the lifting of
sanctions and the reports that surfaced this week that the
President had kept Iran's estimated breakout time a secret
until the framework agreement was announced.
From the very beginning, most of us in Congress decried
these negotiations because they only focused on the nuclear
aspect of Iran's illicit behavior and because we wanted to
prevent Iran from ever acquiring a nuclear weapon, not just
delaying that capability.
The administration insisted that these negotiations be
about the nuclear program alone. Now the administration will
seek to lift all U.N. Security Council sanctions including
those on ballistic missiles and conventional military programs.
The rationale? Because those sanctions were implemented as
part of the nuclear-related resolutions at the U.N. Security
Council.
So for the purposes of lifting sanctions and giving the
Iranian regime more concessions and access to hundreds of
billions of dollars to use to spread its terror and attack U.S.
interests then ballistic missiles, Iran's support for terror
and its conventional military programs are nuclear related. But
when it comes to negotiating this raw deal none of that was
nuclear related.
So Mr. Duelfer, there have been reports that the
administration will give what we have been talking about--Iran
essentially a signing bonus of $500 billion. How are we
weakening the IAEA's ability to monitor and verify Iran's
nuclear program if we already concede billions of dollars to
Iran up front?
And related to that, if we provide this signing bonus what
leverage do we have left with Iran to force this country to
comply and answer all of the IAEA's outstanding inquiries?
Mr. Duelfer. Well, therein lies, I think, the dilemma
that--not just in Washington but the P5+1 faces--how do you
compel compliance? And in the case of Iraq I have a lot of
history and I spent a lot of time there and I should add that I
think the Iranians killed a lot more Americans than ISIS has
ever killed so that, perhaps, colors my views on this, you are
exactly right because the director general of the IAEA has a
limited ability.
He can only report within the parameters of what he knows
and makes judgements about that. He cannot cause Iran to
comply. Only the Security Council and other members can cause
Iran to comply.
Once the sanctions are off, signing bonus or no signing
bonus, the momentum is people want to get on with business.
Russians, you know, demonstrated this in great detail with
respect to Iraq where they----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you.
Mr. Duelfer [continuing]. Explained the last.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much. And Mr. Albright, you
have been saying for a long time now that despite the Obama
administration's claim that Iran's breakout time was over a
year, Iran could actually be closer and potentially even less
than the administration's current public estimate of 2 to 3
months.
How does allowing Fordow to remain active--what does that
mean for a breakout time and how long would it take to test a
nuclear device underground and what kind of assurances do we
have that we could detect it in time?
Mr. Albright. So a lot of questions. Let me--certainly, my
preference would have been that Fordow wouldn't have any
centrifuges.
So because it does you have to continue to factor that into
breakout estimates--the full 1,000 that are there. You could
reduce them as they become unavailable in some significant way
but it still counts in the breakout.
One administration idea is to--is to have any work that is
done involving enriching nonuranium isotopes be such that it
contaminates the centrifuges against use by uranium in the
future and there is some isotopes where that is true--for
example, molybdenum, and having that in the deal will mitigate
some of the risk of Fordow but not all of it.
In terms of testing a nuclear device, I mean, it is--the
estimates vary. I mean, it is very tough to determine or figure
out when a country is working on that. Part of the concern
about--of the PMD, as the IAEA likes to call it, is that Iran,
in their view, knows how to build a crude nuclear weapon and
therefore if they were--had the nuclear explosive material, the
weapon grade uranium, in sufficient quantity then it is
probably not a long road in order to fashion it into a device
that could explode underground or a crude kind of nuclear IED.
And so that could be a matter of just several months.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Albright. I know my time
is up.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Brad Sherman of California.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. It is said that no deal is better
than a bad deal. That looks good on a political bumper sticker.
I think our choice is between a bad deal, perhaps a very bad
deal, and a very bad and intractable situation.
I want to thank Mr. Rademaker for making it clear just how
bad this deal is in year 10 or maybe year 13. They will
literally be on the 1-inch line.
The President has acknowledged that. You have said it
clearly. And the reason for that is during this deal they will
have, roughly, 5,000 centrifuges that are IR1s.
Starting in year 10, maybe if we negotiate very well year
13, they can have an unlimited number of centrifuges and those
centrifuges will be perhaps 10 times as efficient and that will
shrink their breakout time from 1 year to 1 day.
Just do the math--20 times as many centrifuges and those
centrifuges are 10 times as powerful. So the question--you
know, I know we are supposed to ask you questions but people
are asking us questions--what do we do now and what do we do
when a deal is submitted to us.
As to what we do now, we have got to put pressure on the
President to at least meet his minimum objectives, and I think
you gentlemen have pointed out two very important areas.
One is the signing bonus--the idea that if we release $30
billion or perhaps $130 billion while Iran keeps its stockpiles
and hasn't yet dismantled the centrifuges Iran could take all
the benefits and back out of this deal by Labor Day $130
billion richer.
The purpose of these hearings is to focus on verification.
We need go anywhere, go anytime or almost any--or with a very
short notice and we need to be able to use environmental
testing. The administration has said they are going to achieve
that but then I--we saw Secretary Kerry try to argue to us that
don't worry, Iran won't have a nuclear weapon because they
can't have a nuclear weapon because that would violate the
nonproliferation treaty.
That is using the word can't as you can't do it and still
be an upstanding honest nation. I don't think that is a real
bar to Iran. We are told that the additional protocol is going
to give us access, and I am going to get to that in a question.
Trust me there is a question in here somewhere. The--I want
to commend the chairman for having these hearings because that
is part of the effort of letting the administration know that
they have to meet at least their own stated minimum objectives.
And finally, the administration will tell us that these
inspections are the most intrusive ever. That is comparing
these inspections to what we need to make sure the Netherlands
doesn't develop a nuclear bomb.
We have to compare these inspections to what we need to
prevent Iran from having a nuclear bomb. The question of what
we do long term when a deal is--if a deal is submitted that the
President submits to us and has accepted there are those who
say we blow up the deal where does that leave us.
It leaves us with the whole world thinking that Congress is
the unreasonable party. It leaves us with an administration
that has taken the military option off the table.
It leaves us with Iran's centrifuges all intact rather than
two-thirds to three-quarters dismantled. They are stockpiled,
ready to go. They are a few months away and nobody wants to
cooperate with us in international sanctions because the
President has said that it is the Congress, not the ayatollahs,
that are being unreasonable.
After all, the ayatollahs will have signed the agreement
and Congress will have blown it up. But the other side of this
is that we cannot approve the agreement and leave it to a
future President and a future Congress to decide what to do in
2 years, 5 years or 10 years because as I think Mr. Albright
has pointed out, this might be a good deal for 10 years, might
even be a good deal for 13 years but after that it is a deal to
put them, as Mr. Rademaker says, on the 1-inch line.
If I can sneak in a question--Mr. Albright, it took us 2
years to get into Fordow. Does the additional protocol and the
NPT give us the kind of prompt access that we would need?
Mr. Albright. No. No, no. It has to be supplemented. I
mean, it can't be--Iran could slow down the inspectors. They
could use managed access as an excuse to cover up things.
Mr. Sherman. How long could they delay us? They delayed us
2 years for Fordow.
Mr. Albright. Well, it couldn't--it is going to be shorter
than that but days matter and in some cases even hours matter.
So you want prompt access.
You want to be able to get in the day you ask, for example,
and you are going to need the deal to ensure that because Iran
has been--is actively challenging the IAEA on its central
mission within the--within the Board of Governors.
And so I think the deal is going to have to include the
measures explicitly that provide for prompt access and Iran is
going to have to sign the line so that if it doesn't then it is
seen as a material breach of this deal.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Chris Smith of New Jersey.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Chairman, and thank you
again for calling this very important hearing. Welcome to our
witnesses.
As we all know, the framework is a colossal retreat from
the previous internationally agreed upon benchmarks designed to
deny nuclear weapons capability to Iran. For example, U.N.
Resolution 1929--to suspend all uranium enrichment--we now know
that the framework would allow over 5,000 centrifuges and only
limits research and development with advanced centrifuges--full
cooperation of the IAEA inspectors, say the U.N. Security
Council resolutions.
The framework, we now know, and the statements that have
come out of high-ranking people from the ayatollah to Rouhani
to high members of the military establishment, military sites
are going to be completely off limits.
I mean, that is a deal breaker in and of itself. And then
refrain from any activity related to ballistic missiles--U.N.
Security Council resolutions, ballistic missiles aren't even on
the table, which is a gross missing element in this entire
thing.
Let me just ask a couple of questions. I met and talked to
Zarif personally about the missing Americans and said if you
want to show things had changed in Iran allow human rights to
be respected in Iran for your own people but also for Saeed
Abedini, Levinson, Hekmati, and Rezaian.
And I have had two hearings myself on Saeed Abedini and
they are still being held. That is unbelievable. You know, even
when Reagan walked away from Reykjavik in 1986 we had a robust,
on the United States side, discussion with Gorbachev with lists
of Soviet Jewish refuseniks and other human rights.
It was always on the table. I had Andrew Natsios, who is a
leader of an NGO for a pro-human rights for North Korean NGO--
and he said the delinking of human rights with North Korea was
a major blunder on the part of the Clinton administration and
it should have been. We got nothing on the nuclear side. If you
can't treat your people well, why should we respect your word
when it comes to something so existential as a nuclear bomb.
So my question is, is this a Pyrrhic victory? Are we on the
threshold of a Pyrrhic victory when it comes to nuclear
agreements? I think your Faustian bargain, Secretary Rademaker,
was very well put. Does the Senate have the ability to deem
this a treaty and treat it as such?
I looked into this and studied extensively, you know, the
State Department has eight criteria--very vague--that they have
asserted to call this an executive agreement. It seems to me
that is all too cute because, obviously, the threshold of
stopping it is reversed.
You only need one-third plus one to stop a treaty and even
what Senator Corker has done, which was an outstanding effort,
given our limited abilities, it seems, you know, he needs two-
thirds to get it passed.
But why a treaty versus an executive agreement? Let me also
ask you if you could--similarities with the North Korea deal,
you know, how many do they have. I remember the hearings in
this room because I have been here a long time, 35 years, when
some of the administration people from the Clinton
administration were bragging how they were going to have an
onsite inspection and it was going to be, like, 6 months down
the road.
And I said, are you kidding me--you think in 6 months you
will see anything? If they have it, it will be moved somewhere
else.
And even the IAEA, in their report in February, they could
not conclude there was no nuclear weapons-related activities
taking place in the country due to lack of access, to
documents, materiel, and personnel. I mean, there are no
confidence builders coming from the Iranians.
We are fools, in my opinion, to suggest that this is going
to be a deal that they will live up to, especially with the
verification protocols so egregiously flawed.
So if you could speak to that, Mr. Rademaker.
Mr. Rademaker. Thank you, Chairman Smith.
Mr. Smith. Could you add one last thing? If the Iranians
procure a weapon from another state--they are very close to
North Korea and we know there is cooperation going on--what
does that do to the deal?
Mr. Rademaker. Okay. I will try to address all those
questions. First, on the treaty versus executive agreement
issue, you know, I am certainly sympathetic to the concern you
are expressing but let me just say as the former chief counsel
to this committee, you know, I think, you know, the legal issue
is complicated.
There is a lot of precedent that the administration will be
able to point to for not treating this as a treaty. So I think
there is no chance whatsoever that they will agree to submit it
in that manner.
So in order for there to be congressional review I think
what Senator Corker and his colleagues in the Senate have come
up with is as good as it is going to get. I wish it were a
better mechanism.
I wish--I wish the Senate-approved mechanism would require
approval by majority vote rather than disapproval, which, as
you pointed out, ultimately requires two-thirds majorities in
both Houses to override the predictable Presidential veto of
the resolution of disapproval.
So it builds in a bias in favor of approval. There is no
question about that.
But, you know, I think as a practical matter that is what
is going to afford congressional review and, as we all know,
the administration would be happier without even that level of
congressional review.
The--on the North Korea issue I spoke to that in my
testimony. The agreed framework with North Korea was another
Faustian bargain. It was--it was defensible on the theory that
the North Korean regime was probably going to collapse within
15 years.
That seemed like a reasonable expectation in 1994. It was
proved ill founded. I am not sure there is any reasonable
expectation that we are going to see radical change in Tehran
over the next 10 or 15 years and in the end we were fortunate
that we got out of the agreed framework because North Korea
cheated on it and we caught then cheating.
You know, we can speculate here on what the Iranians will
do. I guess I would submit that if I were the--well, if the
Iranians are rational the thing to do for them is to bide their
time, fully comply and then reap the benefits in 10 to 15
years.
Chairman Royce. And quit saying ``Death to America,'' if
they were rational? Gregory Meeks of New York.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the
gentlemen for their testimony. I have been running back and
forth from different hearings.
But I traveled to Vienna not too long ago and had a
conversation with the head of the IAEA because for me--and I
guess my question, you know, is one can frame the potential
deal as one that would eventually roll back some sanctions in
exchange for a significant reduction of centrifuges and
increased transparency, transparency being the key issue as
well as the IAEA getting to do the work that they need to do
and access.
Now, they told me that at least so far while the framework
was being worked on Iran has lived up to whatever its
commitments were.
But would you say that the key is what would allow an
inspector to be satisfied in their work in verifying Iran's
implementation of a deal and is that where and what we should
be pushing to make sure that there is, in this deal, this
transparency issue? Is that--would you think that is the key
here?
Mr. Albright. One thing--when the IAEA says that Iran has
lived up to its commitment it is talking about Iran's
commitments under the interim deal of the Joint Plan of Action,
which are pretty minimal.
And so there is some questions, you know, of whether they
are fulfilling their obligations in a timely manner if you look
at the issue of newly produced 3\1/2\ percent enriched uranium.
There is also issues of are they processing the near 20
percent LEU. I mean, they--ultimately if it is going to be a
violation or not they have to the end of some period of time
under the interim deal.
But the--all these conditions on the interim deal are
pretty minor and at the same time while it is complying with
the conditions in this interim deal it is totally uncooperative
with the IAEA on the big issue of the day--did Iran have a
nuclear weapons program in the past, can the IAEA have access
to military sites.
So in a sense, Iran chooses when it wants to comply and
will often choose to comply on the minor things while, you
know, uncooperative or noncompliant on the big things.
Mr. Meeks. See, here is what my concern is and I have to
rely a lot on the IAEA and I hope that the committee has a
chance to go and talk again while--with some of those. I think
that would be good instruction for all of us.
Chairman Royce. I have talked to the chairman too.
Mr. Meeks. That would be great. But my concern is this, if
we don't engage for example. From what I understand, and you
correct me if I'm wrong, back in 2003 Iran had 164 centrifuges
and then by 2008 that figure was close to 5,000. In other
words, the number of centrifuges increased by 30 times between
2003 and 2008.
And so what other alternatives--it seems to me by engaging
we have rolled back the program. I don't know what the other
alternative is if we don't continue to engage and try to work
it out.
Mr. Albright. Yes. I think engagement makes sense. I mean,
I think that is the best way to proceed. You know, the obvious
other option is--that Israel has exercised twice is to bomb
facilities and I think that is one to avoid at all costs. So I
think the engagement is the best one.
But the issue is, and I think Congressman Sherman raised
it, is that if you get a bad deal or less than adequate deal
you are probably going to--you are just delaying the time when
they have nuclear weapons. So that is really----
Mr. Meeks. So that is why I say the transparency issue was
tremendously important. So then the question would be what are
the minimal verification measures that you believe are needed
in a final agreement to ensure that Iranian compliance would
provide the high level of confidence that there is not a secret
Iranian program?
Mr. Albright. Well, there is a lot of them. I mean, it is a
complicated deal. I mean, you need anywhere anytime inspections
or at least approaching the anytime. You need the IAEA having
its concerns about possible military dimensions of nuclear--of
Iran's nuclear program resolved.
You need a very robust control over Iran's imports for its
nuclear programs and other imports of key goods that could be
used in a secret nuclear program.
I mean, there's a--I could go on and on and on. They are
all--they all have been identified in the negotiations so it is
clear what needs to be done.
But what you have, though, is at every opportunity Iran
tries to erode the U.S. goals in these negotiations and----
Mr. Meeks. Well, we have got a framework. We don't know
what the final deal is going to be until we see it in writing
on June 30th, correct?
Mr. Albright. Right. And that is right, and so you can't
judge it until you see it. I mean, I think some--you know, some
trip wires have been crossed for some members and people in the
expert community. I think I feel I have to see the deal in
order to judge it.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Dana Rohrabacher of California.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Let me just very quickly, if I could--is anything in this
treaty so far that you understand, would that prevent or is an
agreement by the mullah regime in Iran not to purchase a
nuclear weapon from another source?
Mr. Albright. I don't know if that's in there. It should
be.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. You don't know. Yes.
Mr. Albright. Yes, it should be and we've proposed
language.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I understand. No--yes or no?
Mr. Rademaker. I don't see anything about that in there.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. No? Okay. Well, that is the answer
then, isn't it? The answer is
is  deg.here we are
focusing everybody's attention on a nuclear treaty with this
mullah--repressive corrupt bloody mullah regime when in fact
even if we get the agreement and even if they abide by the
agreement they can buy a nuclear weapon from Korea or from
some--how about Pakistan or some oligarch who happens to have
gotten away with it as the Soviet Union was collapsing.
This focus, Mr. Chairman, on this treaty has done a great
disservice to the people of the United States. It is giving us
a false sense of security that it will mean something even if
it is abided by in terms of the mullah regime which, of course,
doesn't feel they have to keep their word to people like us.
Even if they do keep their word on the treaty they can
easily obtain a nuclear weapon. Thus, during this time period
all of these years that we have spent negotiating with the
mullah regime they were playing us for suckers because we have
refrained from helping those people--those many people in Iran
who would struggle to rid themselves of the mullah regime's
oppression.
There are Hazars. There are Baluch. There are Kurds. There
are millions of young Persians who hate the oppression of this
regime but yet because we have focused--we have let them focus
on this treaty, which won't have any impact on whether or not
the mullahs can get a nuclear weapon, we have been able--they
have been able to prevent us from helping those people in their
own society establish a government that will not want to have a
nuclear weapon and will stop oppressing their own people.
This has been a great detriment to the security of the
United States and the well-being of the West. I am beside
myself when I hear this because we have spent so much time and
so much effort in this when, indeed, we could have been helping
the Baluch, we could have been helping the Hazaris, we could
have been helping the young Persians, we could have been
helping the Kurds and we could have rid ourselves of this--of
this problem.
Mr. Chairman, we haven't even been able to confront the
mullah regime in these last few years with their oppression of
these people in the MEK, who are a democratic alternative to
the mullah regime. But yet we haven't even been able to get
ourselves to champion that cause.
I think this whole issue has been a big loser for the
United States and I think that it is giving us a false sense of
security. I would hope we wake up and figure that out. If any
of the witnesses have a comment on that please go ahead.
Mr. Rademaker. Mr. Rohrabacher, I will just respond
briefly. I think if an administration representative were here
they would respond to your point about possible transfers of
nuclear weapons by saying you should relax--we don't have to
worry about that because Iran is a party to the nuclear
nonproliferation treaty and they are forbidden under the
nuclear nonproliferation treaty to either produce nuclear
weapons or buy them, acquire them from someone else.
Now, of course, the same was true of North Korea back when
we had the agreed framework with them up until the point where
they decided they didn't want to be part of the NPT anymore.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Right.
Mr. Rademaker. So, you know, I guess it comes down to how
much you are prepared to rely on treaty commitments and we all
know treaty commitments are--they can be renounced by treaty--
--
Mr. Rohrabacher. Let me associate myself with Mr. Smith's
questioning. If indeed you have a regime that is so brutal to
their own people--these are their own citizens, people that
they murder and they brutalize people and they have, of
course--believe they have a right from God to control this
territory--any regime like that there is no reason why--I don't
see why there is any reason for us to believe their word even
if they write it down on a piece of paper that they are going
to do something that is beneficial to us and they are going to
refrain from doing something--from doing something that is
harmful to us because they have given their word.
When they murder their own people, why should we--this is
an act--this whole effort is an act of futility. We should be
doing what worked with Ronald Reagan and the Soviet Union which
is aiding those people through what he called the Reagan
Doctrine who would--who will fight those people who are the
enemy of freedom around the world.
And we can help those people internally and we should have
been doing it all along when it comes to Iran.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, and there is the legislation
that myself and Mr. Engel have that will overhaul the
Broadcasting Board of Governors, especially with a focus on
transmitting information into Iran in the same fashion as was
done during the 1980s into the former Soviet Union in order to
give people access to views on political pluralism, on freedom
of speech, on the real stories of what is happening inside that
country as well as the rest of the world and that may do a lot.
At least, it did a lot in Eastern Europe to reach
audiences. But it is--we need to all work to go on offense in
order to get that tool of communication so that those inside
Iran can hear information from Surrogate Free Radio. We now go
to Mr. Ted Deutch of Florida.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Albright, I want to--I would like to start by thanking
you for the analysis, the, I think, really thoughtful and
helpful analysis that your organization recently published and
it is from that analysis that I have a few questions.
There are a number of concerns that I have. I will just--I
would like to drill in on a couple, though. The first is
Fordow. You point out that the deeply-buried Fordow remains in
operation but the number of centrifuges is reduced by two-
thirds, no uranium for 15 years.
Both--those are good requirements. The fact that Fordow
remains open is still a concern. So how do we overcome that
concern? You point out that molybdenum would contaminate the
Cascades so that you couldn't enrich uranium afterward but
other more common isotopes would not contaminate centrifuges so
that uranium enrichment could be rapidly established.
And you say unless additional limits are included in the
agreement Fordow could be expected to reemerge as a substantial
uranium enrichment plant after year 15 with advanced
centrifuges 10 to 16 times more capable than the current ones.
And if bans on producing 20 percent low enriched uranium
sunset at year 15 then--and this is the point--this heavily
fortified plant will be capable of producing enough weapons-
grade uranium for a nuclear weapon within a few weeks or enough
weapons-grade uranium for two weapons in less than a month.
What can be included in a deal that will help us overcome
these concerns?
Mr. Albright. A couple. One is that the limit on the
production of the enrichment level limit should be permanent--
that they wouldn't produce over 3\1/2\ percent.
My understanding from talking to people in the negotiations
is that Iran has every intention to return to producing 20
percent enriched uranium after that limit sunset. So I think
that, first of all, is a permanent limit. Another is that the--
--
Mr. Deutch. Wait. But hold on, Mr. Albright. Let us just--
and it sounds--it certainly sounds reasonable. But they say
they want to enrich uranium for peaceful purposes. To enrich
uranium for use in a civil nuclear power program that would be
enrichment to 3\1/2\ percent.
Mr. Albright. Correct.
Mr. Deutch. So they wouldn't need--why would they need 20
percent enriched uranium? Just for research?
Mr. Albright. Well, they would argue that they would need
it for research reactors.
Mr. Deutch. Is there--and is there any other way for them
to access the 20 percent enriched uranium? How much would they
need for research reactors?
Mr. Albright. Not very much, and they could buy it easily
and so--and they also--it is not clear when they would build a
research reactor. So I think it is a reasonable limit to
maintain at 3\1/2\ percent and if they need more they can--they
can acquire it internationally.
Mr. Deutch. And, again, I just--just to be clear because
there is so much information it is so hard for us to get our
arms around because there is just so much of it.
But the key argument that Iran make is that it wants to
enrich uranium for a peaceful civil nuclear program and its
focus primarily on nuclear power, and for that they would need
to enrich to 3\1/2\ percent.
There is no need to enrich beyond that for their stated
purpose to their program. Isn't that right?
Mr. Albright. I believe so. I mean, they argue that they
want to be able to produce their own fuel. I mean, and in fact
one of the--but that argument is being undermined by how this
deal was playing out.
I mean, Iran is planning to either dilute its enriched
uranium--it has to go down from about 10 tons of 3\1/2\ percent
down to 300 kilograms--planning to dilute it or sell it
overseas.
And so I think that a lot of these future plans would be at
a time when Iran would have been able to buy reactors
internationally and would have depended on those suppliers for
all its enriched uranium.
So looking out in the future I would see that Iran would
have even less of a need for enriched uranium than it does now
and Iran is shifting in the negotiations to say they have no
need now.
In fact, it is one of the ironies of this deal, that you
have U.S. agreeing to a nuclear program involving fuel cycle
activities that has no need, and that is expressed by diluting
down the low enriched uranium back to natural or selling it
overseas.
So the idea that there would be even a practical need for
an enrichment program has more or less disappeared. And so you
have a program going forward that really has no purpose and so
why would--and in the future it would also have no purpose and
therefore it doesn't need to be expanded and certainly doesn't
need to make 20 percent enriched uranium.
Mr. Deutch. I understand. Mr. Chairman, just, again, Mr.
Albright, I want--I just want to be clear and I--and I have
made that argument in the past.
There is ample opportunity for Iran to build out a nuclear
energy program without enriching the uranium. We have had this
discussion. The chairman has spoken about this at length.
But in a deal--we are talking about this framework and
whether we can get to a deal and if a conclusion is drawn that
all the limitations that are otherwise contained in the deal
would be beneficial.
I just want to finish, again, by hammering home this key
point that you make, that there is--there is no stated purpose
for Iran to be able to enrich beyond 3\1/2\ percent, there is
no--nor is there a reason that the P5+1 should acknowledge one.
Isn't that right?
Mr. Albright. Yes, I agree.
Mr. Deutch. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Deutch.
Mr. Darrell Issa of California.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am going to take a slightly different tack but it may
look a little bit like my colleague, Mr. Rohrabacher's, for a
moment.
Mr. Rademaker, or Secretary, let us expand the question
beyond just nuclear for a moment. During your tenure, was Iran
a terrorist state?
Mr. Rademaker. Yes.
Mr. Issa. Did--during your tenure did they in fact export
destabilizing forces throughout the region, particularly to
Arab states that were Sunni-run?
Mr. Rademaker. They were an active supporter of terrorist
organizations such as Hezbollah and Hamas?
Mr. Issa. But Hezbollah and Hamas--I was going to get to
them. So we have got that one checked off. To your knowledge
today, are they in fact backing the Houthi in Yemen who are
currently trying to overthrow that government and one in which
we are part along with the United Nations in saying that that
is an unlawful act under the U.N. Charter?
Mr. Rademaker. So far as I know, the answer to that is yes.
Mr. Issa. Okay. And you probably were not aware--we talked
just briefly before this began--it appears as though there is
effectively a stand down order coming from this administration
to the Saudis and in fact a nuclear aircraft carrier, the
Theodore Roosevelt, doing circle 8's with binoculars offshore
of Yemen, not stopping that terrorist organization--excuse me,
that rebel organization backed by Iran--while in fact Iranian
resupplies are going to that organization as we speak? Now, are
you even a little bit aware of that current action as of today?
Mr. Rademaker. I have read reports about that, yes.
Mr. Issa. So as much as I appreciate the details of a
nuclear program that may or may not look good when we see it,
we have a terrorist state actively supporting Hezbollah,
including backing Bashar Assad, a regime that this President
has called for regime change.
We have Hezbollah continuing to be a threat throughout the
region. There is a call from Sheik Nasrallah for those
Hezbollah to go to Yemen to fight on behalf of their Shi'a
brothers.
We have Iran shipping resupplies to ensure that Yemen falls
into Iranian control, Shi'a control and in fact becomes yet
another threat to Saudi Arabia and other countries in the
region, all of this going on while we are negotiating.
Now, I have watched the Cold War since the '60s. I was in
the military throughout the entire '70s and the '80s as a
Reservist. I saw Reagan negotiating with the Soviets.
What I didn't see is this kind of active combat in which
U.S. military personnel are risking and losing their lives in
Afghanistan, in Iraq, soon to be in Yemen in all likelihood
along with our allies.
This is not a cold war. This is a very hot war in which
people are dying in these countries including the 200--whatever
the number now is, 300,000 perhaps, in Syria because of Iranian
activity.
What part of this deal--to any of the three of you, what
part of this deal will in any way reduce the activity of Iran
in these and other areas? And I only say one thing to caveat
the question.
When we give them access quickly to $100 billion or more of
locked up funds what part of this deal is going to reduce any
of that activity?
Mr. Rademaker. I think, Congressman, you know the answer to
that question. There are no----
Mr. Issa. But do the American people know the answer, that
in fact what we are going to do is take a terrorist state that
is destabilizing, causing Americans to die now as they did when
they provided advanced IEDs in Iraq where we had soldiers on
the ground a decade ago?
What part of this deal is good for America and what part
are Americans going to die if part of our Iranian deal is not
in fact to stop this activity?
Nuclear or no nuclear, what part of a nuclear deal isn't
going to effectively say to them okay, as long as you play nice
and abide by this 10-year before you can have a nuke, as long
as you do that we are going to let you continue to destabilize
Arab nations, to cause Americans to die, to cause our allies to
live in fear and to cause our allies to want to beef up their
militaries both conventionally and nonconventionally? That is
my question for each of you.
Mr. Rademaker. Speaking for myself, I didn't come here to
defend the deal so I am not going to quarrel with----
Mr. Issa. But your knowledge is a combination of nuclear
nonproliferation. But it is also the reality that just not
having a nuke it doesn't solve all problems and ultimately a
deal to not have a nuke, even if this is a good deal--and I
don't think it is--doesn't it effectively imply that we will
not go in and bomb them, intercept their military, et cetera,
because right now it looks like that is what we are doing.
It looks like President Obama and the Department of Defense
is playing careful with Iran while in fact Saudis are dying,
Yemenis are dying and America is looking impotent off the
coast.
Mr. Rademaker. I guess--I know we are out of time but just
to sort of comment generally, you know, I think, obviously, the
United States has multiple issues with Iran.
The nuclear issue is one of them, terrorism. I mean, there
are half a dozen--the human rights issue that Congressman Smith
was talking about.
Mr. Issa. I would just like to get our Embassy back in
control and not held by them.
Mr. Rademaker. The--but the concept of this negotiation is
that these issues can be compartmentalized and we can try and
solve one of the issues without doing----
Mr. Issa. So it is your position----
Mr. Rademaker [continuing]. Without solving others but
without----
Mr. Issa. So it is your position we could intercept and if
necessary sink the weapons that are being sent to Yemen--as we
speak will continue to negotiate a nuclear disarmament treaty
with them, or deterrent?
Mr. Rademaker. That appears to be where the Obama
administration is in its policies, right. They have a ship that
is threatening to do that. Meanwhile, their negotiators are
meeting.
I guess--but the concept is compartmentalization but, you
know, especially like when we look at issues such as the cash
transfer. You know, I think it is fair to ask.
You know, in trying to solve one of these problems are we
in fact making other--you know, the problems we have in some of
the other areas far more serious by, you know, enhancing the
resources available to the Iranian Government.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, could we briefly have
the other members of the panel answer, if they could?
Chairman Royce. Well, we can do that in writing. But at
this point we are going to need to go to Mr. David Cicilline of
Rhode Island. Thank you, Mr. Issa.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
all our witnesses for being here to really discuss a very, very
important issue and we all, obviously, will have to make an
assessment about a deal if a final agreement materializes. But
as is often the case, the devil is in the details and so this
hearing is helpful in terms of understanding what we should be
looking for and what we should be pressing for.
And if there is any--if the public statements made by both
sides with respect to this framework are accurate there seems
to be considerable space between the two parties still.
But I want to just start with Mr. Duelfer. You said that
the--in your testimony that you thought the sanctions relief
should be sort of upside down from what it is, that it
shouldn't be IAEA that has to prove something but there should
be compliance before any sanctions relief and at least in the
summary that has been provided by the administration that is
exactly how it does work because it says that after the IAEA
has verified Iran has taken all of its key nuclear-related
steps then sanctions relief is appropriate.
So you can quarrel about whether or not we can verify that
but at least the framework for the agreement is the order that
you suggested, that they first determine that there has been
compliance and that the actions have been taken by Iran before
relief can be granted.
Mr. Duelfer. Sir, what you describe is correct at the front
end. The initial relief of sanctions they talk about is
contingent upon the IAEA being able to verify some set of
standards.
But the continuing verification that Iran continues to
abide by its obligations in that period of time it is when the
leverage is flipped.
Mr. Cicilline. I see. So you are suggesting that that same
burden shifting should happen throughout the agreement?
Mr. Duelfer. I am just observing that the IAEA is going to
be in a very weak position and we shouldn't kid ourselves about
that.
Mr. Cicilline. And Secretary Rademaker, you said in your
testimony that at the end of 10 or 15 years there are no
restrictions. At the end of the 10 or 15 years there are both
enhanced protocols and safeguards and membership as a party to
the NPT which are in place, which presumably Iran could
violate.
But if that were the case, are there any options that are
not available then that would be available today? In other
words, the agreement doesn't restrain the United States if
there is a violation after 10 or 15 years to take whatever
action the U.S. or the P5+1 thinks is necessary, correct?
Mr. Rademaker. I think it is a little bit more complicated
than your question is suggesting. First of all, I mean, there
are under this agreement some restrictions on, for example----
Mr. Cicilline. And are permanent?
Mr. Rademaker. They are permanent. They are on, you know,
plutonium production, for example, which are, you know, useful
concessions by the Iranians. I don't mean to downplay that.
But I do think after 10 or 15 years we give up on--we will
have surrendered today on our ability to implement then what
has been the centerpiece of our policy for the last 20 years,
which is to try and apply economic and political pressure on
Iran not to be a nuclear weapons threshold state and not to,
you know, put itself in a position where it can easily at the
drop of a hat break out of the nuclear nonproliferation treaty
and deploy dozens of nuclear weapons.
Today, we have a whole range of sanctions in effect. What
is being promised in this deal is if they abide by the terms
for 10 to 15 years the restrictions that are specified, at the
end of that the vast majority of those restrictions evaporate.
And especially in the enrichment area they can do whatever
they want and we are giving up the right to complain about that
and, you know----
Mr. Cicilline. Okay. Thank you. I understand. Thank you.
Mr. Albright, I want to ask you, you mentioned in your
testimony the challenges of inspections with respect to any
place, any time--that there seems to be no agreement yet on
what that inspections regime would look like.
And so my question is, is any place any time the only
inspections regime that would work or is there something
between that and what is currently being discussed that would
provide the kind of assurances that we need--a notice, some
quick opportunity to inspect, and when you said IAEA should not
be the determinant body for violations do you have a
recommendation of who should be.
So both can we have an inspections regime different than
any place any time? Is that the only one that you would
recommend that could be successful or--and who would do these
determinations with respect to violations?
Mr. Albright. Yes. I think at this point in time I don't
see anything but the--approaching any time but, certainly,
anywhere and I don't see an option, given the history of the
inspectors with Iran.
The additional protocol is just not enough and so, of
course, how that has worked out is probably going to be
complicated and there will be some compromises but it has got
to err or end up much closer to the any time. And, now, in
terms of the compliance I don't have a good answer.
I mean, it just--I just think in our work on this, and
looking at the JPA issues, the IAEA is not a good--we shouldn't
depend on the IAEA to make that fundamental determination. I
think in the end the United States is going to have to make it.
I mean, that is going to be key that there is a process
where that can be done and Congress has a role in it. The P5+1,
I think, is going to have to form a commission that is going to
have to be able to make those kind of determinations.
But the--but the IAEA is going to have to report and we are
going to have to expect honest reporting and hard-hitting
reporting, better than what they have done in the JPA. I mean,
what they report on the JPA is a minimal amount and they don't
decide on compliance at all, and they are not even giving the
information publicly to really determine what is going on.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. I thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. We go now to Mr. Jeff Duncan of South
Carolina.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and as chairman of the
Western Hemisphere Subcommittee let us not forget that Iran is
very active in the Western Hemisphere as well.
I would like to yield some time to the gentleman from
California to have his question answered. He was on the right
track.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman, and Mr. Albright, I think
you were--you had your finger on the button but I would like to
give both of you an opportunity to talk about what $100 billion
and essentially an agreement not to take extreme action if Iran
continues to do what it is doing in the other areas in which
there are some historic sanctions.
Mr. Albright. Yes. My answer is probably predictable. I
mean, my group ultimately comes out of the arms control
community and I was active in the '80s on arms control at other
organizations.
I think you do need to keep countries from building nuclear
weapons and in the Cold War the U.S. had a vital interest in
limiting the threat posed by Soviet nuclear weapons.
So I think on its own merits arms control is worth
pursuing. But we have to recognize that this deal with Iran is
essentially an arms control agreement and it will have a
limited duration, and so we should recognize that and work
around that.
Mr. Issa. But the question--the question really was, and I
will paraphrase--I will phrase it this way--during the H. W.
Bush administration in return for support in the first Gulf
War, George H. W. Bush essentially gave Lebanon over to the
Syrians and said, we won't interfere and the Syrians moved in
and essentially ran that place for years and years until the
assassination of the late Rafik Hariri.
But it was Arab on Arab. It was a country and another
country that had once been part of the same region. Today,
Iran, a Persian-Shi'a regime with a very different view, is in
fact dominating Syria, Lebanon, now Yemen--is effectively
controlling Iraq.
And I don't want to take any more of Congressman Duncan's
time. But this deal--the important thing that I hope that I
will get--and I will give one more chance--what is not in the
deal is anything that says we are going to aggressively do what
we need to do, which includes bombing weapons on the ground in
Iran if a plane is about to take off to supply people from
Yemen, sinking that ship that is heading in.
Those questions are questions that will need to be resolved
if you are certainly going to get the support of most people on
this dais. If you have got a comment on it I would appreciate
it because I appreciate the nuclear--I know that is what it is
about.
But if we give a green light to Iran and $100 billion we
know exactly what they will do because for three decades they
have been doing it. Please.
Mr. Duelfer. Three quick points. One is in the case of Iraq
sanctions contained Saddam. They were a tool of containment. In
this case, as you point out, we are releasing resources to
Iran.
Second point is I don't know where this all fits in the
overall strategy with respect to Iran. I mean, as many people
have asked questions along that line I have not heard that. I
mean, yes, we can argue about access and weapons, breakout
potential and so forth. But where does all fit in the long
haul?
Finally, I think, and related to this, you really need to
hear from Jim Clapper. You need the intelligence community. I
have been in, you know, the U.N. side. I have been in the
intelligence side.
But, you know, weapons inspectors can--you can learn a lot
from that but there is other sources and methods as well and,
you know, he is the one who is going to be able to answer the
question, you know, what level of confidence are we going to
have that we can see Iran breaking out.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, and I thank the gentleman from South
Carolina, Mr. Duncan.
Mr. Duncan. I reclaim my time.
Mr. Chairman, I just don't think the majority of the
American people agree with the Obama administration that this--
that this deal will lead to a nuclear bomb. The American people
don't want to see Iran with a nuclear bomb and regardless of
whether that is next year, whether that is 10 years or 15 years
down the road.
In fact, 367 Members of Congress wrote a final
comprehensive nuclear agreement must constrain Iran's nuclear
infrastructure so that Iran has no pathway to a bomb and that
verifiable constraints on Iran's nuclear program must last for
decades.
I stand by that today. That ought to be the position of the
United States Congress in approving any deal that is brought
before us by the Obama administration. The problem is, and I
agree with the New York Times on this--hard for me to say--but
their analysis said that the one problem is there is two
versions of this.
You have got the version that the Obama administration has
shared with the American people and then you got a version that
Iran has rolled out of what this framework looks like. I would
just end with this.
As recently as April 19th, General Hossein Salami, deputy
head of the Iranian Revolutionary Guards Corps, reiterated
this, in his words: ``They,'' meaning the inspectors, meaning
the U.S. and the U.N., ``they will not even be permitted to
inspect the most normal military site in their dreams. Visiting
a military base by a foreign inspector would mean the
occupation of our land because all of our defense secrets are
there. Even talking about that subject means national
humiliation.''
If that is the position the Iranians are taking in this,
this whole negotiation of the P5+1 is a farce, with Iran hoping
to enter the nuclear community and have a bomb. The problem
with Iran entering the nuclear community is they are unlike any
other nation that has the bomb to this day.
They have urged and pledged death to America and death to
Israel. That make Iran different. That is why it is imperative
that they do not get a nuclear weapon.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Duncan.
We go now to Dr. Ami Bera of California.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This committee and this body, Congress, has been pretty
unanimous in, you know, our voice ratcheting up sanctions and
in fact when we spoke with that voice we accomplished what we
wanted, which is to make Iran feel the pain and bring them to
the table.
Obviously, you know, I commend the administration for
taking the ball from there and negotiating but, you know, my
big concerns with the framework are given our history with
Iran, given Iran's actions in the Middle East and around the
world, we can't use the phrase ``trust, then verify.''
We have to start from a place verify, and if you are doing
what you are supposed to be doing then you will get trust over
time. And, again, that is my perspective.
So maybe, Mr. Albright, thinking about it from that
perspective--verify and then trust--what are the minimal
verification measures that you believe are needed in a final
agreement to ensure Iranian compliance?
Mr. Albright. I think the first thing is I agree with you.
I mean, it is--this is not about trust because Iran has been so
noncompliant and noncooperative that it is impossible, and Iran
has created that.
I think the IAEA tends to give people the benefit of the
doubt initially, and then over time becomes more vigilant and
resistant. So I think the trust is way down the road. Now, in
terms of minimal things, I think there are two parts to this.
One is what do you want up front before the key economic
and financial sanctions are relieved. And so I think there is a
whole list of things that Iran has to commit to up front--
anywhere anytime inspections would be one. Creating this
procurement--verified procurement channel is another.
But I think one of the most important is it has got to
provide some concrete evidence that it had a nuclear weapons
program or acceptance of that position and is open enough to
the IAEA that they can make a preliminary determination that
yes, it existed in the past and it doesn't exist now.
Again, they will have--in the longer term they are going to
have to do even more things that are going to require Iranian
cooperation.
But I think in the short term there has to be some
fundamental answers to whether this program is indeed peaceful
and part of knowing whether they had a program in the past and
that Iran, at least if it doesn't have to do a mea culpa, at
least acknowledges it in some way and it could acknowledge it
by accepting an IAEA determination that there was indeed a
program.
Mr. Bera. And in your sense is there enough in the
framework at this juncture that allows us, again, going from
the framework of verify first that gives us unfettered access?
Mr. Albright. No. No, no. There is too many issues
unresolved.
Mr. Bera. Okay.
Mr. Albright. That it is just impossible to judge. I mean,
I think--and then also I think we have to realize the--in the
Washington context I think the administration has been, you
know, better than I in a battle with Congress on this issue and
I think they have rounded some edges and exaggerated some of
the points where maybe parameters agreed but the details really
matter and there is fundamental disagreements over some of
these issues that have to be resolved in the negotiations.
Mr. Bera. Again, I think if we are doing our job as Members
of Congress and members of the Foreign Affairs Committee this
does have to be a partnership with the administration and the
administration does need to work with Congress, from my
perspective, and it does start with having these tough measures
of verification.
I do have real concerns if there is immediate sanction
relief based on an agreement because an agreement is not
actually demonstrating what you are going to do. I would like
to see them demonstrate that accessibility, that unfettered
access, before you even start considering the sanctions relief.
Mr. Albright. But that is--at least on the economic and
financial that is the intention of the administration is that
these key nuclear steps would have to be dealt with and then
you could have the sanctions come off. So I think the
administration's position going into this is a pretty sound
one. The question is what is it going to get in the end.
Mr. Bera. It is sound but, you know, again, unless I am
mistaken I have heard some rumblings that there may be some--
you know, if the framework is agreed to and signed on there may
be some immediate sanction relief, which worries me.
Again, agreeing to a framework and actually doing what you
agreed to are two different things. I want to see them do what
is--they agreed to, allow us or allow the inspectors unfettered
access.
As you said, have some culpability on what their past
programs were, and then once we have verified at that juncture,
you know, provide some relief. Again----
Mr. Albright. I think--sorry, I didn't mean to interrupt.
Mr. Bera. No, go ahead.
Mr. Albright. Yes. I think this--I think it has been stated
here it is like a signing bonus. I mean, Iraq has been getting
money--some of its assets relieved all along in the interim
deal.
So I think that is--this signing bonus is a continuation of
that. It is not the sanctions coming off, and so one should
argue about that for sure. I mean, it is a lot of money and it
is a new twist to arms control in a sense to have--you know,
have big payoffs for signing an arms control agreement.
But in terms of the sanctions themselves, Iran has to meet
conditions under the U.S. position and my understanding is Iran
is obviously balking at that.
But the U.S. position and the P5+1 position remains firm
that those conditions have to be satisfied before there will be
sanctions relief.
Mr. Bera. And I would urge that the administration take a
tough stance here----
Mr. Albright. Yes.
Mr. Bera [continuing]. On that and not back down from that.
I yield my time back.
Chairman Royce. Okay. We go to Mr. Lee Zeldin of New York.
Mr. Zeldin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank our
witnesses for being here today.
First, with regards to a treaty, I am someone who believes
that the President is negotiating a treaty it should be treated
as such.
I believe our Founding Fathers would agree with that. The
President would try to argue precedents. We have the
Constitution of the United States which I believe has a process
in place that should be respected.
As far as sanctions, the President talks about snap back.
For a sanction, that may take several years to put into place.
I think in reality it is Fantasyland if you think you can just
click your heels back together and sanctions that take that
long to put into place if Iran has a violation that all of a
sudden they are just going to be snapped back.
And I think that my constituents, the American people, are
starting to catch on to that. It is important to understand
where we are right now.
The President, just 3 weeks ago, he announces a framework
agreement. He puts out a fact sheet. Within 24 hours, the
Iranian foreign minister is on his official Twitter feed
calling it just a spin. The ayatollah is on the streets
chanting ``Death to America.''
In order to have an agreement, both sides have to agree to
material terms. We are talking about a framework as if the
Iranians actually agree to it.
I think that one of--one thing that might have been agreed
to 3 weeks ago at the table is that both sides were agreeing to
go back to the their home countries and spin wherever they
thought we were at that moment--this moment in these talks to
whatever best serves their own domestic politics.
I have concern about critical components where if there is
no agreement that it can be worded in a broad vague way for
each side to interpret the agreement differently. And we may be
presented an agreement in English that may not be accurately
translated.
So there are multiple levels to the complication. So we may
be interpreting an agreement that the Iranians interpret
completely differently. We already know what the President is
going to say.
If he reaches an agreement, no matter what the agreement
says--he may say this agreement is good for the United States,
good for our allies and good for the safety of the entire
world, he may say compliance will be certified by the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
That sounds familiar? Those were Bill Clinton's words in
1994, October 18th, announcing a nuclear agreement with North
Korea and we all know how that turned out. What else will he
say?
He will tell us this is a good deal that prevents Iran from
having a nuclear weapon. Well, what isn't included in this
deal? We aren't talking about Iran, state sponsors of
terrorism.
We are not talking about their work to overthrow foreign
governments, pledging to erase Israel from the map, chanting
``Death to America.'' This doesn't include their development of
ICBMs or their unjustly holding and imprisoning United States
citizens.
Right now, a lot of people--a lot of our constituents are
watching the playoffs. Basketball is going on and hockey. These
are seven-game series. The first team that wins four wins the
series and you move on.
The President is--I mean, this is like the number-one
seed--the United States of America--we are going up against a
mediocre Division II basketball team and we decide to give up
our first three games.
We are now trailing in the fourth game. The President
should call a time out. He should take a walk, take a breath
and come back with a stronger hand.
This is the United States of America. There is no reason
that we should be playing as if these are our equals and it is
not that hard for him to do that.
My question for our witnesses here this morning is this.
There was some chatter about legislation and one proposal that
these talks require Iran to recognize Israel's right to exist.
With the ayatollah in the streets chanting death to America
while these negotiations are going on, blowing up mock U.S.
warships and everything else they are doing wrong, should these
talks include Iran recognizing America's right to exist?
Mr. Rademaker. I mean, I have not heard that they dispute
America's right to exist. So, you know, I don't know that that
needs to be established as a precondition. You know, on the
question----
Mr. Zeldin. With all due respect, they are in the streets
chanting ``Death to America.''
Mr. Rademaker. Right.
Mr. Zeldin. I mean, they are--I mean, they are blocking--
blowing up our warships. I mean, there is plenty of evidence
that they are not recognizing our right to exist. When they are
chanting ``Death to America'' that is pretty much--when it is
coming from the ayatollah indicating that they are not
recognizing our right to exist.
Mr. Rademaker. This goes back to the issue of
compartmentalization that we discussed with Congressman Issa,
that--I mean, the philosophy of this negotiation is we can, you
know, okay, set aside the issue of Israel, set aside the
threats against America over political issues.
We are just going to focus on the nuclear issue and try and
solve that and hope that in solving that we don't compound the
problems in these other compartments. It is a legitimate
question whether that is doable.
On your point about the--you raised the question about the
treaty, whether this is a treaty, and I had spoken to that
earlier and let me just say, you know, the political reality is
the President is not going to submit this agreement to
congressional review unless Congress passes a law requiring him
to do so. And that is what they are working on over in the
Senate and hopefully that is what this committee will be able
to work on at some point in the future. But, you know, absent
the enactment of legislation I don't think you are going to
have any meaningful congressional review at all.
Mr. Zeldin. And just with the sake for of my time because
it is expiring, I don't believe that Congress has to because
you just hold out the Constitution of the United States. This
is a treaty, in my opinion.
This is a treaty. We don't have to pass something that
requires the President to do that. Just because the President
is going to play by his own set of rules and he is going to get
played at the negotiating table doesn't mean that we and I need
to play along--that my colleagues need to play along as well.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Royce. We go now to Gerry Connolly of Virginia.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and welcome
to our panel.
Mr. Rademaker, does Congress get to declare what is and it
not a formal treaty pursuant to the Constitution, in your
experience?
Mr. Rademaker. The Congress can express opinions but, you
know, there is a formal process that involves the submission by
the President----
Mr. Connolly. Correct.
Mr. Rademaker [continuing]. Of the text to the Senate.
Mr. Connolly. Correct.
Mr. Rademaker. And if he doesn't do that there is nothing
before the Senate to reject.
Mr. Connolly. Correct. Thank you. So my friend from New
York can decide on his basis that something constitutes a
treaty but actually the Constitution is kind of vague about
that. I mean, we don't have a formal definition.
Mr. Rademaker. Yes, and can I just add?
Mr. Connolly. Yes, sure.
Mr. Rademaker. So then the in between thing that Congress
can do is it can sue the President.
Mr. Connolly. Of course.
Mr. Rademaker. And it happens all the time and pretty
consistently what the courts say is, you know----
Mr. Connolly. You work it out.
Mr. Rademaker [continuing]. It is interesting but Congress
needs to stand up for itself.
Mr. Connolly. Correct.
Mr. Rademaker. Don't ask us to do your work for you and so
that is--then you come back to the question of legislation.
Mr. Connolly. Now, with respect to that issue, are there in
fact lots of executive agreements with foreign countries not
formally ratified by the U.S. Senate?
Mr. Rademaker. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. Lots?
Mr. Rademaker. Many, yes.
Mr. Connolly. Many?
Mr. Rademaker. There is a formal--you know, there is a law
that requires executive agreements to be transmitted to
Congress and, you know, Case-Zablocki Act and every few
months----
Mr. Connolly. Right.
Mr. Rademaker [continuing]. We will get a long list of
treaties or--I am sorry, of executive agreements with their
text.
Mr. Connolly. Correct. So it is hardly unprecedented. We
might all express an opinion about the desirability of it being
submitted to us for formal approval as if it were a treaty. But
that is a different matter.
So to assert that it is violation of the Constitution is in
fact on its face false because the Constitution is silent as to
what constitutes a treaty and I think--I thank you for your
answer.
It really requires the President to take an action to
submit as if it were a treaty to trigger that provision and I
might even agree with my colleague that it ought to be
considered as a treaty but that is, frankly, immaterial and it
is not a violation of the Constitution, though we might say
otherwise.
My colleague--another one of my colleagues said a little
earlier in this hearing, ``The President is doing the U.S. a
great disservice engaging in negotiations.'' Mr. Albright, is
it your position that be are--we have made a mistake just to
even engage with them?
Mr. Albright. No.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Rademaker?
Mr. Rademaker. No. I don't think that is a mistake.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Duelfer?
Mr. Duelfer. Well, I don't how long you continue in them if
you don't--if you are not getting what you want. But no, to
talk to your enemies makes perfect sense.
Mr. Connolly. Okay. Thank you.
One of the criticisms, and I am not unsympathetic to it, is
that the agreement in front of us or the framework of the
agreement that will be in front of us does not address a whole
panoply of issues we care about with respect to Iran.
So everything from human rights violations to intrusive
insurgent support for elements we don't support in the region
to internal democratic issues to freedom of the press, freedom
of expression, on and on.
Is it your position, Mr. Albright, that a nuclear agreement
ought to be all inclusive with respect to bilateral issues?
Mr. Albright. No.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Rademaker?
Mr. Rademaker. I think as a practical matter it will be
impossible to resolve all issues at one time in one
negotiation.
Mr. Connolly. And yet, I would just say to you I couldn't
agree with you more. I think in an ideal world I would love to
work out all those issues.
But right now the big issue on the table is we don't want a
nuclear Iran and we got to start somewhere. We haven't talked
to each other, virtually, since 1979 and well, it is a matter
of opinion whether we are better off with this agreement than
no agreement and that is a perfectly legitimate subject for
debate.
But the idea that it ought to be all inclusive, which seems
to be some of the criticism one hears from the critics, I
think, you know, in an ideal world, yes. In a practical world,
no. I mean, we can't--I wish we could do that but we can't.
Mr. Duelfer, would you agree or not?
Mr. Duelfer. Well, I just--I haven't heard what the overall
Iran strategy is and I think that is--you know, if somebody
could articulate that well I think that would benefit everyone
including the nuclear negotiations.
Mr. Connolly. Do--and final question because I am going to
run out of time, the interim agreement that is still operative
right now are we better off with that or would it have been
better not to enter into it? Mr. Albright, Mr. Rademaker, Mr.
Duelfer? And I yield back.
Mr. Albright. No. It was a good--I think it was a good way
to start the negotiations and grab some quick restraints that
deal with the things that bother us most and then--and then
move on to the long-term negotiation.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. Mr. Rademaker.
Mr. Rademaker. I, largely, agree with that although I think
I would add that we would be better off leaving in place the
interim agreement than entering into what seems to be about to
be signed onto.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Duelfer?
Mr. Duelfer. I think the end deal drives everything.
Mr. Connolly. I can't hear you.
Mr. Duelfer. The end deal will drive everything.
Mr. Connolly. Yes. But I mean--but if we hadn't--but
nonetheless are we better off with this interim agreement than
if it had not come into existence?
Mr. Duelfer. In other words, the option would have been
walking away and assuming that sanctions would stay on?
Mr. Connolly. Yes.
Mr. Duelfer. It is a tough call.
Mr. Connolly. Tough call. And finally, Mr. Chairman, before
I yield back I just want to note--we haven't had a chance to
get into this but that is another question. How do we hold
together the coalition to enforce sanctions if we walk away
from this agreement?
I have grave reservations about whether we can hold P5+1
together. We may want to keep the sanctions and even double
down on them. I am not sure our partners would. Mr. Chairman,
thank you.
Chairman Royce. We go now--thank you very much, Mr.
Connolly.
We go now to Ted Yoho of Florida.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, gentlemen.
I want to start with a quote from John Kerry in the
Washington Post. It says,

``If Iran's nuclear program is truly peaceful it is not
a hard proposition to prove. The only reasonable
conclusion for its stonewalling of international
investigators is that Tehran does not--does indeed have
much to hide.''

And then President Eisenhower back in the late '50s, early
'60s said Atoms for Peace program, one lesson is clear--
civilian nuclear programs flourish only through cooperation and
openness. Secrecy and isolation are typically signs of a
nuclear weapons program.
And I think it is very evident that they have been very--
not willing to be forthright and allow the inspectors in there,
and then my question is this. Without the sanctions, in your
opinion would Iran have weapons now or eventually? Yes, all
three of you real quick.
Mr. Albright. I think they would have had them by now
without all the----
Mr. Yoho. Are we all in agreement with that?
Mr. Albright [continuing]. Negotiations and sanctions. I
think the negotiations by the Europeans in the early 2000----
Mr. Yoho. Okay. I just--I need a quick answer here.
Mr. Duelfer. Yes.
Mr. Yoho. Mr. Duelfer? All right. With the sanctions in
place, in your opinion would Iran have nuclear weapons
eventually?
Mr. Rademaker. I think they have put themselves on a
trajectory where--yes.
Mr. Yoho. I have sat here for 2 years and I have heard
experts like you--not saying you--saying that Iran was 6 months
to 1 year from having enough fissile material for five to six
weapons. So with the sanctions in place we have already moved
to this direction.
And then my last question for this is with the U.S.-Iranian
nuclear agreement will Iran have nuclear weapons eventually?
Mr. Albright. I don't--I think it is an open question. It
is a challenge. I mean, this isn't over when there is a deal.
It is going to require lots of work.
Mr. Yoho. But we know the sanctions--we know the sanctions
go away in 5 to 10 to 15 years because I have heard all kinds
of numbers. How about you, Mr. Rademaker?
Mr. Rademaker. I think we don't know what their ultimate
intentions are but as I stated in my prepared testimony this
agreement puts them on the 1-inch line so that it is purely a
decision on their part whether--you know, if they decide they
will almost automatically have them.
Mr. Yoho. Mr. Duelfer, what is your----
Mr. Duelfer. If they want one they can have one.
Mr. Yoho. And the point I want to bring out here, if we had
no sanctions they would have one. If we had sanctions and they
had been working here why else would you have the secret--all
the secrecy that they have done, all the development that they
have done?
They have moved in this direction and the experts again
have told me they are going to have them, and then with this
agreement we are pretty much saying you can have one in 10 to
15 years. And what I don't hear is why are we not preparing for
the day that they have one.
We are spending and wasting time trying to prevent that
which we can't instead of preparing that which will be and I
think the American people and our national security would be
better served if our focus was on the day that Iran has a
nuclear weapon and talk about the responsibility of a nation
that has nuclear weapons.
I mean, I can't think of a more rogue nation than North
Korea and I think our focus in time should be spent for that
day because they are going to get it. And I would hope they
don't but, again, I see them getting that and, you know, the
whole idea--and Mr. Zeldin brought this up--of the snap back. I
think that is a joke because if I were to ask you to take us
through a snap back process when that times comes, when you
look at what Iran has done over the course of the last 30
years--lie, deceit, deception--we know that snap back is going
to have to be put in place.
How long of a process would that be to say all right, you
have broken the--you have violated the agreement. How long of a
process would that be for snap backs to go in place to stop
their development?
Mr. Rademaker. I think that will totally depend on the
deal--I am sorry, on the terms that are worked out. But let me
just say to the extent we are talking about U.N. sanctions, I
will be astonished if the mechanism doesn't require an
affirmative vote of the U.N. Security Council to implement the
snap back.
Mr. Yoho. I mean, we are talking months if not years to
even say all right, they broke that.
Mr. Rademaker. And it is also requiring, among others, the
consent of Russia and, you know, as a country that is under
U.S. sanctions today their appetite for imposing sanctions on
others is, I think, much diminished from what it was in the
past.
Mr. Yoho. With the sanctions already in place you got
continued illicit procurement. China, the UAE, Turkey are
supplying with stuff they are not even supposed to be buying.
So to think that they are going to abide by an agreement I
think is a joke and that our nation would be better served to
prepare for that day and change our policy in that direction.
I yield back and I thank you for your time.
Chairman Royce. We go now to Mr. Alan Lowenthal of
California.
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the
witnesses for your testimony. I have learned a lot.
I would like to kind of zero in a little bit more in depth
in terms of what really the purpose is. We are not--I am not
concerned from the panelists about the contents of the
framework of the final deal but of the verification process--
can we verify.
And so my first question is the inspection is being done
primarily by the IAEA. Is that not correct? The question is do
they have the resources to do what we are going to be asking
them to do and who will provide these additional resources and
if it is not in terms of the inspection how would you verify?
I don't want to hear about whether it is a good deal or
not. The question is how would you propose to verify that the
Iranians are not complying with the deal?
Can the--first of all, can the IAEA do it and if not what
resources are they going to need to do it and who is going to
provide those resources?
Mr. Albright. Yes. They are certainly going to need a lot
of resources and sometimes the inspection requirements aren't
rational and so but they still would have to do them and it
would cost them money.
So the member states of the IAEA including the United
States are going to have to provide money.
Mr. Lowenthal. Has that been provided already?
Mr. Albright. I think it would be. But it is--they are
getting more money to implement the monitoring of the interim
deal. But I think, more importantly, is they are going to have
to get some clear mandates of what they can and can't do and in
this case that they are going to be able to do more and that is
going to have to come probably from the U.N. Security Council.
It will have to have support from the member states.
Mr. Lowenthal. Well, what mandates would you give?
Mr. Albright. One is I would give a much stronger mandate
to look at Iran's illicit procurement and to verify that they
are not--they are not buying things illegally that could be
used in a covert nuclear program and that there is--they are
limited in doing that and Russia, in the negotiations, has
opposed giving the IAEA more mandates.
But I think that needs to be overturned or resisted by the
United States and have the IAEA being able to do more. And a
lot of it is it bolster their ability to investigate.
I mean, finally, the U.N. experience in Iraq in the '90s
was to create investigators, not verifiers, in a sense--that
you have a more aggressive, more analytical capabilities to be
able to ferret out covert activities.
And while, I think, Charles said it right they couldn't
show that the compliance was there it sure made it very--it
created an incredible deterrent against cheating.
Mr. Lowenthal. Mr. Duelfer, you were the one that said that
in--you know, the difficulty in the--what would you do now? Let
us say we are--we kind of come to agreement on kind of
ultimately what he agreement will be, how are we going to
verify it?
Mr. Duelfer. The way we thought about this when we were
designing and monitoring a system for Iraq was sort of in the
notion of a simple equation. You have designed some array of
sensors, visits, overhead surveillance--an array of things
which gives you some kind of a probability of detection.
But you can't look at that independently of other elements,
I mean, because if the goal is to deter Iran from going down
the nuclear weapons path then the weapons inspectors only
control one part of that equation.
The other part of the equation is the consequences and in
the case of Iraq and in the case of what we are talking here
presumably that is largely going to be the Security Council.
So there has to be, in Iran's assessment of the
circumstances, they are going to make a judgment well, am I
going to get caught--what is the probability of me getting
caught and what happens to me if I do get caught.
It is that part of the equation which is also important and
to look at one separate from the other, you know----
Mr. Lowenthal. Got it. I got it, and you learn that in
terms of that it is not just the inspection but the
consequences. I want to get back to that.
Is there a difference between trying to inspect and finding
out whether you get caught or not on looking for weapons of
mass destruction and in this case the development of a nuclear
bomb? Is that the same process, same risks involved or same
difficulties? It seems to me that they are different issues.
Mr. Duelfer. What the administration has designed is the
system aimed at what they call the nuclear supply chain, which,
to me, is defining the problem kind of narrowly.
When we were designing inspection systems we had--we needed
a baseline. We wanted to know in detail what was the
infrastructure that existed before we started so we could
calculate where the deviations were.
This is why when people talk about the possible military
dimensions that is a critical point. You know, if John Kerry
can't get up and stand and say exactly where the Iranians were
on weaponization then, you know, we don't know if we are going
forwards or backwards. You need that kind of a baseline for
designing an inspection system.
Mr. Lowenthal. I know I have to yield back because I have
used my time. I am just wondering, Mr. Rademaker, do you have
anything else to add in terms of the verification--the actual
process itself?
Mr. Rademaker. Well, I think maybe just to echo what Mr.
Albright said. You know, I think for verification to be
effective it is a question of both the authority and the
resources and hopefully there will be ample authority and ample
resources.
But whether there is sufficient authority depends
ultimately on the details of the agreement. If there was not--
--
Mr. Lowenthal. Do you believe if it was sufficient--if
there was sufficient authority and sufficient resources that
this would be appropriate?
Mr. Rademaker. What would be appropriate?
Mr. Lowenthal. Going down this road of using the--you know,
this kind of inspection regime, that this can work?
Mr. Rademaker. Well, I am in favor of the most robust
inspection and verification mechanism that can be achieved. But
the point I wanted to make was that even if the authority is,
in the judgment of myself and every other expert inadequate,
that is still not a reason not to provide the resources
necessary to make the best use of those authorities and so
hopefully both the supporters and the critics of this deal will
support making the resources available to do the best job
possible of verifying it.
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
We are going to go to Mr. Scott Perry of Pennsylvania
followed by Lois Frankel of Florida.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, gentlemen.
Just curious, Mr. Rademaker, of the executive agreements that
you have cited--there are many--are there any that provide for
nuclear nonproliferation?
Mr. Rademaker. Truthfully, I think the answer to that is
probably yes. I mean, the--well, yes. I mean, first of all, the
agreement with North Korea--the so-called agreed framework--was
not submitted to Congress for approval. But, you know, I think
we have----
Mr. Perry. And something as it is, right? I mean----
Mr. Rademaker [continuing]. Similar agreements with the
IAEA about inspections and those are not submitted as treaties.
But, you know, I didn't--I didn't a chance to make the
fundamental point which is, you know, the President triggers
the treaty process with his decision whether or not to submit
something as a treaty to the Senate.
If he chooses not to, you know, he can use what authority
he has to try and implement that. But one thing is clear--that
agreement does not achieve the force of law. I mean, this was
the subject of the Tom Cotton letter in the Senate.
Mr. Perry. Sure. And it seems to me that, and it is obvious
to me and I think many of the American people that this is--
this is orchestrated by the administration specifically and
expressly because getting the two-thirds approval of the Senate
was--it would be nearly impossible and because this is a
horrible deal for the region, for Israel, for America and for
the world.
That having been said, it seems to me that the whole
thing--I am going to call it a treaty because that is what it
is to me, it binds the American people--the whole treaty is
predicated on inspection and verification.
And with that having been said, just to set the framework
or the context up, Iran is party to the NPT, right? You would
agree with that, right? They are party to it, and in so they
also in signing it they have signed or agreed to the safeguards
agreement as a component of being signatory to the NPT,
correct?
Mr. Rademaker. Yes.
Mr. Perry. That is correct. So and have they already
violated the safeguards agreement that the themselves signed?
Mr. Rademaker. Absolutely.
Mr. Perry. They absolutely have. So that kind of sets the
context. Now, of who we are dealing with and past performance
we keep on hearing that they can--the administration can
compartmentalize, telling us that somehow that we are dealing
with a convicted murderer, a rapist, someone that has been
involved in human trafficking but right now we are going to
discuss petty burglary and just disavow those other things even
though they are on the table. That is not important. We can
handle this.
Let me ask you this, Mr. Albright. Who provides
intelligence for these suspected sites? Who provides the
intelligence for the IAEA?
Mr. Albright. Member states provide information and so a
member state could decide to provide the information----
Mr. Perry. Or not.
Mr. Albright [continuing]. On suspect sites.
Mr. Perry. But the IAEA needs to get its information
somewhere. It doesn't have an intelligence wing that is out
looking at the satellite photos of Iran?
Mr. Albright. No, it looks--it has--it looks at satellite
photos. It uses what they would call open sources.
Mr. Perry. Oh, it is open. I can be looking with Google
Earth, right?
Mr. Albright. That is right.
Mr. Perry. Okay. Yes.
Mr. Albright. They also--but they are also in the country
and so they can see indicators of violations.
Mr. Perry. If they are freely roaming the country do they--
--
Mr. Albright. Well, no, just even in interacting----
Mr. Perry. Sure.
Mr. Albright [continuing]. In their normal verification
exercises under the NPT. They also--the NPT does require
declarations and they can--and they scrutinize the declarations
for inconsistencies and in fact some of the new arrangements
under the deal would be that there be much broader declarations
that then would provide even more ability to look for
inconsistencies.
Mr. Perry. Let me ask you this. Are the U.S. capabilities
to locate undeclared sites adequate?
Mr. Albright. I am not--I can't independently just that. I
mean, some of the studies have said no. I mean, but at the same
time----
Mr. Perry. That is--that is the answer I get is no.
Mr. Albright [continuing]. But they found--in conjunction
with allies found Fordow----
Mr. Perry. Right.
Mr. Albright [continuing]. Found Natanz, found----
Mr. Perry. But they are being hidden.
Mr. Albright [continuing]. Physics research center.
Mr. Perry. Actively being hidden. They are not being
offered up to us. We have to go find them and that is who we
are dealing with.
Mr. Albright. Right.
Mr. Perry. Let me ask you, Iran has refused to allow IAEA
inspectors from the United States, Britain and France in the
past because, of course, we are all spies. Is this going to--is
that circumstance going to change under this agreement, as far
as you know?
Mr. Albright. It should change.
Mr. Perry. It should, but is it going to, as far as you
know?
Mr. Albright. Well, if once Iran ratifies additional
protocol I would imagine that at least British inspectors could
go back in and----
Mr. Perry. Oh, well, that is good to know.
Mr. Albright [continuing]. But on the U.S. side, I mean, it
is anyone's guess. Anyone's guess.
Mr. Perry. We are dealing with nuclear proliferation and
potentially nuclear war so I would rather not guess. Let me ask
you this.
The IAEA--you have all professed that it is not the best
vehicle for determining violations necessarily from a political
context and so it would go to the U.N. Security Council at
least is one of the possible avenues, right? Which we have
already alluded to including China and Russia. Russia is now
selling S-300 missiles to protect these sites.
Is this something that the American people should feel
comfortable with knowing that Russia--the likes of Russia and
China will be determining whether Iran is in violation of a
treaty that allows them to produce nuclear material,
potentially nuclear weapons?
Mr. Albright. I think the U.S. has to have it very clearly
recorded in this deal that it can decide on compliance and
noncompliance. I mean, you want others--also you want some kind
of authority created in this deal that could also decide. You
don't want it just to be the Security Council and you don't
want it just to be the IAEA.
Mr. Perry. I concur. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Okay. Lois Frankel, Florida.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
First, I just--I want to just state what is obvious to all
of us here, which is that Iran should not be allowed to get a
nuclear weapon. They are the leading state sponsor of terror.
They remain the most destabilized actor in the region and
nuclear weapons would allow them to play an even more dangerous
role and spark a nuclear proliferation throughout the Middle
East. So I think we all agree on that.
Do you all agree that a negotiated agreement would be a
better solution than a military action?
Mr. Albright. Yes.
Mr. Rademaker. Yes, although I would add to that, you know,
an acceptable negotiation. I mean, we could always negotiate
that they can have everything they want but----
Ms. Frankel. Some say a good agreement----
Mr. Albright. No, I would agree and----
Ms. Frankel. Okay. I understand that, yes. Mr. Duelfer?
Mr. Duelfer. Well, you know, I am a little bit reluctant to
say because, you know, a negotiated agreement that gives you a
false sense of confidence could be worse than all the horror
that goes with a military strike.
Ms. Frankel. Okay. So now, let me now take you back 1\1/2\
years ago, which is when we entered into the Joint Plan of
Action.
I believe that--I forget which one of you said that under
the--that under what you see is the parameters of a new
agreement, which we don't know the details yet but that--I
think you said that Iran would be on the 1-inch line under that
agreement to have a nuclear weapon.
So I want to take you back 1\1/2\ years ago. Tell me what
line were we on then. I mean, how--had we not--had we not had
the Joint Plan of Action how quickly was Iran or how close on
that inch line or foot line was Iran to not only developing a
nuclear weapon but having the ability to deliver it?
Mr. Albright. I think--it is hard for me to use a football
analogy but the breakout times----
Ms. Frankel. All right. Well, use whatever one you want.
Mr. Albright. Yes, the breakout times were shrinking
dangerously. I think our estimate at that time, given the large
stock and growing stock of near 20 percent was about a month
from being able to have enough weapon-grade uranium for a bomb
if it chose to breakout.
Implementing the JPA pushed that back to about 2 months and
so that was a valuable gain, and their inefficiencies in their
centrifuges would probably buy you--maybe make an estimate of 2
to 3 months.
Ms. Frankel. And then what about being able to actually
deliver it?
Mr. Albright. And I should add too they were headed--and
this is what Mr. Rademaker is referring to--by the--I think we
were estimating by--based on their plans to deploy centrifuges
but the summer of 2014 the breakout times would have reduced
down toward a week or two.
And so the--now, in terms of their deliverability, I there
is two parts to that. One is a crude device that can be used to
test underground or delivered by crude methods. I think you
would have to conclude that within 6 months or so they could--
they could cobble together something.
If they wanted to put it on a Shahab-3 missile I think I
would refer to the IAEA findings in their internal reports--
that they still had a ways to go and I think U.S. estimates are
probably greater than 1 year.
Ms. Frankel. But it could have and may have, would you
agree, sparked a proliferation had they--had they enough
material to create a nuclear weapon, that that could have
sparked a proliferation in the Middle East?
Mr. Albright. It certainly could. You know, unfortunately,
one of the things that this deal is sparking, though, is
spreading of nuclear technology in the Middle East and in fact
it is--there is some very good things in this deal and there is
some good norms.
One of the norms that isn't good and we are going to have
to wrestle with is that you can an uranium enrichment program
with zero purpose and it can be in the hands of a U.S.
adversary. So how do you say no to Saudi Arabia?
Mr. Rademaker. Could I just interject? I am the one
responsible for this football analogy.
Ms. Frankel. All right. Okay.
Mr. Rademaker. And, you know, Dave was talking about how
the football has moved up and down the field.
Ms. Frankel. Right.
Mr. Rademaker. But let me just say, you know, where the
football has been and where it is now, wherever it is on the
football field the one thing that is clear is that today
their--Iran's nuclear program is illegitimate.
Its very existence violates U.N. Security Council mandates.
We are entitled to sanction it. If it came to the point where
we felt we needed to use military force against it we would be
able to point to U.N. Security Council resolutions and say this
is an illegitimate program--we had no choice but to take it
out.
One of the critical things this agreement does is it is
going to legitimize the program and one of my--my point about
them being on the 1-inch line--you know, I guess I didn't
emphasize this--they are going to be on the 1-inch line and it
is going to be legitimate.
Ms. Frankel. Okay.
Mr. Rademaker. We are going to have no right to complain
about it.
Ms. Frankel. Is it on the--is it on the 1-inch line or you
say it is going to be on the 1-inch line in 10 years?
Mr. Rademaker. The latter.
Ms. Frankel. Okay.
Mr. Rademaker. But today, wherever the football is on the
field it is--it is an illegitimate program. It is subject to--
you know, its existence is in violation of U.N. Security
Council mandates and that is not going to be the case at the
end of this deal or really on day one of this deal, you know,
because the Security Council will act very quickly to repeal
those resolutions that forbade Iran to do this.
Ms. Frankel. All right. Well, may I ask--Mr. Chair, may I
ask one more question? I think I am the--as usual, I am, like,
one of the last people standing here, or sitting here.
I am trying to--I guess I am going to try to get back to
Mr. Connolly's question because--I mean, more specific because
he asked whether or not by entering the Joint Plan of Action we
actually gained anything and so I think, if I am hearing what
you said, that before the Joint Action Plan they were maybe a
month from breakout so----
Mr. Albright. It could breakout--could break out in a
month.
Ms. Frankel. It could break out in a month. So at least we
know had we--if there was no Joint Action Plan they could have
a nuclear weapon today. That we would agree on, correct? So----
Mr. Albright. Well, maybe not. I mean, again, U.S. policies
prevent Iran from getting--U.S. policy has been to prevent Iran
from getting a nuclear weapon.
Ms. Frankel. Right. But----
Mr. Albright. If they move to get it, one would have
expected the Obama administration to try to stop them.
Ms. Frankel. Okay. So maybe with a military action or
whatever.
Mr. Albright. Whatever.
Ms. Frankel. With all the options on the table. So just
right now, with the Joint Action Plan in place, how would you
compare--is the breakout time greater or less than when we
started?
Mr. Albright. It is greater and so it is 2 to 3 months.
Ms. Frankel. Okay. So we went from a month to 2 to 3
months?
Mr. Albright. And that is--and that was a valuable gain and
it also reversed the trend, which was to go down toward 1 week.
Ms. Frankel. All right. All right. Well, I hope--I thank
you for your time. You know what? Mr. Sherman said, I think,
what we are dealing with what is--what is the best of the worst
solutions here and maybe somebody will come up with the best of
the worst, I hope.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
Now we go to Mark Meadows from North Carolina.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to each of
you for your testimony today.
My staff has been working on a number of issues that really
are perplexing and, Mr. Rademaker, you kind of alluded to it
just a few minutes ago.
You know, five executive orders, over 10 codified laws that
required Congress to act to remove the sanctions in some way,
form or fashion from Iran.
And yet here we are today discussing this particular deal
of a new deal when Iran is violating not only outlined codified
law on our behalf but, according to your testimony just now,
U.N. sanctions.
Is that correct? Are they violating U.N. sanctions by
having a nuclear program?
Mr. Rademaker. You know, that is one of the mysteries of
the Joint Plan of Action because yes, those U.N. mandates
remain in effect yet you have got this agreement that sort of
takes a wink at that or gives a wink to that and says----
Mr. Meadows. So we have----
Mr. Rademaker [continuing]. We are going to--I mean, in a
way we have sort of delegitimized the authority of the U.N.
Security Council by winking at these Iranian violations of U.N.
mandates.
Mr. Meadows. So what this administration is saying is that
it is okay if you violate some of the U.N. sanctions and some
of the U.N. guidelines that are out there today as long as you
enter into a new agreement where you promise not to violate
them. Is that correct?
Mr. Rademaker. I would say that is correct, yes.
Mr. Meadows. Well, if that is the case, if they are not
willing to adhere to existing laws that are in place, existing
guidelines by both the United States and the U.N., how do we
expect them, just because 18 months has transpired, to be any
more, I guess, legitimate, to use your words, with regards to
compliance? How can we expect a different result based on this
new agreement?
Mr. Rademaker. Well, I will give you two answers. The first
is a flip one--you know, hope springs eternal--but the second
one is more serious and that is it is the Faustian bargain that
I referred to in my testimony.
I think the calculation is we are going to offer the
Iranians a really sweet deal. They behave for 10 years and we
are going to incentivize them to behave for 10 years because at
the end of the 10 years they get everything they want.
Mr. Meadows. So----
Mr. Rademaker. And so, you know, maybe they cheat during
the 10 years but then they get--then they lose the really sweet
deal.
Mr. Meadows. So we are legitimizing their nuclear program
today in exchange for them to have a bona fide nuclear program
10 years from now?
Mr. Rademaker. That is fundamentally the bargain that is
being offered to them.
Mr. Meadows. Well, if it takes Congress to act to remove
these particular codified laws, if it takes the U.N. to act to
remove U.N. sanctions, how in the world does a snap back really
happen?
I mean, this new snap back is part of the framework. I have
never known sanctions to ever snap back and ever be effective
quickly.
Mr. Rademaker. Well, you know----
Mr. Meadows. Can you show--can you point to a point in
history where that has ever had immediate impact on a snap back
kind of situation where a sanction had an immediate effect and
changed it overnight?
Mr. Rademaker. I would have to think about that but let me
just say, you know, for the domestic side of it, you know,
where it is a matter of U.S. law, you are going to be writing
the law and, you know, you can write a law that will snap back
U.S. sanctions.
You can write that. Now, it may require the President to
implement that law in good faith but--and that may or may not
be an obstacle. But, you know, you can----
Mr. Meadows. So what about the U.N.?
Mr. Rademaker [continuing]. Construct a domestic snap back.
Yes, the U.N. much, much harder and I would say, as I said
earlier, I would be astonished----
Mr. Meadows. Harder or impossible? Well, close to
impossible?
Mr. Albright. You should wait and see, though, because
they--there is another challenge. It has to be automatic and so
you can't----
Mr. Rademaker. Well, I----
Mr. Meadows. And therein is my thing. In the framework
analysis that we have, gentlemen, it talks about mitigation and
how we mitigate differences and if we have a 2-month window or
even if it grows to 1 year, as the talking points have, can you
mitigate something longer enough to allow Iran to get to a
nuclear bomb before we could actually take action, according to
our own framework?
Mr. Albright. Yes, but there are two issues. One is can you
create a snap back mechanism and I am told that they are
seriously looking at ways to do that. It is not resolved and I
couldn't give you an answer in any case because----
Mr. Meadows. Can you point to anywhere this has----
Mr. Albright. Well, I think this is on precedent.
Mr. Meadows. I am not aware of any.
Mr. Albright. But the other part is can it work. I mean, in
that I think we should be clear on. I think that using
sanctions to stop an Iranian breakout is probably not possible.
I mean, it just takes too long for the sanctions to really
have an impact and so more is going to be needed and I think
that has to be thought through by the U.S. Government and by
Congress of what else is going to have to be put into, in a
sense, the implementing U.S. legislation that would trigger
reactions if Iran isn't in compliance.
Mr. Meadows. So let me--let me clarify. A snap back will
not stop Iran from getting a nuclear bomb. Is that----
Mr. Albright. I don't think so, not even if you had a year
breakout time. It is hard to see how that alone would do it.
Just, again, that if it is--if you create, you know, go much,
much further on the impact of sanctions.
But I think in the end you are pushed to the point of are
you going to respond militarily. I mean, I think that is a
horrible place to be but I think that is ultimately where you
end up.
But if you want to stop them before they get enough
material for a bomb you probably have to have some
preauthorization or something in law that would--that would
authorize the U.S. to respond.
And this would also help address what Mr. Rademaker has
brought up about the legitimization of the program and so I
think it is going to require some real thought about how the
U.S.--how it implements this deal.
Mr. Meadows. I am out of time. I will yield back. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, and let me just express our
appreciation for our witnesses for being here today and for the
time they have given us and also on this issue of inspections,
this verification component and the other parts of this program
that we have talked about today.
An understanding of that is going to be critical to
Congress as it judges any final agreement. So we are going to
have a series of additional hearings on different aspects on
the agreement. But it is clear when it comes to the issue of
verification that the administration has a long way to go.
So this hearing for now is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:52 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Record
Notice deg.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Material submitted for the record by the Honorable Darrell E. Issa, a
Representative in Congress from the State of California
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Material submitted for the record by the Honorable Darrell E. Issa, a
Representative in Congress from the State of California

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
