- U.S. STRATEGIC INTERESTS AND THE APEC AND EAST ASIA SUMMITS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

U.S. STRATEGIC INTERESTS AND THE APEC AND EAST ASIA SUMMITS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

DECEMBER 2, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-130

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

97-754PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific

MATT SALMON, Arizona Chairman
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         BRAD SHERMAN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   AMI BERA, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Mr. Michael H. Fuchs, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for
Strategy and Multilateral Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and
Pacific Affairs, U.S. Department of State......................     5
Mr. Bruce Hirsh, Assistant U.S. Trade Representative for Japan,
Korea, and APEC, Office of the United States Trade
Representative.................................................    13

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Mr. Michael H. Fuchs: Prepared statement.........................     7
Mr. Bruce Hirsh: Prepared statement..............................    15

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    36
Hearing minutes..................................................    37
The Honorable Brad Sherman, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California: Material submitted for the record.........    38
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in Congress
from the Commonwealth of Virginia: Prepared statement..........    44
The Honorable Alan S. Lowenthal, a Representative in Congress
from the State of California: Prepared statement...............    46
Questions submitted for the record by members of the Subcommittee
on Asia and the Pacific........................................    48
Written responses from Mr. Michael H. Fuchs to questions
submitted for the record by the Honorable Brad Sherman and the
Honorable Gerald E. Connolly...................................    49

U.S. STRATEGIC INTERESTS AND THE APEC AND EAST ASIA SUMMITS

----------

WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 2, 2015

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:35 p.m., in
room 2255, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Matt Salmon
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Salmon. This subcommittee will come to order.
Good afternoon. We convene this hearing today to gain a
deeper understanding of the administration's continued efforts
to engage with Asia at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
and East Asia Summits. This hearing will examine the outcomes
of APEC and EAS and determine how Congress can support the
expansion of U.S. presence in the region.
The APEC Summit convened 21 member economies in Manila to
discuss economic growth and integration in the region, which is
no light task. As a bloc, APEC countries represent over half
the world's GDP and 44 percent of all their global trade.
Given that summit occurred immediately following the Paris
attacks, the fight against ISIS was a large part of the
conversation. The heads of state at the summit rightly took a
united stance against terrorism and stressed the importance of
using economic tools to address the root causes of such evils.
I am curious about how Asia's views of terrorism may or may not
have changed at this event.
I just returned from a trip to Taiwan where I had the
opportunity to meet with President Ma and leaders of the
opposition DPP party. As a strong supporter of Taiwan's
participation on the global stage, I am encouraged to see
Taiwan's membership and the engagement in APEC. Still, I would
like to see additional partners in the Asia-Pacific region take
advantage of membership in APEC, including India, the region's
third-largest and fastest-growing economy. As APEC would
greatly benefit from the inclusion of the next global economic
powerhouse, I urge our administration to support India's
candidacy for APEC membership.
APEC also provided a platform for leaders of TPP countries
to hold meetings following the completion of the agreement. We
will be watching closely as the parties work toward
ratification, though it seems that the TPP strategic value
continues to hold. Indonesia and the Philippines and South
Korea have each expressed interest or intent to seek inclusion
in the deal. Experts say the completed negotiation of TPP is a
major blow to RCEP, China's rival to the agreement.
I would be interested, though, to hear from our
administration witnesses how they see or foresee TPP fitting
into the regional architecture with a number of competing trade
deals in Asia. And I am sure Mr. Sherman will have his thoughts
and comments, too, which I welcome. I actually find it quite
refreshing. It is kind of fun.
President Obama also visited the Gregorio del Pilar, a
former Coast Guard cutter that is now a centerpiece of the
Philippine Navy, to talk about the defense of our allies'
maritime security and the South China Sea. He announced a $250
million plan to provide assistance to regional partners to
improve their maritime capabilities, signaling that China's
belligerent activities would be a prominent agenda item at both
summits, even in light of APEC's economic focus. And I welcome
that. I think that kind of clarity is badly needed, so thank
you.
Maritime security was discussed in depth at the East Asia
Summit in Kuala Lumpur immediately following APEC bringing 18
members of consultations on political and strategic issues.
Even after President Xi gave his assurance to President Obama
and the public that China would not militarize the manmade
islands of the South China Sea, China continues to build dual-
use facilities on them.
China's paper-thin efforts to characterize the construction
of assets with military applications as a public service made
clear the dishonesty in prior statements. Despite this, I was
really glad to see the summit chairman's statement reaffirm the
importance of the freedom of navigation and overflight in the
region and supported a rules-based order in the maritime space.
The EAS also provided an opportunity for discussions of
other interests to include terrorism, energy, health,
development, combating human trafficking, and poverty
reduction. I had the recent opportunity to meet with
representatives from all the ASEAN nations and reassured them
of our support for the development of democracy and security in
their countries and across the region.
Summits such as APEC and EAS have provided substantial
opportunities for the United States to bolster our foreign
policy goals in the region, strengthen our partnerships and
alliances, open our markets, and promote sound international
law and norms.
And with that, I look forward to hearing from our
witnesses. Members present will be permitted to submit written
statements to be included in the official hearing record. And
without objection, the record will remain open for 5 calendar
days to allow for statements, questions, and extraneous
materials subject to the length limitation in the rules.
And, Mr. Sherman, I will turn to you.
Mr. Sherman. I oppose the Pivot to Asia if by that phrase
we mean redirecting our military focus to a place where there
are few reefs that we can quibble about at a time when ISIS and
the Iranian-led Shiite alliance are killing tens of thousands
of people and killing as many Americans as they can.
It may be useful politically in Beijing to focus
nationalist attention on these reefs, and of course it meets
the desire of some in our Pentagon to focus on a confrontation
of uniformed and advanced militaries with which they are
comfortable. But the fact is these so-called islands, reefs,
are basically useless. We are told they are important because
ships passing close to them involve hundreds of billions of
dollars of trade. That is true. They are all going in and out
of Chinese ports, and I do not think that China will blockade
its own ports.
That being said, we do believe in freedom of navigation. We
should continue to assert that, but not as the chief focus of
our military. What is happening now at the Pentagon is they are
abandoning the research and procurement and structuring and
planning necessary to deal with the problems of the Middle East
and focusing their attention to building advanced naval systems
designed solely to confront China. Keep in mind if these so-
called islands are of any economic value, that value does not
accrue to the U.S. taxpayer. It accrues to Japan, Korea, the
Philippines, et cetera, while we are without much attention,
spending hundreds of billions of dollars in procurement and
planning at the Pentagon redirecting our military efforts to
the defense of these supposedly valuable islands. The amount of
additional money being spent on defense by the countries that
claim to own these islands pales in insignificance.
Much brouhaha about Japan making the slightest change in
where it will deploy its forces, the fact that there is so much
brouhaha over that proves how insignificant the Japanese--I
hope I said Japan and not China as to the application of their
forces. The fact is Japan claims the islands but claims that we
should defend them and has not insignificantly increased its
military budget.
The one exception to this on burdening-sharing is Taiwan.
They want to buy a couple frigates for them. The Congress has
authorized it. It has been planned. They are ready and it is
time to deliver them. And we will have legislation on that to
push the delivery of those frigates.
We do need to focus on the interests of the American middle
class and the American taxpayer that sends us to Washington.
This TPP is such a terrible economic deal for the American
middle class that it is being sold as good geopolitics because
it can't be sold on the basis of economics. As a method of
containing China, it is a fantastically good deal for China and
they didn't even have to show up to the negotiations.
Two things: First, we are told this deal sets precedence of
a world adopting America's rules. They are not America's rules.
They are the rules that have destroyed the American middle
class over the last 30 years. They are Wall Street's rules. But
the one case the rules reflected in the TPP are not Wall
Street's rules; they are Beijing's rules. This is the holy
grail that establishes that currency manipulation is allowed
and almost glorified in the text of this agreement, or should I
say the missing pages of the text of this agreement. So it
establishes for China's benefit and, I hate to say it, but also
for Japan's benefit that currency manipulation is allowed and
cannot be stopped.
Second, under the rules of origin, goods that are admitted
to be 30 percent made in Vietnam or Malaysia but 70 percent
made in China get duty-free access to the United States. Now,
it is not just 30 percent because if a Chinese company creates
a factory in Vietnam and then labels things saying, well, at
least 30 percent of the goods were--they are making all the
decisions as to how to allocate the costs of production. They
are doing the intercompany invoicing. Goods that are 3 percent
made in Vietnam could be labeled 30 percent made in Vietnam.
And this agreement does not employ 50 or 100,000 accountants to
go look at every intercompany invoice, which is what would be
necessary.
So this is a free trade deal par excellence for China. Now,
I know they are fainting and saying, oh, we want to join the
deal. They get all the benefits of the deal just as soon as
Congress approves it. Well, maybe only 97 percent of the
benefits. They will still have to do a little bit of the work
in Vietnam or Malaysia.
So if this deal cannot be sold as good economics for the
American middle class, it would be sold on the basis of
patriotism because Americans are patriotic. And we will tell
our constituents you have got to lose jobs but it is necessary
for our security. No. It is necessary to further enhance China
and Wall Street.
And I yield back.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you. Mr. Bera?
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, I want to thank the chairman for having this
hearing because obviously when we are thinking about the Asian
markets, you know, some of the fastest-growing markets that are
critically important to our economy and growing our economy,
making sure that we have fair access to those markets and our
companies.
Also, you know, I would like to align myself with the
chairman's statements that what is happening in the South China
Sea is critically important, both strategic value, as well as--
it is quite important to make a statement today so we don't
have to engage militarily in the future. And it is incredibly
important that international law, international waterways, and
international norms in the South China Sea are recognized.
And, you know, I have stated in committee many times that,
you know, China has incursions here. The building of these
manmade islands really goes outside international norms. And it
is very important that we send a strong message that that is
not okay.
Extremely important that we keep these markets open,
extremely important that we create a fair playing field for
American companies, for the American worker and, you know,
evaluate how we engage again in an incredibly important region
of the world.
So, again, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing, and I look forward to the testimony of the witnesses.
Mr. Salmon. I thank the gentleman.
We are really appreciative to have both the very
distinguished witnesses joining us this afternoon.
First, Mr. Michael Fuchs is the deputy assistant secretary
of State for Strategy and Multilateral Affairs in the
Department of State's Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs.
And Mr. Bruce Hirsh is the assistant U.S. Trade
Representative for Japan, Korea, and APEC, and you have been
really busy lately.
We would like to start with you, Mr. Fuchs.

STATEMENT OF MR. MICHAEL H. FUCHS, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY
OF STATE FOR STRATEGY AND MULTILATERAL AFFAIRS, BUREAU OF EAST
ASIAN AND PACIFIC AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Mr. Fuchs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Sherman,
members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you today to testify on the recently concluded
East Asia Summit and U.S.-ASEAN Summit. I would also like to
thank the committee for your continued leadership and
supporting and promoting engagement in the Asia-Pacific region.
Two weeks ago, as you know, President Obama made his ninth
trip to the Asia-Pacific, which is a reflection of a continued
importance of the region to U.S. national interests and the
administration's commitment to advancing the rebalance
strategy. A central component of this strategy is what I would
call a ``rebalance within the rebalance'' to Southeast Asia and
those 10 countries that make up the Association of Southeast
Asia Nations, or ASEAN.
Given its strategic location and the essential role it
plays in the region's multilateral institutions, ASEAN is at
the core of one of the world's most dynamic regions. This year
in particular has been a historic one for our engagement with
ASEAN. At the U.S.-ASEAN Summit, the President and ASEAN
leaders elevated the U.S.-ASEAN relationship to a strategic
partnership and agreed on a new plan of action for 2016 to
2020. And we were pleased to announce that the ASEAN leaders
had accepted the President's invitation to attend a special
summit in the United States in 2016.
Taken together, these summits are charting a course forward
with ASEAN, guiding our efforts to work together on everything
from climate change to trafficking-in-persons to maritime
security and beyond.
The President also participated in the East Asia Summit,
which has quickly become the premier forum for addressing
political and security issues in the Asia-Pacific region. This
year was its 10th anniversary, and leaders used the occasion to
endorse a number of institutional reforms to move the EAS
closer to being the strong, effective institution that the
region needs to support the rules-based order.
This year, the leaders of EAS also endorsed statements on
key regional challenges, including maritime cooperation, cyber
issues, preventing health pandemics, and countering violent
extremism, which will help build a foundation for regional
cooperation.
And as the region's premier institution for addressing
political and security concerns, the leaders also focused on
the South China Sea. At both the EAS and the U.S.-ASEAN
Summits, the President directly addressed the maritime disputes
in the South China Sea. All countries of the EAS, claimants and
non-claimants alike, have a vested interest in how this issue
is addressed. While the United States is not a claimant and
takes no position on the sovereignty of particular features in
the South China Sea, the President used the East Asia Summit to
convey the United States' deep and abiding commitment to
freedom of navigation and overflight and other lawful uses of
the sea, upholding international law, and the maintenance of
peace and stability in the region.
He made clear that the United States will stand by our
treaty obligations and our security commitments. The President
encouraged ongoing efforts to develop a code of conduct between
ASEAN and China. He also urged parties to take more immediate
steps to lower tensions, including a halt to land reclamation,
construction of new facilities, and any further militarization
of outposts.
He noted the unanimous October 29 decision of the arbitral
tribunal regarding its jurisdiction in the case between the
Philippines and China and expressed support for the arbitration
process as a peaceful mechanism to resolve disputes.
The level of concern over events in the South China Sea was
clear from across the region during the summit. At the East
Asia Summit, 15 of the 18 leaders present expressed concerns
over tensions in the South China Sea, and 10 of those leaders
emphasized the importance of the non-militarization of
outposts. And this year, ASEAN itself sent a direct and
unmistakable signal to China on the South China Sea referring
in its own summit statement to concerns about the possible
militarization of outposts. This chorus of support on the issue
of non-militarization is a step forward and one we intend to
work with others to build on in the coming weeks and months.
Fundamentally, of course, these maritime security issues
are about rules, not rocks. The question is whether countries
work to uphold international legal rules and standards or
whether they flout them. It is about whether countries work
together with others to uphold peace and stability or use
coercion and intimidation to secure their interests.
And I want to reaffirm here today that we will continue to
champion respect for international law, freedom of navigation
and overflight and other lawful uses of the seas, unimpeded
lawful commerce, and the peaceful resolution of disputes.
Finally, while my colleague Bruce Hirsh will address APEC
in more detail, I would like to note quickly that we view APEC
as the premier economic forum in the region for advancing free
and open trade and investment, as well as for fostering
cooperating and promoting sustainable and equitable growth. The
United States' priority in APEC is to enhance regional
integration and stability while establishing systems conducive
to U.S. economic competitiveness.
So in conclusion, I thank the committee for its interest in
these issues and look forward to working with you in pursuit of
U.S. interests in the Asia-Pacific. I look forward to answering
any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fuchs follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Salmon. Thank you.
Mr. Hirsh?

STATEMENT OF MR. BRUCE HIRSH, ASSISTANT U.S. TRADE
REPRESENTATIVE FOR JAPAN, KOREA, AND APEC, OFFICE OF THE UNITED
STATES TRADE REPRESENTATIVE

Mr. Hirsh. Chairman Salmon, Ranking Member Sherman, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify on the recently concluded APEC Leaders' Meeting and on
APEC's importance for U.S. economic and trade engagement in the
Asia-Pacific region.
The Asia-Pacific region continues to be a dynamic and
growing part of the global economy. The 21 APEC economies
account for nearly 60 percent of global GDP and international
trade and are home to 2.8 billion consumers, 40 percent of the
world's population.
U.S. engagement in APEC plays an important role in helping
to secure the economic benefits offered by the Asia-Pacific
region and to address the challenges we face there. APEC
remains the premier regional forum through which we are able to
advance U.S. trade policy objectives in a leadership role. With
other economic powers vying for influence in the region, U.S.
active engagement remains essential.
The unique characteristics of APEC make it an effective
forum to advance work on emerging issues in the trade and
economic area. First, given how much the region has benefitted
from trade, APEC economies generally embrace open markets and
ideas that advance free trade.
Second, APEC outcomes are nonbinding and voluntary in
nature, thus allowing APEC economies to be more forward-leaning
and open-minded when exploring new issues in contrast to other
venues where achieving consensus is more difficult.
Third, APEC initiatives can take a variety of forms with
varying levels of participation by economies. This flexibility
allows for more creative and diverse approaches to new and
emerging issues.
Finally, APEC has a diverse membership. As a result,
initiatives that emerge from APEC carry significant weight in
other fora. For example, the WTO Information Technology
Agreement and a subsequent expansion have their origins in
APEC. Similarly, the 2011 commitment by APEC leaders to reduce
tariffs on environmental goods gave impetus to the launch of
the WTO Environmental Goods Agreement. And APEC's long-term
work on supply chain facilitation helped lay the groundwork for
the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement.
In 2015, with the Philippines as host, APEC continued its
work to improve the business environment in the Asia-Pacific
and to facilitate trade. This work culminated in a number of
outcomes at the November 18 to 19 Leaders Meeting, including on
topics of great interest to U.S. stakeholders such as the
reaffirmation of the commitment to reduce environmental goods
tariffs, endorsement of substantive work on the internet and
digital economy, a mandate to elevate APEC work on services
trade, and the instruction to complete work on APEC best
practices on trade secrets protection and enforcement. Other
outcomes were reached on electric vehicle standards, trade and
health care products, and advertising standards, among others.
The U.S. has been a leader on all of these issues.
Finally, APEC leaders also noted the recent conclusion of
the Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations. All 12 TPP members
are in APEC, and most other APEC economies have expressed an
interest in the agreement. Given this connection, the United
States and other APEC members have a real opportunity over the
coming years to educate APEC members about the benefits of
adopting policies that will meet the requirements of high-
standard agreements like the TPP. In this way, U.S. engagement
in APEC will further serve to support the objective of creating
a rules-based trading system for the Asia-Pacific region.
Looking ahead to 2016 when Peru will serve as APEC host,
the United States will have an opportunity to push for
significant outcomes on digital and services trade, as well as
on trade secrets protection and enforcement. APEC will assess
progress on its target of improving supply chain performance by
10 percent and look beyond that target. And we will continue to
explore ways to ensure that the benefits of economic growth
extend to businesses of all sizes.
One of APEC's successes lies in its mandate to engage with
the business community. The APEC Business Advisory Council
plays an important role by providing its views and priorities
to APEC officials throughout the year. In the United States we
have a longstanding and close working relationship with the
National Center for APEC. We will also continue to consult with
Congress as we plan our agenda for APEC in 2016. We are
grateful for the interest of this subcommittee in this regard.
In conclusion, I want to thank you for the opportunity to
discuss the outcomes of the APEC Leaders Meeting and the
importance of APEC to U.S. engagement in the Asia-Pacific
region. As that region continues to grow in economic and
strategic importance, U.S. leadership in APEC will be
increasingly vital. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hirsh follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Salmon. Thank you both very much.
You know, for the last several administrations we have
operated on an overarching policy toward China under the
umbrella of a term that just makes me feel about like, you
know, the time I remember getting my tooth drilled without
Novocain, it is called strategic ambiguity because I believe if
we need clarity anywhere, we need it with China.
And on that vein I would like you to pass something on to
your boss. I applaud him for what he said about the rules of
the road in maritime space in the South China Sea and the
overflights. I think that kind of strategic clarity and that
recommitment to something that is incredibly important not just
to the United States but to the world at large was badly
needed, and thank him for showing that leadership. I don't
think we do that enough.
We have all been concerned about how we juxtapose this
Pivot to Asia with the needs and the crisis in the Middle East.
Based on this year's Asia-Pacific Summits--and by the way, I
think the Pivot to Asia is a great thing. I want to go on
record saying that. I think it is incredibly important that we
can walk and chew bubblegum at the same time and that we can do
more than one thing.
But based on this year's Asia-Pacific Summits, how do you
assess the region's views toward transnational terrorist
threats? And have these summits yielded any lessons or insights
we can apply to better balance global crises with long-term
policy goals and to remain engaged in Asia while handling
responsibilities elsewhere? Do you feel that the recent events
in the Middle East and Europe have changed Asia-Pacific
perceptions about terrorism and how to address it? Mr. Fuchs,
can I start with you?
Mr. Fuchs. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think it is obviously a
very important issue that you have raised. And I think coming
back from these summits I can say without a doubt that the
countries of the region are focused on this issue. And this is
something that, obviously, many of the countries in the region
and Southeast Asia have been focused on for a number of years.
These are threats to them as well. And so this is why this has
been a priority for us working both bilaterally with many of
these countries to strengthen their capacity, information-
sharing, to deal with these issues and to coordinate and
cooperate on them. And it is also why we have tried to engage
through these regional institutions, including ASEAN and East
Asia Summit, to build broader cooperation throughout the region
in dealing with these issues.
In 2014, last year's summit in Burma, the leaders of the
East Asia Summit adopted a statement about the need to stem the
flow of foreign fighters to and from Iraq and Syria and agreed
to take a number of steps to do so and to cooperate on that
endeavor.
This year, following up on that--and obviously the horrible
attacks of Paris had just taken place right before the leaders
of the EAS met this year, and so that was very much on their
minds as well. And they adopted a statement on countering
violent extremism and again trying to set out some actions and
some principles at least that countries can use to cooperate
when it comes to this important issue. So without a doubt I can
say this is on their minds and this is something the region has
to deal with.
Mr. Salmon. Well, and one of the rationales I used for
trying to get Taiwan observer status in INTERPOL is that when
we have a global terrorist crisis, then it needs to be all
hands on deck. And hopefully, all of these countries understand
that. It is nobody's responsibility solely. It is collectively
our responsibility to deal with this horrible global threat.
I have a question for you, Mr. Hirsh. Twelve out of the 21
APEC countries are members already of TPP. How does the
conclusion of the TPP affect where APEC fits in the U.S. policy
toward Asia? And how do you reconcile APEC's principles of
volunteerism and open regionalist with the TPP, which is a
binding agreement?
Mr. Hirsh. Thank you very much. And those are very good
questions.
You know, the TPP is going to serve as a race to the top,
we hope, in terms of the rules of the road in Asian trade. We
have had a lot of interest from a number of non-TPP parties in
what is in the agreement, and we believe that the conclusion of
the agreement will help to emphasize the importance of
maintaining high standards.
With regard to reconciling APEC's volunteerism with the
approach in the TPP, APEC has a very useful and important role
to play by virtue of the fact that not every member of APEC is
in the TPP. Because it is a voluntary organization, APEC
members who are not members of TPP will be more open to
experimentation and exploration of ideas that ultimately will
allow them to adopt policies that are consistent with high-
standard agreements like the TPP. So APEC can continue to serve
as an incubator for good policy ideas in the region, and it can
help us to educate countries in the region about the value of
high standards such as those in TPP.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you. Mr. Bera?
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Chairman.
You know, I applaud the work that the administration has
done in the Pivot in laying some of the groundwork, working
with the APEC nations. Obviously, they are creating economic
cooperation to help their region, and our partnership there
certainly is important. I also think, you know, a good TPP
certainly starts to build a framework for economic cooperation
throughout the Pacific Rim nations.
So as we evaluate the TPP and look at that and consider it
here in this body, I think many of us will be doing it with
that eye to the future, does it lay the foundation for a fairer
trade policy across the entire Pacific Rim region.
You know, as I think about APEC, though, and some of the
steps, you know, I have a unique focus on the U.S.-India
relationship and certainly a lot of the discussion that is
going on in economic cooperation between the United States and
India. Certainly, Prime Minister Modi and President Obama have,
you know, both echoed a similar theme to, you know, open up
stronger economic ties between both countries. You know, while
the bilateral investment treaty is not moving as quickly as I
would like to see, you know, certainly is a starting point. But
another starting point that many of us have talked about is
India's desire to join APEC and, you know, some have suggested
that the United States should take a more active role in, you
know, pushing for India's inclusion.
I would be curious as to what challenges and what
suggestions either one of you would have for both, you know,
Members here in Congress who might suggest that we push to
include India, but then also what India ought to be doing to
make it more palatable to join APEC.
Mr. Hirsh. Thank you very much. Well, we welcome India's
interest in joining APEC. It is important for economies that
are interested in APEC to align their trade and investment
policies and their economic reform plans with APEC's
longstanding commitments to trade and investment liberalization
and market-driven economic reforms.
APEC is an important consensus-based economic institution
that deals with a wide range of issues, and it will be
important for India to demonstrate its commitment to that
consensus-based approach, as well as to the free and open trade
and investment policies that APEC espouses. So we certainly
will want to understand better how APEC fits into India's
economic reform efforts.
Mr. Fuchs. If I may add, Congressman, perhaps taking a step
back as well, I think as you mentioned, this administration and
President Obama have taken a real interest in engaging with
India and strengthening our partnership with India. And that
includes, you know, the top of that list, engaging with India
with respect to the Asia-Pacific region. Obviously, President
Obama's trip there earlier at the beginning of this year, they
released a joint vision statement on cooperation between our
two countries and the Asia-Pacific, the goals that we share.
In this administration we have begun a series of other
dialogues, including a bilateral U.S.-India dialogue about the
Asia-Pacific, a trilateral dialogue with India, as well as
Japan, covering issues with respect to the Asia-Pacific region.
And so, broadly speaking, we are engaged in multiple different
levels with India trying to deepen the relationship and the
cooperation that we can pursue together on a wide range of
issues in the Asia-Pacific.
Mr. Bera. Great. And I agree, laying that foundation today,
you know, which, again, we may not see the return on this
investment, for, you know, several years or maybe a decade. But
it is important that we start to lay that foundation of
economic cooperation not just in the region but again across
the Pacific, which I do believe, as that partnership
strengthens, as the economic relationship between the TPP
countries, as well as the APEC countries, strengthens, I do
think China will actually see the importance of, you know,
normalizing its economy in a way that, you know, allows it to
consider joining the TPP. I don't see this as a giveaway to
China. I see this actually as the United States strengthening
our rules of economic engagement.
And actually hearing the desire of the countries in the
region to play by our economic rules, which are much fairer,
which are much more equitable, and much more benevolent in
helping those countries grow their economies, grow their
stability. And I do see this as a key to building stability in
the region. So, you know, again, I applaud the administration's
efforts. And I will yield back.
Mr. Salmon. Thanks, Mr. Bera.
Mr. Lowenthal, did you have any questions?
Mr. Lowenthal. Yes, I have--thank you, Mr. Chairman--
statement by also applauding not only the Pivot to Asia but the
administration moving towards--in much more way moving toward
policies, a strong stance on the South China Sea and making
sure that, you know, being the adult in the room and talking
about how we have freedom of navigation and that territorial
disputes must be kind of resolved in a rational way. And I
think that is really a very, very important message for the
United States not only to shift but to send that message.
I have three issues wanting to understand more about our
role and maybe either in ASEAN or APEC. One of them is human
rights, another one is climate change, and the third one is
Taiwan. And human rights, we have seen how human rights abuses
in one nation can have a regional impact. The persecution of
the Rohingya Muslims in Burma has created a refugee crisis that
affects surrounding countries. Are these issues that are
discussed and in this kind of context? I would really kind of
like to know how those issues are being discussed.
The same thing by climate change, how is the United States
bringing up climate change in the context of these talks?
Developing nations in ASEAN that are expected to rapidly grow
and develop in coming years, have they been receptive to
discussing emissions and how to limit them? And beyond
emissions, how have the Asia-Pacific nations been preparing for
adaptation and resiliency? And so that is the second.
And the third one, again, with a lot of questions is, you
know, we have known that the Presidents of mainland China,
President Xi and President Ma, have held a historic meeting
last month. And APEC is one of the few international bodies
where the PRC and Taiwan both participate. Has APEC been
historically a place where the two can cooperate? And do other
APEC participants, have they facilitated any dialogue between
Taiwan and the PRC? So take a stab at any of the three: Human
rights; climate change, our role; and Taiwan.
Mr. Fuchs. Thank you, Congressman. I think that those are,
again, I think very important and relevant questions. I will
try to tackle the first two----
Mr. Lowenthal. Okay.
Mr. Fuchs [continuing]. If I can start. Human rights issues
without a doubt are regularly discussed in a variety of
different manners in these summits. For instance, trafficking
in persons is an issue that is front and center in Southeast
Asia and in this region obviously. We do a lot of work
programmatically and otherwise with the countries of ASEAN
bilaterally at 10 to try to address these issues and to
strengthen regional cooperation.
Just the other week during the series of ASEAN summits,
ASEAN itself actually inaugurated its own convention against
trafficking in persons, especially women and children, which is
a real step forward----
Mr. Lowenthal. Okay.
Mr. Fuchs [continuing]. For ASEAN. And we are doing some
work now with the member countries of ASEAN to try to ensure
that they can begin to implement that convention. And so that
is without a doubt a feature of these conversations.
Other human rights issues obviously are regular features of
our conversations, especially at the bilateral level and with
all of these countries on the sidelines of them. You saw
President Obama make some comments about these issues when he
was in Malaysia as well. And so again, this is a regular
feature of all of our engagement in the region.
With respect to climate change, this is obviously, again, a
top priority for the administration. And with respect to ASEAN
in particular, we in the last couple of years have been doing a
lot of work with ASEAN. Last year, in the 2014 summit, the
leaders in the U.S.-ASEAN Summit, the 11 leaders agreed to a
statement on climate change, which the first time had all 11
countries and all 10 countries of ASEAN agreeing to put forth
their intended nationally determined contributions well before
Paris. At that point I believe only one of the countries of
ASEAN had done so. And to date I think all but two now have
done so.
And the process of engaging with them on the negotiation of
that statement, again, was a real boost and a chance for us to
discuss a wide variety of these issues.
Mr. Lowenthal. But I was wondering, you know, we are seeing
a dramatic--I think--dramatic change in China. China a few
years ago said there is a critical difference between
developing nations and developed nations in terms of setting
standards. They have subsequently changed that position and
really have come to now address that this is a critical issue
for them also.
Are we seeing with these developing nations--what is the
discussion because they are further behind and so I just would
like to understand how do they see themselves as--you know, on
one hand they will be tremendously impacted, especially those
in the Southeast Asia that are on sea level rise. On the other
hand, they have a long way to go. And so I am just kind of
wondering how that dynamic has been played out.
Mr. Fuchs. Well, I think if I can--just to add, I think, to
answer your question, I think you have summed it up actually
quite well, the way in which they see this. This is both
something that is going to affect them so they need to adapt,
they need to find ways to grow their economies in sustainable
ways, and they are grappling with these issues right now in a
very real and tangible way.
They also recognize, though, that with respect to the
global negotiations and the fact that this is a global issue
and that there are many economies in Southeast Asia that are
very large and are growing rapidly in terms of emissions and so
they also have a responsibility to contribute when it comes to
reducing emissions. And so I think that they are trying to
grapple with both of these issues at the same time. And for our
part again, we are trying to engage on both sides. The
statement with respect to climate change last year was engaging
them, I would say, a lot more on the latter side of it, how can
we work together to reduce emissions?
On the former side and the adaptation and growing
sustainable economies, we have done a lot of work, including
through one of our sub-ASEAN initiatives called the Lower
Mekong Initiative, which works with the five countries of
mainland Southeast Asia on a variety of transnational issues,
frankly the top one of which is climate change and the
environment and water and the nexus between that and energy.
And so we have been doing a lot of work with those five
countries to build local capacity.
Mr. Salmon. The chair recognizes Mr. Chabot.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I
apologize for being a little late for this meeting. As some may
have already mentioned, there is a Middle East committee
hearing going on at the same time so I am trying to cover both
areas.
But just a couple questions, and if you already asked
these--somebody already asked and they were answered, I
apologize for that. But India sought membership in APEC for 20
years and has been an observer since, I believe, 2011. However,
some members of the U.S. business community have expressed
doubts about India's role in APEC and feel that the U.S. should
refrain from proactively supporting India's membership. Could
you comment on that? And does the administration believe India
has shown enough commitment to economic reform to warrant U.S.
support in India's membership, whoever wants to handle that?
Mr. Hirsh. Sure. Yes, again, we do welcome India's interest
in joining APEC, but we are evaluating some of the
considerations that you mentioned. It is important for
economies that are interested in APEC to demonstrate that their
policies are aligned with the approaches in APEC for trade
liberalization and economic reform.
Also, APEC is a consensus-based organization, and so it is
important for prospective members to indicate their ability to
work in that environment, as well as to demonstrate their
commitment to free trade and open trade and investment. So we
are certainly examining these criteria as we look at this
question.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you. Next, President Xi continues to
argue that China does not intend to pursue militarization in
the South China Sea, but many experts would argue that it has
already done so and that the artificial islands have both
civilian and military applications. How are President Xi's
arguments received by other Asian neighbors, many of whom are
our allies? What steps is the U.S. taking to display an active
leadership role in preventing China's militarization of the
area? And what further steps might we contemplate from the
administration?
Mr. Fuchs. Congressman, that is a great question and one on
the front of a lot of our minds, as well coming out of these
summits.
First, to take a step back and get the second part of your
question, I think that this administration has pursued a
consistent strategy with respect to the South China Sea that is
focused on upholding our interests, our interests in upholding
international law and the freedom of navigation, the peaceful
resolution of disputes, and that is where our energy is
focused. So we are doing that in a variety of ways. It is by
making concerns directly known to the Chinese. It is by
increasing our maritime security capacity-building, just as the
President announced some more funding for during his stop in
Manila. It is by actively supporting the development of crisis
mechanism tools, the availability of--supporting the ability of
countries to avail themselves of international legal mechanisms
like arbitration such as the Philippines is doing. And it is
including, of course, by strengthening our defense posture in
the region so we can ensure that we are upholding these variety
of interests.
But obviously we are clear-eyed about the challenges that
we face in the South China Sea. This is about, I think, shaping
an environment to ensure that we can uphold these interests.
So with respect to President Xi's comments about
militarization, I think that coming out of the East Asia
Summits and the various summits, to your first question, the
response is very clear from--the majority of the region is
concerned about the actions taking place in the South China
Sea. Ten of the leaders in the room at the East Asia Summit,
including Premier Li, mentioned the importance of non-
militarization of these outposts.
And so we are looking to ensure that there is a regional
consensus to ensure that there is no militarization and no
further militarization of these outposts. That is our goal.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you. Just one final comment--my time is
ready to run out--but one of my real concerns that the
administration has been sending in the whole defense area--and
I am sure this has some concern with our allies in the region--
is that, you know, we are now down--or we will be if the
President's proposals go forward--to have an army that we
haven't seen as low in numbers since World War II, an Air Force
that is getting older and apparently numbers under when we
first had an Air Force. And on the naval front, whereas Ronald
Reagan was trying to get it up to a 600-ship Navy, we are now
down to 200 and some, which is levels that are all the way back
to 1916 in the Navy area. And that is of particular concern in
that part of the world.
So I think some of the actions and some what we talk about
and what the President is proposing are inconsistent, and I
will leave it there since my time has run out. I yield back.
Mr. Salmon. Up for another round of questions? I have got--
--
Mr. Sherman. I didn't get my first round.
Mr. Salmon. What?
Mr. Sherman. I am up to my first round.
Mr. Salmon. Oh, you didn't have your first round. Okay. Go
ahead.
Mr. Sherman. I will try to make my questioning memorable
enough to----
Mr. Salmon. We will give you a second round, too.
Mr. Sherman. Oh, good for me, maybe not for the witnesses.
We will see.
Mr. Fuchs, I will ask you to just answer for the record
just basic questions on the law of the sea, at least as
interpreted by the United States. How big is the economic zone
for an uninhabited reef or island that is submerged at high
tide? What is the size of the economic zone for an uninhabited
island or reef that at least a little bit is above the water at
high tide? And what is the economic zone for an inhabited
island? And what is the economic zone for an island that has
been uninhabited for the last few millennia but the Chinese
Government puts one fisherman's family on it and gives him a
free boat and tells him that he has got to live there whether
he likes it or not? But he does get a free boat, and then after
maybe 5 or 10 years they put a different--in other words,
habitation that begins only after the South China Sea becomes a
huge area of dispute but islands that have been uninhabited for
at least the last millennia as far as we know.
Now, for questions for an oral response, we got a $600
billion military budget, especially if you throw in veterans'
benefits or the cost of compensating our troops. And it is hard
for any cost accountant to tell you what portion of that $600
billion is properly allocable to the cost of defending world
security in the Eastern Pacific or the Asia-Pacific area. But
when I talk to the military about, say, research projects, they
say we are not interested in doing research on anything that is
going to help us in the Middle East. We want all of our
research to be how to shoot down Chinese planes over the South
China Sea.
And so knowing that no one could possibly refute it because
we can't possibly know, I will say that we are now spending,
say, one-third of our military budget focused on the Asia-
Pacific area and we are on our way to spending half or $300
billion. So whether it is $200 billion, whether it is $300
billion or it is $200 billion now, whether it is $300 billion
later, how much collectively is Japan, the Philippines, and
South Korea spending on their total military, all of which is
devoted to the East Asia area? And any chance they are
increasing their budgets or collective budgets by $100 billion
or anything close to that?
Mr. Salmon. Before you answer all those questions, I just
want to say if you can get them all off the top of your head, I
am going to buy you a milkshake.
Mr. Sherman. I am going to buy him a drink.
And if you prefer, you can just respond for the record and
answer the more general--give me solid numbers for the
general--but is there any evidence of tens of billions of
dollars of increase in the defense budgets of Japan, South
Korea, and Philippines?
Mr. Fuchs. Well, Congressman, I will have to look into some
of these questions to get back to you with some specific
answers for the record so that I can make sure that they are
accurate.
What I can tell you about your first question, although I
am not a lawyer, is that my understanding is that with respect
to some of the general explanations of features is that if
there is a feature that is submerged, it derives nothing----
Mr. Sherman. Right----
Mr. Fuchs [continuing]. No territorial sea, no exclusive
economic zone----
Mr. Sherman. We agree on that, yes.
Mr. Fuchs. Yes. Right.
Mr. Sherman. I just threw that in to give you more
questions to answer for the record.
Mr. Fuchs. Right. So we can provide you with some of the
other answers to those.
Mr. Sherman. Yes. But what will be interesting is the
inhabited and then the ``never inhabited before, but now that
there is a dispute, there is a fisherman.''
Mr. Fuchs. Okay.
Mr. Sherman. Mr. Hirsh, okay, we have got the rules of
origin under TPP, but if you controlled the entire supply
chain, if you own the factory in China and you own the factory
in Vietnam or you just have a cooperative relationship but you
could own it, a factory that is Chinese-owned and the goods are
70 percent made in China, 30 percent made in Vietnam, if the
rule of origin is 30 percent, they get duty-free in the United
States, right?
Mr. Hirsh. The rule of origin varies by product so----
Mr. Sherman. Right. And for many products. And then for
others it will be 40 percent and others will be 45 percent.
Mr. Hirsh. There has to be a verification or there can be
verification in examining the eligibility of a product so----
Mr. Sherman. How would you possibly do that with less than
50,000 accountants?
Mr. Hirsh. Well, the way that we--I am sorry, Congressman.
Mr. Sherman. Yes.
Mr. Hirsh. Yes. Yes, the way that we have approached that
in our past FTAs that we would approach here, as well, is just
through a multilayered approach where there are spot-checks,
verifications----
Mr. Sherman. Spot--okay. Every invoice, every intercompany
billing decision is totally in the control of those who want
the free entry of the product. What spot-checking--I mean, your
spot-checking could verify that nothing was being done to the
product in Vietnam, but how would you possibly know whether it
was 33 percent or 23 percent Vietnamese-made?
Mr. Hirsh. Well, spot-checks are one of the mechanisms
which are used to confirm rule of origin. Customs also conducts
verifications in which they actually go onsite and examine the
company's books in great detail----
Mr. Sherman. But the books are made by the company. I mean
have you ever done a--you have never been involved on the tax
side but we do this in the section 482 audits. There is no
chance of catching. Every invoice, every decision, every
booking--you get to look at the company's books? They will put
on the books what they need to put on the books. How are we
supposed to say that if the left side of the product was made
in China and the right side of the product was made in Vietnam
that it is incorrect to say that the Chinese portion is only 42
percent?
Mr. Hirsh. Well, they have to follow generally accepted
accounting principles and customs----
Mr. Sherman. I am probably the only CPA in the room and I
know generally accepted accounting principles do not answer the
question. So what it means is goods that are maybe 10 or 15
percent in reality made in Vietnam get duty-free into the
United States. So China knows that even if we decide to push
them with higher tariffs on their own goods, they can just
stamp the made-in-Vietnam sticker on it, bring it into the
United States.
I yield back.
Mr. Salmon. We are going to do another round.
Mr. Sherman. Yes.
Mr. Salmon. If you want to ask another question----
Mr. Sherman. I am going to go ahead, yes.
Mr. Salmon [continuing]. Then we will go to the next one
because I will get you another chance so he can get----
Mr. Sherman. Okay. Then I will----
Mr. Salmon. How about we move on to Mr. Connolly and then--
--
Mr. Sherman. Yes.
Mr. Salmon [continuing]. You think about the answer to that
one because we are going to go back around again.
Mr. Sherman. We will give you a chance, yes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have got to say the implication here is that Vietnam and
China are in collusion because Vietnam is just so much in love
with China and everything Chinese. I think that is a false
premise.
Mr. Sherman. If the gentleman will yield?
Mr. Connolly. I would yield.
Mr. Sherman. My question was a company in Vietnam entirely
owned by China would cooperate with its parent company, and of
course it would be in the interest of the Vietnamese Government
to let this happen----
Mr. Connolly. But I am not----
Mr. Sherman [continuing]. Because at least they are getting
some of the jobs.
Mr. Connolly. Okay. But you seem to be making sweeping
conclusions from that as if everyone is going to cheat and that
clearly--apparently Chinese companies are going to dominate
trade in 12 countries involving 40 percent of the world's
economy. I think that is a false premise and I think it is a
misleading suggestion. The fact that some people may cheat is
sort of the human condition.
My question, Mr. Hirsh, would be, you know, you got
ridiculed for talking about spot-checks so please don't talk
about spot-checks. Surely, we have some other mechanisms,
however, for verifying the nature of goods and services coming
into the United States or crossing borders pursuant to this
pending trade agreement.
Mr. Hirsh. Well, we do. As with other mechanisms in other
FTAs, we have onsite verifications in which the books are
examined in great detail, and if anything incorrect is found,
there is the potential for enforcement actions where there
would be penalties involved for providing inaccurate
information.
Mr. Connolly. So, for example, the example used, a Chinese-
owned company operating in, say, Cholon in former Saigon, now
Ho Chi Minh City, if we were able to catch them cheating, there
would be consequences?
Mr. Hirsh. Yes, there would.
Mr. Connolly. What would those consequences be?
Mr. Hirsh. Well, in addition to the obvious consequence of
denying them the benefits of the agreement, there are penalties
under our customs statutes for providing incorrect information.
Mr. Connolly. So when a company decides to cheat, pursuant
to the example given by my friend from California, they have to
calculate the risk here. And it is not a consequence-free risk
if caught, is that correct?
Mr. Hirsh. That is correct.
Mr. Connolly. Would there be consequences for the host
country, for Vietnam, since the private company--the example
given by my friend Mr. Sherman--is not a signatory to the
agreement? The Government of Vietnam is. Are there consequences
to the Government of Vietnam for either turning a blind eye,
acquiescing, or simply being malfeasant with respect to this
cheating?
Mr. Hirsh. Well, at the very least they would have an
interest in not seeing their exporters cheating because it is
going to expose their other exporters to closer scrutiny.
Mr. Connolly. No, but my question was does the pending
agreement penalize the host country if it knowingly or even
blindly allows such blatant cheating, as described by my friend
from California?
Mr. Hirsh. I would probably have to take a closer look at
that question. But if it is merely a question of one of their
companies doing this, I don't know that the country itself
would be penalized.
Mr. Connolly. Okay. If it were a pattern, however, if there
were thousands of Chinese-owned companies engaging in this kind
of subterfuge, would there be consequences for the Government
of Vietnam?
Mr. Hirsh. I will have to take a closer look at that
question and get back to you. But, if in fact they were
involved in encouraging that behavior, then----
Mr. Connolly. Well, it is a pretty significant question my
friend from California is asking, and I think it is pretty
important that you answer it hopefully forthrightly and
forcefully because, frankly, this goes to the question of are
there teeth in the enforcement of this agreement or not? Are
there consequences for serious patterns of evasion and cheating
or not? If there aren't, then the treaty isn't worth much.
Mr. Hirsh. I understand.
Mr. Connolly. We already have cheating without a treaty.
My friend also asked, Mr. Fuchs, questions about defense
spending. Our NATO allies, are they all meeting their goals in
defense spending? They are all spending billions of dollars
more in defense spending right now, too, right?
Mr. Fuchs. Congressman, I work in the Bureau of East Asian
and Pacific Affairs so----
Mr. Connolly. How compartmentalized.
Mr. Fuchs. I----
Mr. Connolly. Well, are you aware of the fact that there is
a 2-percent goal for NATO members, that we want you to be
spending 2 percent of your GDP on defense? Are you aware of any
besides the United States, member of NATO, who in fact is
meeting that goal?
Mr. Fuchs. I would have to get back to you on that,
Congressman.
Mr. Connolly. Well, would it surprise you to learn not one?
Would it surprise you to learn that most of them in fact are
retreating from the goal rather than advancing toward the goal?
I only point that out because it is not unique to Asia that our
allies in fact are not meeting defense investment goals.
And my friend mentioned the Middle East, too, but I would
be interested in seeing data on the Middle East when you can
talk to your colleagues, you know, how is Jordan doing, how is
Israel doing, how is Egypt doing? And what percentage of their
current defense spending is coming from the United States?
Japan's defense budget, we provide a protective umbrella.
We have a collaborative relationship but we don't subsidize
their defense that I am aware of. But when you get back to us
for the record, I would be interested in seeing that data.
But I think it is important that the State Department give
us the comparative data because I don't want--the suggestion
being that Asia is unique. It isn't. So I would request you add
to that, knowing and stipulating that you are in your
compartment, but the State Department covers the world and if
you could get back to us, I would appreciate it.
Mr. Fuchs. Absolutely.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you.
Mr. Hirsh, I have a question for you. And before I ask the
question, I want to precursor it by saying that this is my 10th
year in Congress. It was kind of bifurcated. I started in '94
and I served to 2000. Bill Clinton was the President. And now I
am going on my--well, next year will be my 4th year back, my
second time around. During that whole time, I have supported
every free trade agreement that has come before us in the
Congress. I voted for TPA, and so I am very robust. I have held
many hearings trying to be very supportive of the TPP process
because I know how important it is both to our country and to
the region.
That having been said, what are you guys at USTR or with
the administration doing to manage the expectations of the
other 10 TPP countries that--it is probably pretty likely that
we are not going to get something out of the Congress approving
that next year. I mean we are entering the silly season, and
the leading candidate on the President's side has come out
against it even though she helped shepherd it through when she
was Secretary of State. Many of our candidates on the
Republican's side are coming out against it as well. It is a
bizarre world.
But the fact is TPA passed this body by four votes. And
given some of the challenges now--and the vote will be sometime
at best in the spring--I think it is very likely that TPP is
not going to be ratified by the Congress next year. And I say
that not because I hope that or because I want that. I think it
is just a fact of life that we are all going to have to deal
with.
I have had lots of conversations with the Ambassadors from
these TPP countries, and they have expressed to me their
interest in being patient and staying the course and waiting
for a good deal. I know that your real concern, as I am, about
a vacuum being filled by China, and all those arguments are
very good and forthcoming, but the fact remains that,
politically, it is going to be a real heavy lift if not
impossible to get it through next year. What are you doing to
manage the expectations of those TPP partners so that they will
stay patient and stay in the boat?
Mr. Hirsh. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Right now, we are
focused on making the case for TPP here in Congress and for the
American people. And we are confident that when we have made
that case that there will be the support.
With regard to our trading partners, our colleagues in TPP
are following our processes closely, and I think they are aware
of the challenges we face but share our optimism as well.
Mr. Salmon. It is always great to be really optimistic, and
I know every football team goes in with the idea that they are
going to come out victorious, but at the end of the game,
somebody comes out winning and somebody comes out losing. And I
think there has to be a plan B. This is too important to not
have a plan B. And I hope that the administration is managing
the expectations because I don't want our partners to lose
heart and think that, you know, if it doesn't pass next year
then it is off the table because I don't believe that is the
case.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Salmon. Yes, Mr. Connolly, I yield.
Mr. Connolly. I just want to echo what you said. I couldn't
agree with you more. I think timing is everything actually.
And, Mr. Hirsh, I wish we lived in a world of pure reason and
rational actors, but I don't think the dynamic for approval of
this agreement is simply a matter of more information, the more
people know, the more they will come to love it. I wish that
were true but I don't think it is.
You have got to do your job and we understand that, but I
think timing is everything, and I think the chairman has said
it well. And if the timing is wrong, it is not like we have
some huge cushion to fall back on in terms of support up here.
I believe TPA passed by a margin of 10.
Mr. Salmon. Was it 10?
Mr. Connolly. Was it 10?
Mr. Salmon. I thought it was four.
Mr. Connolly. I thought it was 218 to 208 but----
Mr. Salmon. Anyway----
Mr. Connolly [continuing]. Whatever.
Mr. Salmon. It was not a lot----
Mr. Connolly. It was not a lot to spare, to the chairman's
point. And that is why, frankly, getting the timing right is
really critical. So I echo what he said as a supporter of the
agreement and of TPA. But this is going to be a slog and a bit
of trench warfare.
Mr. Salmon. And it would be prudent to have a plan B. The
chair recognizes Mr. Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. I would very much hope the trade decisions
were made on the basis of pure reason and rational actors, in
which case we would have a completely different trade policy
than we have had for the last 30 years when we have decimated
the American middle class.
I do want to agree with the gentleman from Virginia that as
much Chinese cheating as may go on under this agreement, that
will not be the lion's share of all the trade that occurs under
this agreement. Toyota will be a Japanese company whether we
ratify--ratify is the wrong word--whether Congress approves the
agreement or not.
But just to show you how incredibly difficult it is to stop
cheating, I want to put in the record two articles. One is
``U.S. put China-made parts in the F-35 fighter program.''
There is no way that we are auditing Vietnamese and Chinese
textile firms as carefully as our national security is focusing
on the parts in the F-35. Even there, cheating happens.
``Counterfeit Chinese parts slipping into U.S. military
aircraft,'' ABC News is the second article that I would put in
the record if there is no objection.
Mr. Salmon. Can I just say to my friend, we are willing to
audit every one of those firms if we get your vote.
Mr. Sherman. Don't promise what you can't deliver.
And the idea that you can catch this and will penalize it
when you catch it, yes, you can audit the books but I am the
only one in the room who has ever written one of these books,
and you put in the books what you want to put in the books. You
could easily value at zero for intercompany transactions the
value of Chinese intellectual property in the product and value
at a high value intellectual property that happened to be owned
by one of the subsidiaries in Vietnam or Malaysia.
There are so many ways to handle this, not to mention the
profit margins. You could set a profit margin at zero of what
the Chinese company ships to its Vietnamese subsidiary. And
those are the above-board, legitimate ways to cheat. That
doesn't even involve lying, just setting the prices
differently.
But the other concern I have is on coproduction agreements.
Now and then, China does import something from the United
States, and what they do is they say, okay, you think you are
getting jobs because we are buying these planes, but in order
to buy your planes, you have to build a factory in China to
build the fuselages not just for the planes that you are
selling to China but the planes you are selling all over the
world.
Now, that is great if all you are concerned with is Wall
Street profits because you move the fuselage factory to China,
maybe you will make even more money, but you of course lose the
jobs. And once this deal goes forward and China has another
route to ship its goods into the United States, we will never
be able to demand that we don't have coproduction agreements.
But, Mr. Hirsh, is there anything in this agreement that
says that a Vietnamese airline or Malaysian airline can't
prefer one aircraft supplier over the other based on which one
is willing to produce parts for its plane or to have
manufacturing facilities in the buying country? Are
coproduction agreements bad?
Mr. Hirsh. Thank you, Congressman. That is a very specific
question that I don't have the answer right here.
Mr. Sherman. Furnish it for the record, please.
Mr. Hirsh. And we will look into that. Thanks.
Mr. Sherman. Good. And I think I had asked another question
prior to others that you might want to respond to. And do you
have any other comments on any of the other parts of my
diatribe that have been focused on you?
Mr. Hirsh. Sir, only to say that we have a number of FTAs
and that the enforcement of rules of origin is something which
is an issue in every single FTA. We do have a track record
there. And customs does look at these issues very seriously.
Mr. Sherman. Okay. We here in Washington are cut off. Even
I should probably be required to go and sit in the back of a
Trump rally. If you think that our prior FTAs' enforcement is
what America wants, that we have been doing a great job, that
there is no cheating under our existing rules, that everything
is hunky-dory and the middle class is doing well in the United
States, then you and I should sit in the back of a Trump rally
together and see the anger. I won't say that the focus of the
solution for that anger, electing Mr. Trump as President, is
the solution, but the anger is there and the anger is because
for 30 years America hasn't gotten a raise, especially those
who do not have grad school degrees.
So I have gone way over time. I thank the chairman for his
indulgence and I yield back.
Mr. Salmon. You have given Steve and I an opportunity to
think about a present that we could give you, maybe one of
those Trump Make America Great hats.
Mr. Sherman. The greatest present that you could give to my
party and the worst thing or one of the worst things you could
do for my country is to nominate the Presidential candidate who
has got the hat.
Mr. Salmon. All right. And on that note, ba-dum-bum, Mr.
Chabot.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much. Rather than discuss--never
mind. I am just going to stay away from that altogether and go
to something less controversial, and that is TPA and TPP. As
one who also supported TPA and is inclined to support TPP or
certainly was inclined and TTIP and other trade agreements, I
have generally been considered a free-trader over my career, I
was at a meeting this morning where a fairly prominent person
indicated that in chapter 20 of TPP is language that in essence
requires that TPP implementation of any environmental
agreements that are agreed to in other forums, forums similar
to the one that President Obama recently participated in in
Paris.
And a lot of ears perked up, including mine at that point,
and I went and read the language myself, and it seemed
relatively vague. I see that you could interpret it that way. I
think you could perhaps interpret it a different way. But, Mr.
Hirsh, on behalf of the administration, can you give us some
clarification on that issue?
Mr. Hirsh. I will have to defer to my colleagues back at
USTR who are more familiar with the details of that particular
issue, if that is okay.
Mr. Chabot. Okay. Yes, I would like to get that as quickly
as we can and as much detail as we can and clarification
because if that is the case, you know, that would give a lot of
people some real heartburn. So I will yield back at this point.
Mr. Salmon. Great and lively discussion. I really
congratulate the two of you for sitting through this and being
so patient and diligent in your answers and your testimony. We
really appreciate it. So thank you very much.
And this committee is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:48 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Material submitted for the record by the Honorable Brad Sherman, a
Representative in Congress from the State of California

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Material submitted for the record by the Honorable Brad Sherman, a
Representative in Congress from the State of California

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared statement of the Honorable Alan S. Lowenthal, a Representative
in Congress from the State of California

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
