- DOES THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2016 BUDGET

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DOES THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2016 BUDGET
REQUEST ADDRESS THE CRISES IN THE
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA?

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON

THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 18, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-18

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

93-821 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

______

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
TOM EMMER, Minnesota

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa

ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida, Chairman
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         GRACE MENG, New York
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

The Honorable Anne W. Patterson, Assistant Secretary, Bureau of
Near Eastern Affairs, U.S. Department of State.................     7
The Honorable Paige Alexander, Assistant Administrator, Bureau
for the Middle East, U.S. Agency for International Development.    19

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

The Honorable Anne W. Patterson: Prepared statement..............    10
The Honorable Paige Alexander: Prepared statement................    22

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    44
Hearing minutes..................................................    45
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in Congress
from the Commonwealth of Virginia: Prepared statement..........    46
Written responses from the Honorable Anne W. Patterson to
questions submitted for the record by:
The Honorable Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Florida, and chairman, Subcommittee on the
Middle East and North Africa.................................    49
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly...............................    68

DOES THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2016 BUDGET

REQUEST ADDRESS THE CRISES IN THE

MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA?

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 18, 2015

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2 o'clock p.m.,
in room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ileana Ros-
Lehtinen (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. The subcommittee will come to order.
After recognizing myself and Ranking Member Deutch for 5
minutes each for our opening statements, I will then recognize
other members seeking recognition for 1 minute.
We will then hear from our witnesses and without objection
the witnesses' prepared statements will be made a part of the
record and members may have 5 days to insert statements and
questions for the record subject to the length limitation in
the rules.
And before we begin today, I wanted to take a moment to
express our condolences to the people of Tunisia, Poland,
Italy, Germany and Spain for today's senseless and cowardly
terror attack in Tunis that has left at least 19 people dead.
We all have great hopes for Tunisia as it leads the way on
its path toward democracy against all odds and this attack
reminds us that we must continue to support it as it strives to
make progress.
The Chair now recognizes herself for 5 minutes. First, let
me again welcome you both for being here and thank you for your
service.
Each year as part of our oversight obligations we hold this
hearing to examine the President's budget request for the State
Department's Near Eastern Affairs Bureau and USAID's Bureau for
the Middle East.
We are all aware of just how difficult the Middle East and
North Africa is with all the instability, the sectarian
tensions, the violence and the terror. So we know it isn't an
easy task to address all of these crises and protect our own
national security interest.
What I hope to hear today from our two distinguished guests
is the administration's plan to address the most pressing
issues in the region and how the budget request is commensurate
with what we are aiming to achieve.
In this year's budget, the administration is requesting
$7.14 billion in overall non-humanitarian bilateral aid for the
Middle East and North Africa countries, an 8.7 percent increase
over last year's request.
It is also requesting an additional $873.4 million in
bilateral aid for these countries as part of its overseas
contingency operations--OCO fund--a 5.7 increase since 2014.
On top of that, there is a request for an additional $1.64
billion for humanitarian aid for the crisis in Iraq and Syria.
I am fully aware that this region poses probably the most
difficulty for us to address.
But in a time when we don't seem to have a clear and
decisive plan to tackle these crises, these increases must be
closely scrutinized by us and the administration must justify
them.
This is a significant sum of U.S. taxpayer dollars and we
can't just sign off on such increases without identifying our
policy goals and objectives and this administration has been
plagued by indecision and half measures. And time and time
again, we hear that the administration was surprised or caught
unaware by certain events.
We heard the President say the rise of ISIL was a surprise.
Then the administration was surprised when ISIL easily captured
Mosul.
More recently, even though President Obama hailed our
counterterrorism efforts in Yemen as a model of success in
September, the administration acknowledged that it was
surprised by the collapse of the U.S.-backed government in
Yemen earlier this year.
Yet all of these events were foreseeable. In Syria, the
President still has not defined a clear and comprehensive plan
for dealing with ISIL, al-Nusra and Assad nor has it been able
to put forth a clear and distinct strategy for addressing the
humanitarian crisis that has resulted.
Instead of seeking the removal of Assad, now Secretary
Kerry has lowered the threshold and is seeking to negotiate
with Assad, a man responsible for over 220,000 deaths and who
used chemical weapons against his own population.
But this is part of the administration's willingness to
negotiate with the world's worst regimes at the expense of our
allies and partners. In the meantime, Iran is essentially in
control of four capitals in the region--Damascus, Beirut,
Sana'a and Baghdad.
Yet, we carry on these misguided P5+1 nuclear talks while
continuing to alienate our traditional partners and allies in
the region, which is a recipe for disaster.
While in Israel and the Palestinian territories the
administration failed to prevent Abu Mazen from agreeing to a
unity government with Hamas and failed to prevent Abu Mazen
from going to the U.N. Security Council with a resolution that
would establish a Palestinian state outside of the
Palestinians' obligation to come to a negotiated settlement
with Israel.
And though that initiative may have failed, at least for
now, we were unable to prevent Abu Mazen from ceding to the
Rome Statute and joining the International Criminal Court, the
ICC, which has since launched a preliminary investigation
against Israel.
In each of the President's requests for economic support
funds, ESF, is $150 million, $50 million less than Fiscal Year
2014, and we were told that this decrease was a result of a
policy decision but we were given no specifics.
This is somewhat puzzling since a GAO report that I
requested with Mr. Connolly recently made public shows that we
still have nearly $\1/2\ billion in previously unobligated
funds for Egypt. So why are we requesting an additional $150
million and what are we doing with the $\1/2\ billion?
There are significant funds from the OCO account that are
intended to go to Iraq including $250 million in FMF for the
Iraqi security forces. But what about the Kurds who bear the
brunt of much of the fighting against ISIL?
The administration has recognized the continued progress
that Tunisia has made on its path toward democracy but the
tragic and deadly attack and hostage situation in the Bardo
Museum in Tunis today serves as a reminder that there is still
much work to be done on the democracy and security front.
There are plenty of good programs and good work that this
budget request supports and I am pleased to see that it commits
continued support to our ally, Morocco, and recognizes the
increased assistance to Jordan as part of the new memorandum of
understanding as the kingdom continues to be on the front lines
of the humanitarian crises and fight against ISIL.
So I do hope that we will hear from our witnesses today on
how the administration plans to address these challenges head
on and how we can all work together to make the region more
secure, more stable while furthering our interest as well.
I will now yield to my friend, the ranking member, Mr.
Deutch of Florida.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Chairman Ros-Lehtinen.
I look forward to these budget hearings each year as it
gives members a chance to take a broad look at the region,
assessing our priorities and gaps.
Before we start, though, I would like to echo the
chairman's comments on the attack today in Tunisia. Our
thoughts are, clearly, with the victims and their loved ones
and I am afraid this is a stark reminder of exactly why we need
to continue to support and keep Tunisia stable.
Secretary Patterson, we welcome you back to this committee.
Assistant Administrator Alexander, it is a pleasure to have you
join us for the first time and I would like to first
acknowledge the truly remarkable work that both the Department
of State and USAID provide.
I am particularly--I particularly want to acknowledge the
aid workers and the members of our Foreign Service who are out
in the field day after day, standing up and representing this
great country.
They deserve our recognition and they deserve our thanks,
and we hope that you will pass that along to them.
The President's Fiscal Year 2016 budget bilateral request
for this region amounts to roughly 13 percent of the
international affairs budget.
The region is facing no shortage of complex crises, many of
which have grown exponentially over just the past several
years. Regional instability is not just a security threat to
this country and our allies.
It also presents humanitarian challenges that could last
well past the end of the military conflicts. In the aftermath
of the Arab Spring, we face an entirely new landscape.
Orders have in some cases become nearly obsolete and one of
the reasons that today's news is so disconcerting is that there
have been promising developments in countries like Tunisia
where a relatively stable government has emerged.
And if we are to prevent any further destabilization in
Tunisia and help set the country back on the path to economic
prosperity, the United States has to continue to provide
support both politically and economically.
I am pleased to see this year's budget request contains
$134 million for Tunisia and I look forward to hearing how
these funds will continue to support the country's fragile
democracy, particularly with the closing of USAID's Office in
Transition Initiatives.
And while we continue to foster great regional security
cooperation in North Africa with our larger partners like
Morocco, we have been set back significantly by the chaos in
Libya.
What seemed like a chance to rebuild a democratic Libya in
the aftermath of Gaddafi has unfortunately devolved into a
perilous security situation and virtually ineffective if not in
some cases a nonexistent government institution.
The United States has a clear interest in seeing stability
return to Libya but we cannot be alone in this effort. Regional
actors must recognize that a terrorist safe haven in Libya will
significantly complicate the international effort to counter
violent extremism and prevent the growth of groups like ISIS.
The horrific beheadings of Egyptian Christians in Libya by
those claiming allegiance to ISIS should be an extraordinary
wake-up call to the international community that Libya needs
greater focus and attention, particularly on the United
Nations' efforts to reconcile the country's political system.
Egypt, the country perhaps currently most affected by
Libya's instability, given its shared very long and porous
border, has posed another great challenge to the United States.
Egypt serves as an incredibly important security partner
and has faced a growing threat of terrorism in the Sinai that
must be confronted.
Egypt has cooperated with Israel on securing its shared
borders and has been at the forefront of our efforts to combat
Hamas' building of terror tunnels and its vast smuggling
network.
I want to see Egypt succeed. I recognize it is a long road
to democracy, and while I am still concerned about the
perceived severity in which the state has cracked down on civil
society, I hope that we can address some of the ways in which
we are balancing our vital relationship with Egypt and our
concerns about human rights and how the $150 million in
economic support funds can be used to support civil society and
good governance.
I also support critical funding for security cooperation
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority. This cooperation
provides an enormous security benefit to Palestinians and to
Israelis, and I hope that those who use the threat of an end to
this cooperation recognize the devastating effect that it could
have.
I also believe there comes a time when we have to assess
whether there is a credible partner to work with and this means
that President Abbas must stop his attempts to bypass negations
via unilateral means.
Moreover, we must continue to remind the world that Hamas
is a terrorist organization and whatever humanitarian aid we
provide to those suffering under its rule in Gaza must be
carefully tracked to ensure that it is not diverted.
Palestinian Authority must take responsibility for its
people and must ensure the greatest transparency and
accountability for any U.S. funding if it is to continue.
The bulk of the NEA budget, of course, will go to
supporting the crisis in Syria and Iraq. The United States has
led a coalition of over 60 nations including five Arab states
in the fight against ISIS.
There have been over 3,000 coalition air strikes that have
devastated much of ISIS' leadership but there are many of us
here who are still unclear as to our long-term strategy for
dealing with ISIS in Iraq and Syria and I hope that we continue
to see an inclusive governing process in Iraq.
Part of our strategy also addresses the use of religious
extremism as an recruitment tool and I would like to know what
the United States' role in that process looks like.
But wrap up by reminding everyone that Assad is still
Assad. He is still the biggest threat to the people of Syria.
We have to support a political solution that ends his
brutality and, Ambassador Patterson, I hope you will clarify
for everyone the Secretary's recent comments on Assad's role in
that process.
Finally, looming over the region, of course, is Iran's role
and influence from its meddling in Yemen and the Gulf States to
its support for Hezbollah and Assad in Syria to its influence
in Iraq and to its nuclear weapons ambitions and threats
against our regional allies.
This regime has made the calculated decision to disrupt the
stability of our partners. And regardless of the outcome of the
nuclear negotiations, we cannot ignore the myriad of dangerous
activities that Iran promotes.
Increased cooperation with our Gulf partners can help
counter Iran's actions and in addition we must highlight the
regime's repression and human rights abuses and I hope we will
do our best to continue to support the Iranian people.
Chairman, I don't think there is any doubt this is the most
challenging region to work in but the security of this country
and our allies is too important for the United States to
disengage.
I support a robust international affairs budget that allows
us to respond to complex challenges and advance our interests,
and I thank the witnesses for being here today and look forward
to their testimony.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Deutch.
I will now turn to the other members for an opening
statement that they wish to make.
Mr. Clawson of Florida.
Mr. Clawson. Thank you for coming today, both of you.
A couple things if you will keep in mind in your comments
today that you could help me with as I think about these things
and study these things.
From the view of the State Department, it just feels
generally speaking like do we do more harm than good in this
region, and it feels like we need a regional solution that
involves other people but that our interventions have been far
from perfect and we spill a lot of blood and treasure in the
region and I am unsure of what we get back for that sometimes.
And that is kind of a nonpartisan comment and, you know, will
we get it right this time.
I have deep respect for USAID and whenever I run into them
overseas, Ambassador, I just think they are doing a great job
and under very difficult circumstances.
The question there that I have that you could keep in mind
as we talk today should we be involved in these sorts of
efforts where there is a war going on or where we have hostile
regimes?
Because it seems like the aid ends up in the wrong hands.
So I don't question the mission. I am always worried about
accountability.
But I worry that if we are doing these sorts of activities
in Cuba or in the Middle East where we have people hostile to
our allies in Israel, are we doing the right thing by focusing
our efforts in those sorts of areas.
With that, I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Clawson.
Mr. Cicilline of Rhode Island.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Madam Chairman and Ranking Member
Deutch, for calling this hearing and thank you to our two
distinguished witnesses for being here today to discuss the
important topic of U.S. priorities in the Middle East for the
Fiscal Year 2016.
As we all know, the current situation in the Middle East is
incredibly turbulent and constantly changing and the United
States must have the funding and the flexibility to respond to
existing threats and crises as well as future issues that may
come up in the region.
The request of the administration of $7 billion for the
region is an almost 9 percent increase over the Fiscal Year
2015 enacted levels, and while this increase certainly seems
justified given the vast security and humanitarian needs in the
region, I look forward to hearing from our witnesses on the
United States--how the United States can ensure that our
resources are being used effectively to advance American
strategic priorities.
I am particularly interested in asking some questions that
relate to the Syrian refugees as well as our efforts to, again,
invest in training the Syrian--so-called Syrian opposition.
I know most of that goes through the Department of Defense
but I hope the witnesses will address those two issues and I
look forward to your testimony, and I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Cicilline.
We are pleased to welcome our two witnesses, a good friend
of our subcommittee, Ambassador Anne Patterson, who is
Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs.
Ambassador Patterson has served as the U.S. Ambassador in El
Salvador, in Colombia, Pakistan and Egypt.
She has also been Assistant Secretary of State for
International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs, Deputy
Permanent Representative to the U.N. and State Department's
Deputy Inspector General. Welcome back.
Then we are also so pleased to welcome Assistant
Administrator Paige Alexander of the Bureau of the Middle East
at USAID.
Previously, Ms. Alexander has served as Assistant
Administrator of the Bureau for Europe and Eurasia as well as
an associate director for Project Liberty at Harvard
University's John F. Kennedy School of Government.
She has also served on the board of the Basic Education
Coalition and the Project on Middle East Democracy.
Welcome, ladies, and we will start with you, Madam
Ambassador.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE ANNE W. PATTERSON, ASSISTANT
SECRETARY, BUREAU OF NEAR EASTERN AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
STATE

Ambassador Patterson. Thank you, Madam Chairman and Ranking
Member Deutch, members of the subcommittee. Thank you for
inviting us to appear today.
With your permission, I will submit my full testimony for
the record.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Without objection.
Ambassador Patterson. I will focus on a few of our budget
highlights and I look forward to answering your questions.
The Middle East and North Africa is experiencing a
difficult period of instability with serious consequences for
both our national and regional security.
It has shaken the foundations of these societies, many of
whom are our long-term partners where rapidly growing youthful
populations are pressing for change.
Although the region's challenges take many--will take many
years to resolve, American engagement and leadership is
critical to reaching a new equilibrium that will protect our
vital interest and spur economic progress.
The President's Fiscal Year 2016 request seeks $7.3 billion
in U.S. foreign assistance to the Middle East and North Africa.
This figure is an overall increase of 5 percent, or $351
million, from Fiscal Year 2014 levels and will support U.S.
national security interests, enable us to pursue our vital
interests and allow us to remain an engaged and productive
partner to the region's people and governments.
The Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant has become the
most pressing threat to U.S. interests and our allies in the
region. As the President has clearly stated, we are committed
to degrading and ultimately defeating ISIL.
This request includes a total of $1.8 billion to counter
ISIL and to support the moderate Syrian opposition and the
security and stability of Syria's neighbors. Bashir al-Assad,
whose brutality toward the Syrian people catalyzed a civil war,
has lost legitimacy in the eyes of Syrians and the
international community.
We are requesting $255 million for programs to enhance the
moderate Syrian opposition's capacity to provide governance and
essential services to the Syrian people and to establish the
conditions to advance a political solution.
We will provide needed nonlethal support to vetted armed
units to complement the DoD Train and Equip program. We are
also requesting $355 million for Iraq to help the Iraqi
security forces respond to the threat ISIL poses and over time
establish security through unified national force and provide
public services for all its citizens.
We are also seeking funding for our continued engagement in
the search for a just and lasting two-state peace agreement in
the Middle East and our deep commitment to Israel's security.
We continue to believe that only a two-state solution that
results in a secure Israel alongside a sovereign and
independent Palestinian state can bring lasting peace and
stability to both peoples.
To that end, we are requesting $3.1 billion for Israel as
part of our 10-year $30 billion memorandum of understanding.
We are requesting $442 million to support the Palestinian
people and remain engaged with the Palestinian Authority in
spite of its unconstructive agenda at the International
Criminal Court.
The resources enhance security for Israelis, Palestinians
and others in the region and help pay many Palestinian
Authority debts to Israel.
In Egypt, the Fiscal Year 2016 budget request of $1.5
billion supports our longstanding partnership with Egypt and
maintains our commitment to Egypt's security.
This request includes $1.3 billion in FMF, consistent with
prior years, and will support sustainment of U.S. weapons
systems previously provided to Egypt, maintenance of the Egypt-
Israel peace treaty and protection of the Suez Canal.
We are focusing our $150 million economic support programs
on fostering private sector-led growth and we will continue to
press Egypt to improve its human rights situation while
promoting religious tolerance, especially for the Coptic
Christian community.
Today's terrorist attacks at the Bardo Museum complex
killed at least 19 people, including 17 foreign tourists,
according to Prime Minister Essid. We condemn this attack and
have expressed our condolences to the Tunisian people, the
victims and their family and friends.
This act of violence, while deeply troubling, in no way
diminishes the achievements of the Tunisian people in
establishing their new democracy or our confidence in Tunisia's
future.
This horrific attack underlies the critical need to support
Tunisia as addressed in the Fiscal Year 2016 budget. Our Fiscal
Year 2016 request of $134 million represents a nearly $77
million increase above our Fiscal Year 2014 allocation and
demonstrates our commitments to Tunisia's nascent democracy.
In particular, the $62.5 million in FMF requested will
increase Tunisia's counterterrorism capacities by building its
intelligence surveillance, border security and reconnaissance
capacities and maintaining aging U.S. equipment crucial to the
fight against terrorism.
The combined $14 million in INCLE and NADR supports
training, the provision of equipment and technical assistance
to the Tunisian minister of interior.
Madam Chairman, Ranking Member Deutch, it is important to
remember that behind all these budgetary numbers lay programs
that provide assistance to millions of people who are seeking
jobs and economic opportunities, education for their children
and a chance to live in peace.
Since the start of the Syrian crisis, the United States has
provided more than $3 billion in humanitarian assistance to
assist refugees from Syria, including significant funding for
humanitarian activities, helping countries like Lebanon and
Jordan cope with the effects of the crisis.
This request will advance the diplomatic and security
interests of the United States while enabling us to help the
people of the Middle East and North Africa during a time when
American leadership in the region remains desperately needed.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ambassador Patterson follows:]

----------

Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Ambassador.
Ms. Alexander.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE PAIGE ALEXANDER, ASSISTANT
ADMINISTRATOR, BUREAU FOR THE MIDDLE EAST, U.S. AGENCY FOR
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Ms. Alexander. Thank you, Chairman Ros-Lehtinen, Ranking
Member Deutch and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for
inviting me here today to discuss the Fiscal Year 2016 budget
for the United States Agency for International Development and
our efforts to respond to the development needs in the Middle
East and North Africa.
We face unprecedented challenges in this region. The
economic frustrations that lack inclusion that brought people
to the streets 4 years ago has not engaged and it remains a
daily reality.
Unemployment among the young people is the highest in the
world. The region faces substantial water challenges and
instability in key countries further complicates our work. The
administration's 2016 budget request is focused on addressing
these needs, providing assistance that is critical to advance
America's strategic, economic and security interests.
USAID is working with local partners in private sector
growth and inclusive economic opportunity, education, civil
society and responsive government. We are investing in programs
that will help individuals in communities build resilient
stable societies.
We are constantly innovating and thinking creatively about
how to best operate in high-threat environments while
leveraging our limited dollars to address development needs. We
work not only with governments but also with grass root level
folks, changing the lives of individuals and transforming
communities.
I just returned from a trip to the region and when I was in
Egypt I was able to see how this works together with government
and society. I visited a USAID program that helped teachers
create innovative classrooms for an early grade reading
program.
USAID actually did the first 166 schools as a pilot and the
Government of Egypt picked up the other 16,000 schools
throughout the country. This is how we work collectively
together.
My statement for the record includes more details of USAID
priorities and challenges in the regions and I would like to
briefly mention some of them here.
The Syrian crisis is the largest and most complex
humanitarian emergency of our time. The United States, with the
support of Congress, has been the largest single international
donor, providing more than $3 billion to date.
In addition to humanitarian assistance, the 16 requests
will support programs in Syria intended to help the moderate
opposition maintain basic governance and services to provide
alternates to the regime and the violent extremist groups.
The emergence of ISIL has had an unprecedented impact on
our region. The majority of Syrian refugees have been absorbed
into local communities in Jordan and Lebanon, doubling and in
some cases tripling the populations of towns that were already
hard pressed to provide these essential services.
The United States provides critical support to these host
communities by building schools, expanding health facilities
and increasing access to water. In Iraq, we anticipate enormous
assistance needs in liberated areas from ISIL to help the
displaced return home and communities recover.
USAID's plans for Fiscal Year 2016 include highly targeted
and focused assistance to help Iraq generate revenue and
provide services with limited U.S. taxpayer resources.
In Libya and Yemen, U.S.-funded programs continue to
operate with local staff and careful third party monitoring,
remote monitoring at this point while our American staff manage
the programs from outside those countries due to the security
concerns.
We remain committed to the pursuit of a negotiated two-
state solution for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. To that
end, the Fiscal Year 2016 budget will continue to support peace
efforts by funding programs that benefit the Palestinian people
including in education, health, humanitarian assistance,
private enterprise and infrastructure.
On my recent trip, I was introduced to Muhummad, an olive
oil farmer who tripled his yield through farming practices
learned with USAID's Olive Without Borders.
This project, with our support, more than 1,500 Israeli and
Palestinian olive farmers and distributors came together to
share farming methods and promote understanding.
With our help, the Palestinian and Israeli officials also
agreed to allow Israelis to purchase Palestinian olive oil for
the first time in 10 years, resulting in $20 million in new
revenues for the Palestinian farmers.
In Fiscal Year 2016, we intend to do more to support
farmers and entrepreneurs like Muhummad because a strong
Palestinian economy is good for everyone and U.S. assistance
plays a critical role promoting the stability and prosperity,
not just for the Palestinians but for Israel.
Egypt continues to be a key strategic partner in the
region. In Fiscal Year 2016, the United States will continue to
support initiatives that help Egypt and the Egyptian people.
We have intensified our commitment to help the Egyptian
economy become more competitive and more inclusive. Our
investments will continue it improve the basic quality of basic
education and higher education as well as addressed issues such
as fundamental freedoms, which are essential to Egypt's long-
term political and economic development.
Elsewhere in North Africa, USAID supports Tunisian people
as they lay a foundation for a future of economic prosperity
and democratic governance.
As the chairwoman said and you all have mentioned, we will
continue to support Tunisia in their drive to make this
progress even in light of today's events.
In Morocco, we continue to promote economic growth, improve
educational opportunities and strengthen the effectiveness of
civil society.
The President's request responds to development needs and
challenges in the Middle East and North Africa and USAID
programs remain essential components of the U.S. foreign policy
interest in security and stability.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today
and I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Alexander follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, both of you, for
excellent testimony and I will recognize myself to start the
questions.
Assistant Secretary--Ambassador Patterson, as I mentioned
earlier in my remarks, Mr. Connolly and I recently received a
report from GAO regarding our assistance program in Egypt.
The report found that we have about $460 million in
unobligated funds for Egypt from previous years, yet this
budget request seeks an additional $150 million for Egypt. What
is the status of the nearly $\1/2\ billion in unobligated
funds?
Is it going to be reprogrammed for something else? Why are
we seeking an additional $150 million when we already have this
$460 million unused? And my office also learned that the
decrease from $200 million in the previous request for Egypt's
ESF to $150 million this year reflected the administration's
policy decisions.
So what is the rationale or the policy decision behind this
seemingly random $50 million cut?
Ambassador Patterson. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
We have certainly over the past several years had
difficulty disbursing in Egypt because of the huge political
turmoil, the issue with NGOs. The--I think the last year I were
there there was something like six finance ministers.
So the environment has been very unsettled for a number of
years. We have tried--we have just signed six agreements. We
are trying to move ahead with our higher education initiative,
particularly focusing on economic growth, and we think we can
liquidate that pipeline in a speedy manner.
One reason we did drop the request though was because we
had a substantial backlog. So we wanted to allocate those
resources to another area.
But we are doing everything we can now to liquidate that
pipeline and put in place a number of promising new programs,
particularly reaching directly to the Egyptian people.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And will use those unobligated funds for
other programs?
Ambassador Patterson. Yes. We have signed up a lot of
programs I think in the last 3 months, six new major programs
including a higher education initiative.
For instance, we have a girl's school that focuses on
science and math and--but our main focus is going to be on
economic growth and trying to reduce the unemployment and to
get the economy growing in Egypt because it is 90 million
people in the center of the Arab world.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And on my question about the $200 million
and then $150 million, and it was said it reflected the
administration's policy decisions, what policy decisions guided
that cut?
Ambassador Patterson. The main policy decision was, as you
say, we had a lot of unliquidated pipeline. So we decided to
reallocate that money or to at least assign that money to other
areas.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Okay. Again, staying briefly with GAO
report, this one touches on another GAO report that I
commissioned on security assistance to Lebanon. But it was
referenced in the Egypt report.
In 2013, GAO reported that bureau evaluation plans for
security assistance were due in May 2012 yet none of them were
completed at the time and, remarkably, GAO reports that the
State evaluation of Lebanon is expected to be the basis for
informing future evaluations of security assistance to Egypt
and other countries.
Where do we stand with these evaluations? How is it
possible that we still have never conducted such reviews?
Ambassador Patterson. Yes, Madam Chairman.
The GAO had an entirely valid point about that and we are
certainly on the hook to conduct an assessment of Egypt's
security programs--security assistance program which is, of
course, very sizeable and very complex.
And we have been working with our colleagues in the Bureau
of Political Military Affairs to get that going. They are
trying to develop a template that they can use worldwide for
these security assistance programs. But I hope to report back
to you and members of your staff shortly about how this is
proceeding.
That said, Madam Chairman, we have worked closely with the
Egyptian military to encourage them to modernize their military
and to use our assistance to meet more current threats such as
counter terrorism and border security. As you noted, they are
facing serious problems both in the Sinai and on their western
border.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Well, we look forward to receiving the
progress report on those evaluations.
Regarding the budget request for Iraq, how much of this
request for Iraq--$250 million in OCO FMF--is going to arming
and helping the Kurds? Where are we in the process of sending
military arms to the Kurds and to Baghdad?
Ambassador Patterson. Madam Chairman, we had a--we have had
a very extensive program to arm the Kurds and we can provide
details to this committee.
DoD had a task force set up to provide small arms, medium-
sized arms to the Kurds and to rush those in during the first
stages of the campaign against ISIL.
I think at issue here is the heavy weaponry and our
analysis, I think, as members of this committee know that it
would not be legal to provide those directly to the Kurds and I
understand members of the committee are considering legislation
to redress that.
We have very close cooperation with the Kurds. We have a
joint intelligence center. We have a large consulate up there.
We work very, very closely with them on military operations.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. We appreciate that. Keeping with Iraq and
Syria and the administration's humanitarian request of $1.6
billion, Congressman Deutch and I have requested a new GAO
report that evaluates our humanitarian assistance on the Syrian
crisis.
Our concern is to ensure that our assistance is getting to
where it is designed to go yet most of it goes to U.N.
agencies. What kind of oversight do we have over this
considerable amount of U.S. taxpayer money going through the
U.N.?
Ambassador Patterson. I would--I would go back to my
assignment in New York about this. We have worked hard over the
years to put in place an inspector general, accountants,
auditors, oversight committees.
The fifth committee in New York that is--that has very
robust American representation oversees these agencies or the
agency directly, and I think if we could provide you more
detail you would be satisfied that there is an oversight
program with the U.N. agencies that basically pretty much
mirrors ours.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. I look forward to getting more
information on our oversight of this humanitarian aid being
funneled through the U.N.
On Monday, Secretary Kerry actually stated that Assad
should be included in the negotiations to reach a political
solution in Syria, which unsurprisingly was immediately
dismissed by Assad, and it is absolutely astonishing to think
that the administration believes that Assad could or should be
part of the negotiations, though it is not surprising
considering the President's penchant for opening communications
with other rogue regimes like Cuba and Iran.
Do you believe that Assad must go or should he be part of
the negotiations? Where are we with Assad this week?
Ambassador Patterson. Madam Chairman, let me try and
clarify that. Let me state unequivocally that our policy toward
Assad had not changed. He must leave. He is a brutal dictator.
He is responsible for the deaths of 250,000 people as well
as enormous displacement. What the Secretary meant with his
statement and, believe me, the Secretary of State did not mean
that he was going to sit down at the same table with Bashar al-
Assad--that any negotiation to remove him from the scene, and
we all hope for a political negotiation, would have to involve
some people close to Assad who could speak for him to get him
to move out.
And that is basically what it boils down to. But I assure
you our policy vis-a-vis Assad has not changed.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And, lastly, it is my opinion that Abu
Mazen's initiative at the U.N. and the ICC have triggered the
law to cut off funding for the PA.
I know we may have a disagreement. There is an ongoing
review. But given the recent statements by the lead Palestinian
negotiator who said that a victory for Prime Minister Netanyahu
would give them no other choice than to continue pressing for
action at the ICC, does this change that review?
Will we cut off funding for the PA, close the PLO office in
DC and what is the status of that review?
Ambassador Patterson. I think my colleagues have told you
we are looking at all the assistance to the Palestinian
Authority. We know that the situation has changed and there may
be a reallocation among accounts.
But you hit the nail on the head. I do think we have a
disagreement about this--whether the law has in fact been
triggered--and let me assure you that the Secretary and many
other American officials but particularly Secretary Kerry are
in constant contact with Abu Mazen and senior members of the
Palestinian Authority to encourage them to take the right path.
It is a, believe me, an ongoing dialogue.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Ambassador
Patterson.
Did not mean to ignore you, Ms. Alexander. We just have so
many questions for the Ambassador.
Ranking Member Ted Deutch.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Let me just pick up
where you left off on that last point. Ambassador Patterson, I
appreciate the statements and the encouragement that President
Abbas take the right path but can you tell us when the review
might be complete, when we might know with some certainty
whether that law has been triggered and if not so that we can
make determinations about how best to proceed?
Ambassador Patterson. Well, Mr. Deutch, we don't think the
law will be triggered until there is a formal investigation
underway. But that quite apart--that is quite apart from our
internal evaluation of essentially the aid package, and I can't
give you a date but I will give you my assurance that I hope it
will be done very shortly.
And I will go back and check on that and we will give you a
call and try and pin that down because I know that is a
interest of great concern for this committee.
Mr. Deutch. We would appreciate that. Let me--let me go
back to Egypt for a second and, again, just picking up on the
exchange that you had with the chairman.
So the Secretary was quoted this week as saying we should
expect a decision soon on certification for aid to Egypt, and
as I said earlier I support our partnership with Egypt. I think
it is very important.
It is critical. But as we look at the relationship and we
balance our very real concerns with civil society and human
rights with our very important security relationship, could you
just continue again where you started and what does that
actually look like going forward? How do you anticipate this
playing out over the coming weeks and months?
Ambassador Patterson. Well, there--frankly, as you well
know, we have essentially conflicting objectives in Egypt and
it is very important to promote our security relationship and,
frankly, Egypt's security relationship with Israel, which has
never been better, and is even more important now than in the
past because of the upheavals in the Sinai, which threatens
both Egypt and Israel.
So the security relationship is paramount. Egypt has to--
Egypt's armed forces have to evolve to meet new threats. They
have quite legitimate concerns on the Western border now with
the growth of ISIL and the uncertainty in Libya.
But I think all of us are concerned, as you are, about the
crackdown on civil society and the crackdown on secular
activists and the large number of people in Egyptian jails who
probably shouldn't be there or at least should be there under
some semblance of due process.
So we are just going to have to balance these objectives
going forward and we are, frankly, doing the best we can. We
pressed--the Secretary was in Egypt last week.
He met with President el-Sisi. I know from previous
conversations that human rights and the future of civil society
is always high on his agenda.
But he is also very mindful of the role that Egypt plays
vis-a-vis Israel and Gaza and now Libya and the threats that
they are facing.
Mr. Deutch. I just--I agree with you completely and I just
want to echo what you have--how you laid that out. It is not an
either-or scenario.
There is--we can continue to address--work to address our
concerns about civil society while also providing the necessary
and critical security support that Egypt desperately needs at
this time because of their role--because of their relationship
with us, because of their role in the region, because of the
role they are playing with Israel. It is not either-or.
It is an important message from you and from the
administration. Because that is the case, I think a lot of us
would like to see it--see us move forward on both paths
quickly. That is my message to you.
And, finally, on Iran, how does the--how does the budget
allow the United States to strengthen relationships with our
regional partners to counter Iran's dangerous and destabilizing
influence in the broader region?
Ambassador Patterson. Well, I think a key to that is our
relationship with the Gulf countries, frankly, who don't need
foreign assistance, and Secretary Kerry has spent a good deal
of time reassuring our Gulf partners.
He was just in Riyadh 10 days ago. He is planning to have a
meeting of GCC countries early in April, reassuring them of our
commitment to their security, not the least of which is the
presence of 35,000 troops in the region.
But, certainly, as far as the request goes to improve the
capacity of Lebanon's security forces is also paramount because
it is a truly national institution that prevents, shall we say,
the rise of other armed groups from playing a more prominent
role in Lebanon.
And then, of course, the request for Jordan is very
important throughout the region.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you.
Mr. DeSantis of Florida.
Mr. DeSantis. Thank you. Has--Ambassador Patterson, has the
administration spoken with Netanyahu to congratulate him on the
Likud Party's victory?
Ambassador Patterson. Yes, sir. Secretary Kerry--I saw an
email a couple hours ago--called him to congratulate him
sometime today.
Mr. DeSantis. Has the White House, to your knowledge?
Ambassador Patterson. I don't know.
Mr. DeSantis. I appreciate both of your statements and
testimony. This--I know the two-state solution has been
something that has been discussed in diplomatic circles for
decades.
But given the election results, given the security posture
that Israel faces right now, do you honestly think it is
realistic that you would have a Palestinian state on the
horizon, given all the terrorism that we are seeing not only
from ISIS but from Shi'ite groups like Hezbollah, to have--the
experience in Gaza was when the Israelis pulled out you had
Hamas take over.
So why would they want to run the risk right now of having
that same history replicate itself on the West Bank?
Ambassador Patterson. Well, this has been longstanding U.S.
policy to--because it is the only----
Mr. DeSantis. No, I understand that. But I am saying as
right now, given where we are, is that really a realistic----
Ambassador Patterson. Yes, I think so because critical to
this issue, and Secretary Kerry has spent a huge amount of time
on this, will be robust security guarantees for Israel.
And my understanding is that that process and that
discussion and that analysis was much more advanced in this
round of discussion than in any previous round. Another
element----
Mr. DeSantis. Well, let me just--I appreciate that. Because
I think it gets to kind of the broader policy. So as the
chairwoman pointed out, you had the Hamas-Fatah unity
government and many of us, including me, think that the law
called for a suspension of aid as a result.
And the administration rationalized it, said well, they are
not--there is no undue influence--these are really just
technocrats with Hamas. One, if there is any unity, the money
is fungible, so that frees up more money for Hamas.
But whatever. So there was no suspension of aid. Now you
have the ICC gamut. Abbas has asked for an investigation. He
signed a letter and the administration's position is well, they
haven't initiated an investigation so we don't think the law is
triggered.
And we know that there have been threats to do other things
unilaterally to the international community to try to attain
Palestinian statehood.
So I guess my question is, if you are always going to read
those things in Abbas' favor and in the Palestinian Authority's
favor, aren't you really just emboldening him to push the
envelope with his unilateral actions?
If he doesn't think there are going to be consequences, why
not try to do what he is doing?
Ambassador Patterson. Congressman, I guess--I guess I would
say in response to that that it strikes me as important for
Israel's security too because at this point, for instance, the
Palestinian civil servants are at 60 percent of their salary
level.
So if you cut off funding to the Palestinian Authority and
you have a considerable degree of disruption and civil unrest
on the West Bank, Israel is going to----
Mr. DeSantis. No, I understand that. But at the same time,
with respect to Abbas, I think we have sent him a message that
he is going to be able to push the envelope.
Let me ask you about UNWRA. It was very distressing to see
all these reports of Hamas rockets in these UNRRA schools where
they are firing into the Israeli population.
And we have sent money to UNRRA and you would ask
questions--they would say oh, well, you know, we are not
working with Hamas. Really? You are not working with Hamas? How
did those rockets get in those schools?
What is the administration's position with respect to UNRRA
and how those UNRRA schools were used to launch rockets against
the Israelis?
Ambassador Patterson. We talked, at least I talked as did
many others, to the head of UNWRA just 2 days ago and they are
doing and have done an exhaustive investigation of those
claims, and we will be happy to provide it to you.
Mr. DeSantis. What is the conclusion?
Ambassador Patterson. The conclusion is a lot of it was
false. There were other--there were--yes, there were things
stored there but it is important that we get all the facts and
provide them to you.
Mr. DeSantis. Yes, we would definitely like to see that.
With respect to Egypt, does the administration consider--I know
you said there are competing values at stake, but does the
administration consider President al-Sisi to be an ally in the
war against terrorism?
Ambassador Patterson. Certainly. I mean, he is--I know
President el-Sisi very well. Yes.
Mr. DeSantis. Great.
Ambassador Patterson. That is the short answer.
Mr. DeSantis. Because I appreciate the problems with civil
society, and I agree with you on that. But it seems to me the
Muslim Brotherhood you had--it was negative in both ways
because they would have cracked down on civil society.
They were doing that, and they would not have been a
reliable ally in the broader fight against Islamic extremism.
And so I think we need to work with the military there, and I
appreciate those comments.
My final question is, if you look at over the course of the
Obama administration Iran has had a pretty good run of it. They
have really expanded their influence throughout the Middle
East.
They are in de facto control of Iraq. They have a client
now controlling Yemen. Clearly, they have been propping up the
Assad regime--very big patrons of Gaza.
Are we concerned--is the State Department concerned about
the expansion of Iranian influence throughout the Middle East
and, if so, what are you going to do about it?
Ambassador Patterson. Well, certainly, we are concerned
about the expansion of Iranian influence and we are certainly
concerned about what is taking place in Lebanon and Yemen and
other countries.
And the broader concern, if I might say, Congressman, is
sectarian conflict is at the highest level that any of us
recall with years of experience in this region in the Middle
East.
The Shi'a-Sunni conflicts are very deep and very extreme.
And let me be clear that we are doing everything we can through
a variety of means, which we can perhaps talk about in another
setting, to arrest some of this confrontation.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Mr. DeSantis.
Mr. Cicilline.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you to the
witnesses for the excellent presentation.
I just returned with some colleagues from the Middle East
and it reminded me that this is a very complicated region of
the world and there are no easy solutions and I really
appreciate the testimony, Ambassador, that you gave with
respect to our competing interests because it seems to me that
is the case in virtually every part of this region and striking
the right balance is really an important objective.
I don't think there are competing values, as was just
suggested. Actually, hopefully, we have a set of American
values that we are promoting and the interests are what are
competing in some of these contexts.
I would like to focus for a moment, again, on Egypt because
I know that that is a place where their kind of competing
interests are really obvious. But I am wondering if you would
just speak to whether or not we are seeing--I recognize the
security interests are deep and longstanding and continue to be
strong.
But are you seeing any progress on the civil society--on
the release of the detained individuals, on efforts to free the
NGO workers, on implementing laws that really advance
democracy, taking steps that are consistent with protecting or
advancing the rights of women and religious minorities?
Is there any progress that we are seeing and what is the
United States doing to really insist on some progress in these
areas?
Ambassador Patterson. First of all, let me say that the
request contains a lot of money--resources that could support
these projects. But let me sort of--I mean, I think what I
would say in Egypt we are seeing modest progress.
For instance, on--I think--I think there isn't a serious
problem and I think the Coptic Christian community is, frankly,
much happier under President al-Sisi than they were under the
previous government and I think if they were here they would
say that they enjoy--he came to Christmas Mass, which was a
first in Egypt's history--I think they would say they are
enjoying a higher degree of freedom than they have in years.
On NGO laws, I will admit there is not much progress on
that. I would be the first to say that, and we will press and
have pressed for a new NGO law that would provide for greater
freedoms for both local and foreign NGOs.
And in terms of the electoral progress, they did set a date
for elections and the courts have just overturned it. So we
will be ready with technical assistance.
They have been very willing to take our technical
assistance for elections. We will be willing to provide that as
soon as they set another election date. But they need to move
on with the democratic process and elect a Parliament.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
And Ms. Alexander, I want to--I just returned as part of
that trip to the Zaatari refugee camp in Jordan right on the
Syrian border and the crisis, as you know, facing the
Jordanians in particular but the Syrian refugee crisis
continues to be really extraordinary, and the United States, I
know, has been the lead donor.
But the demand and the needs are enormous. And I am just
wondering are we--what are we doing to persuade our partners in
the region, particularly the Saudis, the Emiratis, the UAE, to
really undertake a greater responsibility?
I mean, the Jordanians--the Hashemite Kingdom--has taken on
an incredible responsibility and don't even really complain
about it. They just sort of see it as some--their
responsibility.
But it is clear to me that we are doing our part, the
Jordanians are doing their part but are we doing things to
press others in the region to undertake some more of this
humanitarian work?
Ms. Alexander. Thank you, Congressman. In fact, we are. I
am glad you were able to see the camp and I hope that you were
able to see the assistance the U.S. Government has been giving
up there.
There is a donors conference in Kuwait at the end of the
month and one of the main pitches is to make sure we speak with
the Gulf States and other regional players to recognize that
this refugee--the refugee flows are so destabilizing to all of
the neighbors.
And without being able to provide essential services and
the basic humanitarian needs that are there, we are going to
face a larger humanitarian crisis than just the refugee flows
we are seeing now.
So that is something that we are focused on. USAID has bene
out and doing a tin-cup exercise with a lot of these other
countries to make sure that they come to the donors conference
prepared to recognize the incredible needs that are there.
Mr. Cicilline. And it is an important moment to recognize
the incredible workers from the respective agencies,
particularly USAID, who are doing extraordinary work and from
the U.N. and the other agencies.
One final question I want to ask about is Section 7008.
There is a provision in the appendix to the budget request,
which--where the administration is seeking a change in U.S.
law, a law that has been in place for about three decades which
requires the suspension of U.S. aid in the event of a coup
d'etat against a democratically-elected government.
As you know, this section has been applied many times in
places like Fiji and Mali and Thailand and Madagascar and
provided an incentive for power to return swiftly to the
democratically-elected governments.
And so I would like to hear a little bit about what is the
justification for proposing this national interest waiver and
what kind of signal might that send and should we be concerned
about sending to governments that have come to power by
military coup and foreign ministries globally, especially in
this moment?
Ambassador Patterson. I didn't know, sir----
Mr. Cicilline. Yes. Ambassador Patterson. I am sorry.
Ambassador Patterson. I didn't know we were requesting a
waiver. I mean, generally speaking we want--we would seek the
most flexibility we have in the interpretation of the law, and
there was a recent issue in our part of the world in which we
had, you know, shall I say, some difficulty in making that
determination. But I can't answer that. We will get back to
you.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Cicilline.
Thank you, ladies, for excellent testimony. We hope that
President Obama will be calling Prime Minister Netanyahu very
soon.
Thank you very much, and with that the subcommittees are
adjourned. Thank you.

[Whereupon, at 3:53 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
