- FTO PASSPORT REVOCATION ACT OF 2015; SURVIVORS OF HUMAN TRAFFICKING EMPOWERMENT ACT; UNITED STATES-JORDAN DEFENSE COOPERATION ACT OF 2015; PROTECT AND PRESERVE INTERNATIONAL CULTURAL PROPERTY ACT; GLOBAL FOOD SECURITY ACT OF 2015; CALLING FOR THE RELEASE OF UKRAINIAN FIGHTER PILOT NADIYA SAVCHENKO; AND ENCOURAGING REUNIONS OF DIVIDED KOREAN AMERICAN FAMILIES

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FTO PASSPORT REVOCATION ACT OF 2015; SURVIVORS OF
HUMAN TRAFFICKING EMPOWERMENT ACT; UNITED STATES-
JORDAN DEFENSE COOPERATION ACT OF 2015; PROTECT
AND PRESERVE INTERNATIONAL CULTURAL PROPERTY ACT;
GLOBAL FOOD SECURITY ACT OF 2015; CALLING FOR THE
RELEASE OF UKRAINIAN FIGHTER PILOT NADIYA
SAVCHENKO; AND ENCOURAGING REUNIONS OF DIVIDED
KOREAN AMERICAN FAMILIES

=======================================================================

MARKUP

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

ON

H.R. 237, H.R. 500, H.R. 907, H.R. 1493, H.R. 1567, H. Res. 50 and H.
Con. Res. 40

__________

APRIL 23, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-55

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

94-309 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
TOM EMMER, Minnesota

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

MARKUP OF

H.R. 237, To authorize the revocation or denial of passports and
passport cards to individuals affiliated with foreign terrorist
organizations, and for other purposes..........................     2
Amendment in the nature of a substitute to H.R. 237 offered by
the Honorable Ted Poe, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas...............................................     5
H.R. 500, To establish the United States Advisory Council on
Human Trafficking to review Federal Government policy on human
trafficking....................................................     7
Amendment in the nature of a substitute to H.R. 500 offered by
the Honorable Edward R. Royce, a Representative in Congress
from the State of California, and chairman, Committee on
Foreign Affairs..............................................    12
H.R. 907, To improve defense cooperation between the United
States and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.....................    17
Amendment in the nature of a substitute to H.R. 907 offered by
the Honorable Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Florida...........................    23
H.R. 1493, To protect and preserve international cultural
property at risk due to political instability, armed conflict,
or natural or other disasters, and for other purposes..........    27
H.R. 1567, To authorize a comprehensive, strategic approach for
United States foreign assistance to developing countries to
reduce global poverty and hunger, achieve food security and
improved nutrition, promote inclusive, sustainable
agricultural-led economic growth, improve nutritional outcomes,
especially for women and children, build resilience among
vulnerable populations, and for other purposes.................    43
Amendment in the nature of a substitute to H.R. 1567 offered by
the Honorable Christopher H. Smith, a Representative in
Congress from the State of New Jersey........................    57
Amendment to the amendment in the nature of a substitute to
H.R. 1567 offered by the Honorable Ted Poe...............    72
H. Res. 50, Calling for the release of Ukrainian fighter pilot
Nadiya Savchenko, who was captured by Russian forces in Eastern
Ukraine and has been held illegally in a Russian prison since
July 2014......................................................    73
Amendment to H. Res. 50 offered by:
The Honorable Christopher H. Smith.........................    76
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in
Congress from the Commonwealth of Virginia...............    78
The Honorable William Keating, a Representative in Congress
from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts...................    79
H. Con. Res. 40, Encouraging reunions of divided Korean American
families.......................................................    80

APPENDIX

Markup notice....................................................    94
Markup minutes...................................................    95
Markup summary...................................................    97
The Honorable Christopher H. Smith, a Representative in Congress
from the State of New Jersey: Prepared statement...............    98
The Honorable Eliot L. Engel, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New York: Prepared statment of the Honorable
Michael M. Honda, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California..................................................   100

FTO PASSPORT REVOCATION ACT OF 2015; SURVIVORS OF
HUMAN TRAFFICKING EMPOWERMENT ACT; UNITED
STATES-JORDAN DEFENSE COOPERATION ACT OF 2015;
PROTECT AND PRESERVE INTERNATIONAL CULTURAL
PROPERTY ACT; GLOBAL FOOD SECURITY ACT OF 2015;
CALLING FOR THE RELEASE OF UKRAINIAN FIGHTER
PILOT NADIYA SAVCHENKO; AND ENCOURAGING
REUNIONS OF DIVIDED KOREAN AMERICAN FAMILIES
----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 23, 2015

House of Representatives,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 o'clock a.m.,
in room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Edward Royce
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Chairman Royce. The committee will come to order, and we
will ask all the members to take their seat at this time.
And pursuant to notice, we meet today to mark up several
bipartisan measures. Without objection, all members may have 5
days to submit statements for the record, and extraneous
materials, on any of today's business.
As all members were notified yesterday, we intend to
consider today's measures en bloc. And so without objection,
the following items previously provided to members will be
considered en bloc and are considered as read: H.R. 237,

this is  deg.the Foreign Terrorist Organization
Passport Revocation Act, Poe Amendment 33 in the nature of a
substitute; and then H.R. 500, the Survivors of Human
Trafficking Empowerment Act, with Royce Amendment 34 in the
nature of a substitute; H.R. 907, the United States-Jordan
Defense Cooperation Act, with Ros-Lehtinen Amendment 86 in the
nature of a substitute; H.R. 1493, the Protect and Preserve
International Cultural Property Act; and H.R. 1567, the Global
Food Security Act, with Smith Amendment 91 in the nature of a
substitute, and Poe Amendment 122 to Smith Amendment 91; and
then House Resolution 50, calling for the release of Ukrainian
fighter pilot, Nadiya Savchenko, and the following amendments
to House Resolution 50: Smith Amendment 31, Connolly Amendment
36, Keating Amendment 15; and House Concurrent Resolution 40,
encouraging reunions of divided Korean American families.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Royce. And after recognizing myself and the
ranking member, Mr. Eliot Engel of New York, I will be pleased
to recognize any member seeking recognition to speak on these
measures.
So just, if we could, this is consideration of a number of
measures that will strengthen U.S. efforts to counter ISIS and
support our allies in the Middle East that I will begin with
here.
And the first would be H.R. 907, the U.S.-Jordan Defense
Cooperation Act of 2015. This bill recognizes the invaluable
role of Jordan and enhances our security cooperation. It grants
Jordan expedited congressional review of proposed U.S. arms
transfers, status that is otherwise reserved for NATO members
and other close allies. These benefits will be provided to
Jordan during its time of need.
And I want to thank Chairman Emeritus Ros-Lehtinen and Mr.
Ted Deutch for bringing forward this timely and important
measure.
Then we go to H.R. 1493. This is the Protect and Preserve
International Cultural Property Act. This committee has heard
about how ISIS is funding its terror campaign by looting and
selling treasures and antiquities in Iraq and Syria. The loss
and destruction of these artifacts is a national security
concern and an affront to cultural heritage.
And I want to thank the ranking member for his continued
leadership on this issue, and for authorizing this bill, the
Protect and Preserve International Cultural Property Act, which
will improve coordination of U.S. efforts to provide cultural
property, to protect that cultural property, and prevent those
artifacts removed since the start of Syria's civil war from
being sold or imported into the United States.
We appreciate working with the Committee on Ways and Means
on the critical impact and on the important restrictions in
this bill.
Then we have H.R. 237, the FTO Passport Revocation Act. The
flow of foreign fighters to ISIS is a serious threat.
Regrettably, U.S. passport holders are among those who have
joined the ranks of this and other terrorist organizations. So
this bill, the FTO Passport Revocation Act, authored by Mr.
Poe, provides a check to combat this threat.
This bipartisan and common sense bill grants the Secretary
of State the authority to revoke or deny U.S. passports to
individuals who are members of designated foreign terrorist
organizations, so that they cannot realize their jihadist
intentions.
Then we have Mr. Honda's bill, H.R. 500, Human Trafficking
Survivors Empowerment Act. I would like to express my strong
support for this bill. This bill will help to ensure that those
with the most direct knowledge of human trafficking, the
survivors, will have a voice in the anti-trafficking policy
conversations within the U.S. Government.
It is critical to tap the expertise and affirm the dignity
of former victims, many of whom I have had the honor of meeting
in Washington, D.C., and in California, and also overseas.
So this bill will establish a U.S. Human Trafficking
Survivors Advisory Council. It is going to be appointed by the
President and bipartisan congressional leadership. The council
will serve as an advisory body to the administration's senior
policy operating group on human trafficking and as a point of
contact for Federal agencies seeking input from human
trafficking survivors.
I also want to thank the National Survivor Network and the
Coalition to Abolish Slavery and Trafficking, that is CAST, as
the group is known, in Los Angeles, for their important work in
advocacy.
Then we will go to H.R. 1567, the Global Food Security Act.
In an effort to break the cycle of dependency on U.S.
international food aid, USAID has been investing in programs to
accelerate agriculture-led economic growth, to help chronically
food insecure communities become more resilient, and to improve
child nutrition.
The Global Food Security Act, as amended, captures the best
attributes of this current strategy while providing a road map
for future work. It enhances congressional oversight and forces
greater collaboration across the many agencies engaged in food
and agricultural assistance.
A substantially similar measure passed the House
unanimously last December, and I wanted to thank Mr. Smith for
his leadership in, again, bringing the measure forward.
House Resolution 50 calling for the release of Ukrainian
fighter pilot Nadiya Savchenko. She was seized in July 2014 by
Russian-backed separatists in Eastern Ukraine and forcibly
taken to Russia where she has endured psychological abuse and
solitary confinement.
And then we have, lastly, House Concurrent Resolution 40 on
the reunification of Korean American families. For over 60
years, these families have longed for an opportunity to reunite
with their loved ones. This resolution calls on North Korea to
recognize their suffering and permit the reunion they have long
desired.
I go now to Mr. Eliot Engel of New York.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this markup
and, as always, for working with us in a bipartisan manner. I
strongly support the seven measures that make up this en bloc
package.
I would like to begin by urging my colleagues to support
H.R. 1493, the Protect and Preserve International Cultural
Property Act. I introduced this bill with Representatives Chris
Smith and Bill Keating, and Chairman Royce as well, and this is
a measure that is deeply important to me.
We have all seen horrific videos of ISIS ransacking
historical sites in the territory they control. This is much,
much more than the senseless destruction of irreplaceable
treasures in Syria alone. It has happened all over the world,
but today ISIS is trying to erase history. They are trying to
wipe out the heritage and the culture of the people they
oppress. Worse still, they are peddling these antiquities on
the black market to fund their violence.
Since World War II, the United States has led the world in
protecting cultural property from those bent on its theft and
destruction. We have never stood for this sort of barbarity,
and we cannot do so now. We must respond to the ongoing crisis
in Syria and coordinate our efforts to protect cultural
property before the next crisis erupts somewhere else in the
world.
This bill would allow the administration to crack down on
the import of looted Syrian cultural property, restrictions
that would mirror those we have already established for Iraq
and that would bolster steps our allies have already taken. The
legislation would also make sure all of our Federal agencies
are on the same page when it comes to safeguarding antiquities,
and it would ramp up congressional oversight of what we are
doing on that issue.
We need to act on this problem now to cut off a critical
source of funding for ISIS, to stand up to this brand of
psychological warfare, and to stop those determined to destroy
a part of the world's richest history.
Next I would like to thank Representative Poe for
introducing H.R. 237, bipartisan legislation to authorize the
Secretary of State to deny or revoke passports for anyone
associated with a foreign terrorist organization. I am deeply
troubled by reports of Americans traveling to Syria and Iraq to
join ISIS and other terrorist organizations.
This situation creates the potential for attacks on U.S.
soil when they return home. It is critical we use all of the
tools at our disposal, including border protection and passport
controls, to protect our country.
I also support H.R. 1567, the Global Food Security Act, and
I thank Representatives Smith and McCollum for taking the lead
on this important issue. The bipartisan legislation passed the
House last year and would authorize the Feed the Future
Initiative championed by former USAID Administrator Raj Shah.
In its first few years, this initiative has made a real
difference in fighting world hunger, poverty, and malnutrition.
This bill would strengthen this valuable program, and I urge my
colleagues to support it.
I also support H.R. 907, the U.S.-Jordan Defense
Cooperation Act, legislation introduced by my friends, Ileana
Ros-Lehtinen and Ted Deutch. Jordan faces enormous security and
economic challenges. More than 600,000 Syrian refugees have
spilled into the country, and ISIS is sitting on its doorstep.
This bill would speed up the transfer of American defense
equipment for the next 3 years. It would also authorize the
Secretary of State to sign a memorandum of understanding with
Jordan to increase economic and military assistance. We want to
send a message to the Jordanian people we are with them in
their fight against extremism.
I also support H.R. 500, the Survivors of Human Trafficking
Empowerment Act, which was introduced by Representative Mike
Honda. This legislation would create a council made up of
trafficking survivors to provide guidance and recommendations
to Federal agencies working on human trafficking issues. Having
the voices of survivors to help guide Federal policy, identify
funding priorities, and offer technical assistance will improve
our government's response to this horrific crime of modern day
slavery.
Next I want to thank Representative Rangel for his
leadership and introducing H. Con. Res. 40, a resolution that
encourages the reunion of divided Korean American families.
Charlie Rangel, of course, was an American soldier in the
Korean War. More than 10 million Koreans have been separated
from family members since 1953, many of whom are now American
citizens.
This legislation calls on North Korea to allow Korean
Americans to meet their family members from North Korea, and it
takes steps to build goodwill that is conducive to peace on the
Peninsula. I am a co-sponsor of this legislation, and I urge my
colleagues to support it.
And, finally, I would like to voice my support for H. Res.
50, a resolution calling on Russia to immediately release
Ukrainian fighter pilot Nadiya Savchenko and condemning her
illegal captivity. Nadiya was captured by Russian-led
insurgents in Ukraine last summer and has been held in a Moskow
prison.
She is a true heroine of Ukraine. Her courage and spirit
inspire so many in her country who are struggling against great
odds for an independent, democratic, and prosperous Ukraine, an
independent, democratic, and prosperous future.
I commend Representative Sandy Levin and the other members
of the House Ukraine Caucus for introducing this measure, and I
urge my colleagues to support us.
I also ask unanimous consent to enter Congressman Honda's
statement for the record for H.R. 500.
Chairman Royce. Without objection.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, again, for holding this
markup and for working with us on these measures in a
bipartisan manner.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Engel.
Do any other members seek recognition? Ms. Ros-Lehtinen.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Chairman Royce, and
Ranking Member Engel. Thank you for holding this markup today
and for the excellent way in which you are guiding our
committee. Thanks to your staff as well for working with my
staff and Mr. Deutch's office to bring up H.R. 907, the United
States-Jordan Defense Cooperation Act of 2015.
Ted could not be present because he has a markup at
Judiciary, but he wanted me to express, on his behalf, his
strong support for this legislation and his gratitude to the
full committee for bringing it forward this morning.
H.R. 907 is a simple, straightforward, common sense bill
that not only helps secure U.S. national security interests,
but also the security interests of one of our closest allies in
the Middle East region, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. Jordan
has been on the front lines in the fight against the terror
group ISIL, and having to deal with the humanitarian crisis
that is ongoing as a result of the fighting in Iraq, in Syria,
which has caused a great strain on the Kingdom.
King Abdullah has been gracious in taking in over a million
refugees who have fled the wrath of ISIL in Iraq and the
fallout from the war between Assad, ISIL, and other terror
groups. He understands that in order to defeat ISIL more
moderate and understanding voices must refute and fight back
the radicalized Islam of ISIL and other terror groups, and
reclaim Islam for those who seek peace. Otherwise, the fight
against these extremists will never end.
And, of course, we know the horror that befell the people
of Jordan when ISIL captured, tortured, and burned to death a
Jordanian fighter pilot. The brutality of these extremists
knows no bounds, and neither do their aspirations. They will
not cease until they achieve their objectives, and that is to
establish an Islamic caliphate, or until they are defeated and
destroyed. This is where our bill comes in.
Jordan has done a great job of taking the fight to ISIL,
but the Kingdom needs more resources to bolster their
capabilities. The U.S. and Jordan have signed a new memorandum
of understanding that will guide our assistance to Jordan for
the next 3 years. But what Jordan really needs now is for us to
expedite our arms transfers and defense articles to the
Kingdom.
King Abdullah has stepped up to take a leading role in the
fight, but he needs our help and has asked that we expedite
some of these transfers, so that Jordan has the tools necessary
to not only repel ISIL but to take the fight to the terror
group and destroy it.
Time is of the essence, Mr. Chairman, in the fight against
ISIL, and we have none to spare. The U.S. must continue to
fully support our allies in the region as much as we can, and
this bill will signal to them that we stand ready to back them
in their efforts to take on terror and to bring stability to a
violence-plagued region.
And, finally, before I yield my time, I would like the
committee members to meet Mariella, a young lady behind us. She
is a high school junior from Fort Worth. She is part of a
national organization called Girls, Inc., and many of the
female members are participating in a Take Your Daughters to
Work Day. She is not my granddaughter, but I wish she could be.
She is a wonderful young lady.
Thank you, Mariella.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I----
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen [continuing]. Yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Ileana.
Let us see. We go now to--Mr. Keating, are you next in
line? Do you want to be recognized?
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to move to
strike the last word. First, I would like to thank you for the
two amendments I had that are considered in the en bloc as one
en bloc amendment.
The first one is just a technical change, I believe, but an
important one, with Congressman Levin's fine work in
recognizing Lieutenant Savchenko's plight and heroism in
Ukraine. And what it does is, given the Russian Federation's
ongoing efforts to distort the legally and internationally
recognized definition of Ukraine's sovereignty, independence,
and territorial integrity, we changed, and I think it was
crucial to do this, references to all parts of Ukraine simply
as Ukraine as a whole.
Secondly, I want to thank my colleagues, Chairman Royce,
Ranking Member Engel, and Mr. Smith, for joining me in
sponsoring H.R. 1493, the Protect and Preserve International
Cultural Property Act. We have seen images of the terrorist
organization and the group ISIL destroying cultural sites and
artifacts in Iraq and Syria. ISIL's recent activities mirror
the Taliban's destruction of Buddhist statues in Afghanistan in
2001, and an al-Qaeda affiliate's destruction of tombs and
shrines in Timbuktu, Mali, in 2012.
These acts destroy humanity's common cultural heritage and
are a crime against the entire international community,
including the United States. In addition to ISIL and other
groups, there are increasingly looting and trafficking cultural
artifacts to finance their own terrorist operations. ISIL has
reportedly earned millions from the plunder of antiquities,
including $36 million from the looting in one site alone in
Syria.
This bill is an important step in protecting cultural
property in Syria specifically, and coordinating the efforts of
the United States Government in working to protect cultural
property worldwide, and work to prevent the trafficking in
antiquities from benefitting terrorists and other criminal
groups alike.
I look forward to continuing to work on this issue with the
committee, and I want to thank my colleagues for their support.
With that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Keating.
Let us see. We go now to Mr. Smith of New Jersey.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank you, Chairman Royce, and Ranking Member Engel, for
scheduling this important markup, which again evidences the
bipartisanship and the collegiality that is so characteristic
of this committee.
The Global Food Security Act, H.R. 1567, I am happy to say
has a number of co-sponsors, including prime co-sponsor Betty
McCollum. It has been a delight to work with her and her staff,
the ranking member of our subcommittee, Karen Bass, and you,
Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Engel, as well as Mr. Emmer, Mr. Meadows,
Mr. DesJarlais, and Mr. Cicilline. Thank you all for being on
this important lifesaving legislation.
This legislation will help provide a long-term solution,
really, a road map to ending global hunger by authorizing and
strengthening the existing national food security program
coordinated by the USAID, commonly known as Feed the Future.
This program strengthens nutrition, especially for children
during the critical first 1,000-day window from conception to
the child's second birthday. It is absolutely the most
transformative time in anybody's life. And if we get it right,
both mother and child are exponentially more healthy and will
have healthier lives going forward.
In essence, it is a program, this bill, that teaches a
woman or man to fish instead of giving that person the fish. As
such, it is economical in the long run and will likely, over
the long term, lead to a reduction in the amount of money we
spend on emergency food aid. Our aid is leveraged with that of
other countries, the private sector, NGOs, and especially
faith-based organizations whose great work on the ground in so
many different countries impacts so many lives.
By statutorily authorizing this existing program and
strengthening it, which had its roots in the Bush
administration and was formalized by President Obama, is a
fittingly bipartisan program. We are also increasing our
oversight by requiring the administration to report to Congress
in a number of areas.
As you may recall, last year we passed the Global Food
Security Act out of the House, only to have it stall and falter
in the Senate, so we are back. The amendment in the nature of a
substitute, which you have before you, is in substance similar
to what the House passed last year. And, again, it really
speaks to the metrics, measurable goals, benchmarks, time
tables, and, again, makes this whole program a very significant
priority in what we do.
I want to thank Mr. Poe for offering an amendment that
underscores the vital importance of water, sanitation, and
health, known by the acronym WASH in global development, and
that amendment is now a part of this legislation. So thank you,
Ted. Thank you, Judge.
And I would ask unanimous consent to include the rest of my
statement on some of the other measures.
Chairman Royce. Without objection.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Let us see. Mr. David Cicilline of Rhode
Island was seeking recognition.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to begin by
complimenting you and Ranking Member Engel for calling this
markup and for the bipartisan spirit in which all of these
issues have been approached and strongly supporting the passage
of each of them.
I would like to just also take a moment to welcome two
state legislators from Rhode Island, Senator Juan Pichardo and
Representative Carlos Tobon, who are here and watching us, and
just welcome them to the committee.
And with that, I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Cicilline.
Judge Ted Poe of Texas.
Mr. Poe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you and
the ranking member for bringing up all seven of these pieces of
legislation in a timely manner, and the efficiency for which
the committee has worked with me and other members on these
bills.
One-year-old Vivek lived in a village of mud huts in India.
When Vivek was not doing well, his mother took him to the
doctor four times and the doctor said it was malnutrition. His
family had enough food to eat for his young body. They had
goats, fresh buffalo milk, and hundreds of pounds of wheat and
potatoes. So what was the problem? The problem was water.
Vivek's little body was spending so much of its energy fighting
infections from the bad water that there was little left for
brain development and growth.
The lesson here is that you can give a child all the food
in the world, but without clean water it will not do any good.
My amendment to H.R. 1567 that is sponsored by the
gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Smith, makes clean water and
sanitation part of the discussion when we talk about food
security. Instead of each sector of foreign aid with its own
stovepipe, this amendment makes sure that sectors talk to each
other and work together.
Last week a 23-year-old Somali American man from Columbus,
Ohio, was charged with supporting terrorists. He was trained in
Syria and told by a cleric to go home to the United States and
carry out an attack against America. That is the first time we
have caught someone who was specifically told to go back to the
United States to attack the homeland. These Benedict Arnold
traitors who have turned against America and joined the ranks
of foreign radical terrorist armies should not be allowed to
come back into the United States unless they come back in
handcuffs.
For these reasons, I believe H.R. 237, that is co-sponsored
by Mr. Keating and Mr. Sherman, the Foreign Terrorist
Organization Passport Revocation Act, is a critical bill at a
critical time. This bill grants the Secretary of State the
explicit authority to revoke or deny U.S. passports for
individuals who are members of or otherwise help designated
foreign terrorist organizations. We must stop these killers
from coming back to the United States to do harm to Americans.
And, lastly, human trafficking is a scourge in our society.
It is encouraging to see that the Senate yesterday passed the
Justice for Victims of Trafficking Act, 99 to 0. I don't know
the last time that the Senate has agreed on unanimous
legislation this important.
This is very similar to the legislation that passed the
House that I was the lead sponsor on, along with Carolyn
Maloney from New York, along with 10 other bills regarding the
scourge of human trafficking.
Congress is finally coming to the realization that
trafficking happens in our backyards, and we need to do
something about this. Survivors' voices must be part of the
conversation. They know best how to effectively prevent the
fight of this modern day slavery. We must engage survivors if
we have any chance of ending this crime and properly serving
the victims of this dastardly deed.
As the lead Republican on H.R. 500, the Survivors of Human
Trafficking Empowerment Act, I have enjoyed working with
Congressman Honda to ensure victims are empowered and their
voices are heard on the Federal level, and I would recommend
and ask that the two bills that I mentioned be voted on in the
affirmative, and the one amendment be voted on in the
affirmative along with the other pieces of legislation.
And I will yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Poe.
Seeking recognition, we have Lois Frankel of Florida.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I want to
thank you and the ranking member, and all the members who have
contributed to these measures, which I support, and appreciate
that in a world full of crises that we can find so many things
that we here can cooperate on.
I wanted to also, like my colleague, Ms. Ros-Lehtinen,
introduce a young lady. We actually have a miracle in the room.
Her name is Miracle Dixon from a high school in Indiana. And I
want to welcome you here with the Girls, Inc. program.
And I just want to let you know that Ileana Ros-Lehtinen,
who also has someone with her, used to be the chair of this
committee, and chairs one of our subcommittees, because this is
a leadership program. So this is one of our most prominent
women leaders in the Congress, so I want you to know that. And
the rest of us are working toward that.
Anyway, we want to welcome you. She is an honors student,
good grades, and wants to be a lawyer. So keep that up.
And thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you. Thank you, Lois.
Okay. We want to go now to Mr. Rohrabacher of California.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, and I would like to
especially thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Engel for the great
leadership that you have provided us at this time when our
country is confronting this ISIL threat and the terrorist
actions overseas and the threats to our country. I think this
committee is doing its due diligence, and I want to thank you
very much for that.
I support your call today for these bills to be en bloc,
voted on en bloc and brought to the floor. I would like to just
express a couple of concerns that I have with two bills within
this en bloc amendment.
And let me just--and I would like to ask Judge Poe, in your
Passport Revocation Act, would this mean that we would revoke
the passports for people who are here and considered terrorist
threats while they are here? Or is it just for people who have
gone overseas and are part of a terrorist group?
Mr. Poe. The bill allows the State Department to revoke the
passport of any American citizen that is a member of a foreign
terrorist organization anyplace.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Anyplace. Well, wouldn't we want to have
someone who is a member of a terrorist organization either
arrested right away and put away or--that is number one--if
they are here domestically, rather than having them stay here
without a passport, meaning we don't want those terrorists here
in the United States.
Mr. Poe. Well, you would think that the FBI would arrest
terrorists in the United States. But the bill is primarily--you
asked me the specific question--it includes anybody that is a
foreign terrorist organization member. It was aimed at those
people who leave the United States, that are radicalized in
Syria, and then they try to come back over here and do their
mischief. That is what the bill is aimed at.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, we are--of course, I am with you 100
percent on that. I would hope, however, we are not taking away
the passport from someone in a terrorist organization which
makes them stay here. We would like them--to either arrest them
here or take them overseas.
Mr. Poe. We would like them to go to jail.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Yes.
Chairman Royce. And if I could make an observation, this
legislation also was revised, working with the FBI, in a way to
make sure it does not intervene in their work. And it in no
way, of course, preempts or prevents law enforcement from doing
its job.
But I think it is an important step to make certain that
those who are involved in these organizations, whether they are
arrested or not, do not have the wherewithal to travel to get
training offshore and then return. And this, of course, would
prevent that from happening. So your point is well founded, Mr.
Rohrabacher.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I don't want them coming back. I mean,
because if we are not going to----
Chairman Royce. Right. That is the intent behind it.
Mr. Rohrabacher. All right. And the second thing is about
the calling for the release of the Ukrainian fighter pilot. I
think she is offering a great service by drawing our attention
to the fact that there are so many people being held hostage
and prisoner in this Ukrainian catastrophe that is going on
with our country right now.
And I would hope that just in the spirit of--I will be
voting for this, but we should express our desire that it is
not just one Ukrainian fighter pilot who happens to be a woman
who we now can identify with, but we hope that this conflict
ends maybe with the Minsk Agreement, which also had, as part of
it, the release of all prisoners on both sides.
And we should be making sure that the people of the Ukraine
know that we are trying to promote a peace situation where all
of the prisoners are released and they can get back to making
sure they are rebuilding their country, rather than just
singling out one prisoner for that.
Chairman Royce. I think it would be a very good point, Mr.
Rohrabacher, per the situation in Ukraine. But here is the
difference in this particular case. This is actually a
Ukrainian pilot. She is a Ukrainian pilot who was seized on
Ukrainian territory, and then she was transferred to Russian
territory. That is the difference. So she has been held in
solitary confinement. She has been subjected to psychological
abuse, denied access to medical treatment. And given these
considerations, this would be the point of this particular----
Mr. Rohrabacher. All right. I think that is a very good
answer. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Rohrabacher.
Mr. Grayson.
Mr. Grayson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just one brief
comment regarding the Passport Revocation Act. The Supreme
Court has recognized that there is a constitutional right to
travel, and I think that that comes directly from the right of
freedom of assembly under the First Amendment. Therefore, in my
view--and I hope this becomes part of the record on this--I
don't think that you can properly deny someone a passport or
the right to travel without clear and convincing evidence.
I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Grayson, I think you raise a point
here, and this is one of the reasons why this was crafted to
provide permissive authority to the State Department per your
concern here. And I think, given that, we can still meet that
constitutional test, but----
Mr. Poe. Will the chairman yield?
Chairman Royce. Yes. I will yield to the author of the
measure, Mr. Ted Poe of Texas.
Mr. Poe. The Supreme Court has ruled that the State
Department, under certain circumstances, may revoke an American
passport.
Mr. Grayson. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Poe. Yes.
Mr. Grayson. I understand that. I am suggesting, consistent
with the Supreme Court's ruling, that that can be done only
with clear and convincing evidence that that is, and should be,
the standard of proof.
I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Grayson yields back.
Any other members seeking recognition? If not, we are going
to go to--oh, yes. I wanted to recognize Mr. Gerry Connolly of
Virginia for 30 minutes. [Laughter.]
Mr. Connolly. Take off your coats, everybody. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you and the ranking member for
putting together today's markup. I am happy to support all of
the bills in front of us. I want to thank your staffs as well
for cooperating with us on inclusion of our amendment on H.
Res. 50, reiterating the unqualified U.S. support for Ukrainian
sovereignty in all respects.
Thank you again.
Chairman Royce. Reverse psychology. Thank you, Mr.
Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. I yield back my 29 minutes.
Chairman Royce. Okay. Hearing no further requests for
recognition, the question occurs on the items considered en
bloc. All those in favor say aye.
[Chorus of ayes.]
All those opposed, no.
[No response.]
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it, and the
measures considered en bloc are agreed to. So, without
objection, H.R. 1493 and House Concurrent Resolution 40 are
ordered favorably reported, and H.R. 237, H.R. 500, H.R. 907,
H.R. 1567, and House Resolution 50, are ordered favorably
reported, as amended. And staff is directed to make any
technical and conforming changes.
Also, without objection, the Chair is authorized to seek
House consideration of any of today's measures under suspension
of the rules.
And that concludes our business for today, and I want to
thank again, Ranking Member Engel, and all of our committee
members for their contributions and assistance in today's
markup.
The committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:44 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Material submitted for the record by the Honorable Eliot L. Engel, a
Representative in Congress from the State of New York

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
