- TO DIRECT THE PRESIDENT TO DEVELOP A STRATEGY TO OBTAIN OBSERVER STATUS FOR TAIWAN IN THE INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL POLICE ORGANIZATION; THE GIRLS COUNT ACT OF 2015; THE UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS REFORM ACT OF 2015; CONDEMNING THE APRIL 2015 TERRORIST ATTACK AT THE GARISSA UNIVERSITY COLLEGE IN GARISSA, KENYA; AND EXPRESSING DEEPEST CONDOLENCES TO AND SOLIDARITY WITH THE PEOPLE OF NEPAL FOLLOWING THE DEVASTATING EARTHQUAKE ON APRIL 25, 2015

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

TO DIRECT THE PRESIDENT TO DEVELOP A STRATEGY TO OBTAIN OBSERVER STATUS
FOR TAIWAN IN THE INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL POLICE ORGANIZATION; THE GIRLS
COUNT ACT OF 2015; THE UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS
REFORM ACT OF 2015; CONDEMNING THE APRIL 2015 TERRORIST ATTACK AT THE
GARISSA UNIVERSITY COLLEGE IN GARISSA, KENYA; AND EXPRESSING DEEPEST
CONDOLENCES TO AND SOLIDARITY WITH THE PEOPLE OF NEPAL FOLLOWING THE
DEVASTATING EARTHQUAKE ON APRIL 25, 2015

=======================================================================

MARKUP

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

ON

H.R. 1853, H.R. 2100, H.R. 2323, H. Res. 213 and H. Res. 235

__________

MAY 21, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-56

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

94-692PDF                      WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

MARKUP OF

H.R. 1853, To direct the President to develop a strategy to
obtain observer status for Taiwan in the International Criminal
Police Organization, and for other purposes....................     3
H.R. 2100, To authorize the Secretary of State and the
Administrator of the United States Agency for International
Development to provide assistance to support the rights of
women and girls in developing countries, and for other purposes     8
H.R. 2323, To enhance the missions, objectives, and effectiveness
of United States international communications, and for other
purposes.......................................................    15
Amendments to H.R. 2323 offered by:
The Honorable Joaquin Castro, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Texas..................................    83
The Honorable Michael T. McCaul, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Texas.........................    84
The Honorable Edward R. Royce, a Representative in Congress

from the State of California, and chairman, Committee on
Foreign
Affairs..................................................85, 87
H. Res. 213, Condemning the April 2015 terrorist attack at the
Garissa University College in Garissa, Kenya, and reaffirming
the United States support for the people and Government of
Kenya, and for other purposes..................................    88
H. Res. 235, Expressing deepest condolences to and solidarity
with the people of Nepal following the devastating earthquake
on April 25, 2015..............................................    92
Amendment in the nature of a substitute to H. Res. 235 offered
by the Honorable Matt Salmon, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Arizona....................................    96
Amendment to the amendment in the nature of a substitute to
H. Res. 235 offered by:
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in
Congress from the Commonwealth of Virginia, the
Honorable Karen Bass, a Representative in Congress
from the State of California, the Honorable Brad
Sherman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, and the Honorable Alan S. Lowenthal, a
Representative in Congress from the State of
California...........................................   100
The Honorable Brad Sherman.............................   101

APPENDIX

Markup notice....................................................   114
Markup minutes...................................................   115
Markup summary...................................................   117
The Honorable Christopher H. Smith, a Representative in Congress
from the State of New Jersey: Prepared statement...............   118
The Honorable Brad Sherman, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California: Prepared statment of the Honorable Michael
M. Honda, a Representative in Congress from the State of
California.....................................................   119
The Honorable Karen Bass, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California: Prepared statement........................   120

TO DIRECT THE PRESIDENT TO DEVELOP A STRATEGY TO OBTAIN OBSERVER STATUS
FOR TAIWAN IN THE INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL POLICE ORGANIZATION; THE GIRLS
COUNT ACT OF 2015; THE UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS
REFORM ACT OF 2015; CONDEMNING THE APRIL 2015 TERRORIST ATTACK AT THE
GARISSA UNIVERSITY COLLEGE IN GARISSA, KENYA; AND EXPRESSING DEEPEST
CONDOLENCES TO AND SOLIDARITY WITH THE PEOPLE OF NEPAL FOLLOWING THE
DEVASTATING EARTHQUAKE ON APRIL 25, 2015

----------

THURSDAY, MAY 21, 2015

House of Representatives,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:08 a.m., in
room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed Royce
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Chairman Royce. This committee will come to order.
Pursuant to notice, we meet today to mark up several
bipartisan measures that were provided to members earlier this
week.
Without objection, all members may have 5 days to submit
statements for the record and any extraneous material that they
might want to include on today's business.
According to the expedited procedures shared with members
yesterday, we intend to call up and approve today's measures en
bloc at the outset because of the voting, and afterwards I will
recognize myself and the ranking member and any other members
who would like to make remarks on the record.
Members have all of the items, which were provided to your
offices previously, in the packets in front of you. And so,
without objection, the following items will be considered en
bloc and are considered as read: H.R. 1853, this is regarding
observer status for Taiwan in INTERPOL; H.R. 2100, the Girls
Count Act of 2015; H.R. 2323, the U.S. International
Communications Reform Act of 2015, along with the following
amendments to that bill: Castro Amendment 51, McCaul Amendment
33, Royce Amendment 41, Royce Amendment 901; House Resolution
213, condemning the terrorist attack at the university in Kenya
and reaffirming U.S. support for Kenya; House Resolution 235,
expressing condolences to and solidarity with the people of
Nepal following the devastation that came with the recent
quakes. And we have the Salmon Amendment 70 in the nature of a
substitute, reflecting the subcommittee-adopted changes to
House Resolution 235. We have the Connolly-Bass-Sherman-
Lowenthal Amendment; that is Amendment 54 to Salmon Amendment
70. And we have the Sherman Amendment 10 to Salmon Amendment
70.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Royce. The Chair now moves that the items being
considered en bloc be adopted by the committee.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed?
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it, and the
items considered en bloc are agreed to.
Without objection, each of those underlying measures, as
amended, is ordered favorably reported as a single amendment in
the nature of a substitute.
Staff is directed to make technical and conforming changes.
The Chair is authorized to seek consideration under suspension
of the rules.
Having concluded the operative portion of today's business,
I will now recognize members who wish to make statements on the
adopted measures, beginning with myself and the ranking member
when he arrives here.
So we begin with H.R. 2323. This is the International
Communications Reform Act.
And today U.S. international broadcasting must contend with
a new era of what is often called weaponized information, where
groups like ISIS or Hezbollah and Putin are subverting stable
regimes, spreading conspiracy theories intended to incite
violence.
There is widespread agreement that the Broadcasting Board
of Governors, the agency charged with guiding U.S.
international broadcasting, is practically defunct. And this is
not good news for our sole U.S. Government effort to counter
the propaganda of both terrorists and of dictators. So this
measure, the United States International Communications Reform
Act, carries out much-needed reforms to our international
broadcasting, which have been championed by a broad coalition
of supporters.
The bill consolidates the now six organizations of the BBG
into two entities. One, a Federal agency, will house the Voice
of America. And the other, a non-Federal entity called the
Freedom News Network, will run the Radios, or surrogate
broadcasters, known as Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, Radio
Free Asia, the Middle East Broadcasting Network.
They have two very different missions. The VOA exists to
tell America's story abroad. It explains America and American
ideals to the world. The Radios, the surrogates here, function
in closed societies. They do this with a lot more than just
radio, obviously, but they act as a free press would if one
were allowed to operate, and, thus, they have that job of
irritating dictators and inspiring civil society.
The bill also establishes for both of these organizations a
full-time day-to-day agency head and clear lines of
accountability.
By reforming the BBG, more resources can be spent cutting
through the misinformation put forward by our foes instead of
on a broken bureaucracy here in Washington, DC. These reforms
are long overdue. The longer we wait to act, the further ground
we cede to those who seek to do us grave harm.
The next measure, H.R. 1853, that I was going to comment
on, this directs the President to develop a strategy to obtain
observer status for Taiwan in INTERPOL. And this, of course,
builds upon our successful efforts last Congress to ensure U.S.
endorsement of Taiwan's entry into the International Civil
Aviation Organization. So I want to thank Matt Salmon, chairman
of the Asia Subcommittee, for his leadership on this important
issue.
Since 1984, Taiwan has relied on delayed, secondhand
information from the U.S. about international criminals and
global crime, making it needlessly vulnerable to security
threats. Likewise, Taiwan cannot share intelligence it gathers
to the benefit of INTERPOL members. So Taiwan is the United
States' 10h-largest trading partner, a top-20 world economy.
This means a large number of people and goods are transiting
through Taiwan each and every day. Taiwan especially deserves
access to INTERPOL's law enforcement infrastructure to improve
security for all involved.
Briefly, I will also tell you about House Resolution 235.
This is the Nepal resolution. And I thank Matt Salmon for this
resolution on Nepal and the good oversight that his
subcommittee has conducted regarding the U.S. response to its
two devastating recent earthquakes.
We have had 8,000 people, 8,000 souls, killed in this
disaster, including six brave Marines who sought to bring food
and medicine and supplies to remote areas that were
particularly hard-hit in Nepal. This resolution commends U.S.
relief efforts, rightfully so.
Unfortunately, outdated U.S. purchase and shipping
requirements under the Food for Peace program have again
limited an otherwise robust U.S. humanitarian response. We
currently have tons of U.S. food aid sitting in Sri Lanka. In
the meantime, USAID has had to rely on other disaster
assistance accounts to provide much-needed emergency food,
meaning those funds cannot be used for other necessities. So I
am eager to work with my colleagues to reform our international
food aid program so that, in the future, we can get lifesaving
assistance to more people in less time for less money.
House Resolution 213, condemning terrorist attacks by al-
Shabaab at the university in Kenya. I want to start by thanking
Representative Bass for authorizing this important measure.
Al-Shabaab is getting squeezed in Somalia, losing ground
and losing important financial lifelines, and this latest high-
profile attack seems to be an attempt to tell the world that
they are still around. But there were 147 students tragically
killed simply for trying to get an education, you know? Al-
Shabaab divided those students along religious lines by
quizzing them on the Koran. The ones who passed lived; those
who didn't were killed.
This resolution also reaffirms U.S. support for promoting
tolerance in Kenya and commends Kenya's contributions to the
African Union peacekeeping force that is deployed right now in
Somalia.
And, lastly, H.R. 2100, the Girls Count Act of 2015. I want
to recognize Representative Chabot for his work on this good,
bipartisan bill, which our committee and the House passed in a
substantially similar form last Congress.
One-third of children around the world have never had their
births registered. Unable to prove their age or their parentage
or their citizenship, these children are often prevented from
attending school or receiving health services.
For girls, in particular, a lack of documentation can
undermine existing legal protections against their being
trafficked or against their being made child brides. And, as
they grow up, girls without an official identity face
especially high barriers to education and to entrepreneurship.
This bill authorizes the State Department and USAID to
prioritize programs to improve countries' civil registries and
rates of birth registration. And the bill encourages the
development of laws and policies to prevent discrimination
against girls and improve property and inheritance rights for
women. And I encourage all members to support this measure.
We now go to Mr. Eliot Engel, the ranking member of this
committee.
Mr. Engel. Thank you very much for holding this markup, Mr.
Chairman. And thank you, as always, for working with us in such
a bipartisan manner on all the measures before us and in all
the activity of this committee.
Let me first voice my support for H.R. 1853, the Taiwan
INTERPOL Act, sponsored by Chairman Salmon. This bill would
direct the executive branch to help Taiwan receive observer
status in the International Criminal Policy Organization, known
as INTERPOL. INTERPOL enhances public safety around the world
by linking law enforcement agencies and facilitating the smooth
flow of information.
Taiwan's absence from INTERPOL creates a public safety risk
for the people of Taiwan and, actually, for all of us. This
legislation will help put Taiwan on a path to observer status
in INTERPOL, the same status it enjoys in other international
organizations like the World Health Assembly.
I urge all of my colleagues to support this.
Let me next thank Representatives Chabot and McCollum for
introducing the Girls Count Act.
Around the world, over a third of children under the age of
5, mostly girls, have no registration of their birth. A lack of
documentation creates a dire vulnerability to child labor,
human trafficking, and child marriage. Their lives are defined
by limited choices and opportunities, and the long-term
development of their communities is also dragged down. The
Syrian refugee crisis has presented an acute example of this
challenge.
H.R. 2100 will ramp up efforts to get more children
registered. It authorizes the State Department and USAID to
work with local governments to expand access to registration
programs, helping children get off to a good start. So I urge
all my colleagues to support this bill, as well.
I am also glad that Chairman Royce has reintroduced the
United States International Communications Reform Act, which I
am proud to cosponsor. This bill, which passed the House
unanimously last year, would bring a much-needed overhaul to
the Broadcasting Board of Governors.
During the Cold War, the Voice of America, Radio Free
Europe, and other U.S.-backed broadcasters presented honest,
unbiased news and information in the face of relentless Soviet
propaganda. Mr. Royce and I both support these kinds of
programs.
Today, America's rivals spend massive sums to spread
violent messages and disseminate propaganda. Unfortunately, our
ability to respond has fallen behind the techniques employed by
Russia, ISIS, and others.
This bill creates a new management structure to oversee our
international broadcasting efforts. It streamlines our various
broadcasting organizations, eliminates duplication, and
clarifies the roles of the Voice of America and its so-called
surrogates. And it would promote the use of new media platforms
to complement traditional tools like shortwave radio and
television.
I want to thank Chairman Royce for his dedication to this
issue, and I urge support for this bill.
I also support H. Res. 213, which condemns the recent
attack at Garissa University College in Garissa, Kenya, by the
brutal terrorist group al-Shabaab.
Because Kenya's leaders chose to make their region stronger
and participate in the African Union mission in Somalia, al-
Shabaab killed nearly 150 innocent students and teachers and
injured more than 100 others.
The resolution offers condolences to the family and friends
of those killed, recognizes Kenya as an important ally, and
commends Kenya for working to heal a war-torn Somalia. Let me
thank Congresswoman Karen Bass, the ranking member on the
Africa Subcommittee, for spearheading this measure, and I urge
my colleagues to support it.
Finally, I want to express my support for H. Res. 235,
expressing our deepest condolences and solidarity with the
people of Nepal following the devastating April 25 earthquake,
which left more than 8,000 dead, several thousand more injured,
and has disrupted the lives of more than 8 million people.
But even in such a tragedy, we are inspired by the global
response. Partners like India and Japan and, of course, our
American search and rescue teams have done incredible work,
whether first responders from a few miles away from here in
Fairfax County or from the California fire department, along
with American Marines, including six who lost their lives in a
tragic helicopter crash, and the Congress paid homage to them
yesterday.
More than 50 aftershocks have shaken Nepal since April 25,
and there will be more. And that is why we need to work with
partners to ensure that the people of Nepal are prepared for
these kinds of natural disasters in the future. This resolution
signals our commitment to that goal, and I urge our colleagues
to support it.
Again, Mr. Chairman, thank you for your work to move
forward with these important bills. We appreciate very much
working together in such a bipartisan manner.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Engel.
I am going to ask if any of the members of the committee
seek recognition.
Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be very brief,
and I would ask unanimous consent that my full statement be
made a part of the record.
Let me just say I am very grateful for this markup, and all
five of the bills, I think, are outstanding. Again, in the
spirit of bipartisanship, each of those come before us having
worked out any problems that existed between each side of the
aisle, and I think that is the way we ought to work.
I want to note that Sam Stratman is here, one of the most
distinguished members of Henry Hyde's--when he was chairman of
this committee. And it is great to see Sam. He did a wonderful
job for the committee for so many years.
Let me just again thank our ranking member, Congresswoman
Bass, for H. Res. 213 that condemns the horrific attack by
Islamic radicals from the terror group al-Shabaab at Garissa
University College in Kenya on April 2. About 150 mostly
Christian students were segregated from other students and
butchered on account of their religious faith, the fact that
they were Christians.
And there is a report out right now, 55 minutes old, on the
Internet that al-Shabaab took over, at least for about 2 hours,
a mosque in Garissa, fled back into the woods after spewing out
their hatred and vitriol, and then went back into the forest
with, of course, the Kenyans in hot pursuit.
I want to thank Congressman Chabot for an excellent bill,
Girls Count. And, you know, if you don't chronicle the women
and the girls in this world, it is so much easier for them to
be trafficked, to disappear.
And I would also point out to my colleagues that this
underscores and will help bring additional light and scrutiny
to an absolutely ominous phenomenon that has taken place over
the course of the last several years, and that is sex-selection
abortion and the missing girls in the world. The estimates are
at least 200 million missing females because of sex-selection
abortion. It happens here. At least 15 countries around the
world have seen a gross ascendency in this phenomenon of doing
ultrasounds at the fifth month, determining the gender of the
baby, and destroying her simply because she happens to be a
girl.
I held my 51st hearing on human rights in China just 2
weeks ago. We heard from Chen Guangcheng, the great blind
activist and human rights lawyer, who made that daring escape,
went to our Embassy, and is now here in the United States with
his family. He testified about how awful the policy is in China
with its one-child policy and the targeting of little girls.
Mara Hvistendahl, who has also submitted testimony, wrote
in her book that, in Asia alone, there are 160 million girls
and women missing, the girl child being targeted by sex-
selection abortion. And to put that in perspective, that equals
the entire female population in the United States of America,
killed by sex-selection abortion simply because she happens to
be a girl.
This Girls Count legislation--and, Steve, thank you so much
for this--will help to bring light and scrutiny to the missing
daughters throughout the entire world. Excellent bill.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen [presiding]. Thank you, Mr. Smith.
Mr. Sherman is recognized.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I have enjoyed working with the chair of the committee, his
staff, and the ranking member's staff to include in these bills
some important provisions.
First, as to Nepal, I want to thank the chairman for
including my amendment to focus on the importance of protecting
the women of Nepal from violence against women and to work for
gender equality. UNICEF estimates that 7,000 Nepali girls are
trafficked annually, and this amendment directs the State
Department to focus on trafficking.
I would ask unanimous consent to put in the record the
statement of----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Without objection.
Mr. Sherman [continuing]. Mr. Honda, who worked with me on
that amendment.
I worked with Mr. Connolly, and, together, we put in an
amendment to recognize task forces that have gone to Nepal from
his area and mine. In particular, California Task Force 2 was
made up of 57 Los Angeles County firefighters and 6 search and
rescue dogs. This team carries survival and rescue kits that
contain everything from heavy concrete cutting equipment,
chainsaws, search cameras, and SONAR to locate victims.
Moving on to the broadcasting bill, I want to thank the
chairman for working with me to focus on an issue that I have
talked to this committee about for the last several years, the
importance of broadcasting in the Sindhi language.
This committee voted to authorize $1.5 million a year for
that effort, yet we can't get BBG to take this seriously. They
insist upon broadcasting only in Urdu when, if you are going to
reach the people of Pakistan, you have to reach them in the
language in which they are most familiar. And for tens of
millions of Pakistanis, that is the Sindhi language.
I have asked VOA to provide me with a cost estimate for
broadcasting in Sindhi just 3 hours a day on a radio station
that would just reach Sindh province and, in particular, the
upper portion of Sindh province. Instead, they come back with
estimates as to what it would cost to reach the entire country,
and these estimates are at least 10 times the cost of what I am
currently proposing. I would like to propose something grander,
but we realize there are budgetary restraints.
We just need one Urdu/Sindhi speaker who could translate
what we are already broadcasting in Urdu and broadcast it in
Sindhi in one station. When you look at our costs in Korea and
other places, we would realize that this should cost in
Pakistan $100,000 or $200,000, but we can't even get an
estimate for this. And I want to thank the chairman for
agreeing to join me with a letter pushing BBG to give us a
reasonable estimate.
And given that this is a region of Pakistan that is so
important to us and where the natural inclination of people is
toward a moderate approach to Islam, I think that it is
important that we prod BBG to give us a reasonable approach
rather than, ``Well, this is what we are doing, and don't
bother us with any details.''
I commend the committee for undertaking the other bills
that are before us. It is important that Taiwan be part of
INTERPOL, and I joined with Chairman Salmon in introducing that
bill.
And, with that, I yield back to the chair.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chabot of Ohio.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Madam Chair, for calling this markup
today.
I am supportive of all the measures before the committee,
but I will focus for just a moment on H.R. 2011, the Girls
Count Act of 2015, which I introduced with the support from 43
of our colleagues, many of whom are members of this committee.
I want to personally thank Mr. Smith for his impassioned
comments about the importance of this legislation. There are a
lot of reasons for it, but that is one that is particularly
close to my heart.
Every year, approximately 51 million children are not
registered at their birth. Lacking a birth certificate
restricts the ability of children across the globe from
engaging in a number of fundamental rights that we take for
granted here in the United States.
In order to address this issue, H.R. 2100 directs the
Department of State and USAID to support efforts aimed at
improving birth registry through birth certificate programs in
developing countries. Ensuring that every child has a birth
certificate will aid in a host of areas, including but not
limited to, access to voting rights, land tenure rights, health
services, education, and on and on. It will help support
efforts to prevent human and sex trafficking and aid in
identifying displaced persons. H.R. 2100 would also aid in
international adoption cases.
Despite the fact that almost all countries require some
type of birth registration prior to the government's issuance
of identifying documents, like a birth certificate or a
driver's license, nearly one-third of all children under the
age of 5 worldwide have never had their births registered--one-
third of the children on this earth.
For girls, in particular, this lack of birth registration
increases the barriers they face to education,
entrepreneurship, civic participation, in addition to
increasing their vulnerability to trafficking or exploitation.
Girls Count would authorize the State Department and USAID to
support programs that are designed to protect girls' legal
rights, particularly economic and property rights, and to build
legal and policy frameworks to prevent discrimination against
women and girls.
Madam Chairman, I want to thank you for considering this
important piece of legislation and thank my colleagues for
their broad bipartisan support in a number of comments they
have made this morning in favor of this legislation.
And I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Chabot.
Mr. Cicilline.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
I want to begin by thanking Chairman Royce and Ranking
Member Engel for their continued leadership on this committee
and on the important bills that we just moved forward.
I am proud to support the Girls Count Act, which will help
improve birth registration around the world, especially in
countries where girls and women often get left behind, unable
to pursue an education or work outside the home because the
government has no official record that they exist. This will
complement the work already being done by the State Department
and USAID and help us pave a road to full gender equality. And
I want to thank everyone who worked so hard on that piece of
legislation.
I am also pleased that we have passed the Taiwan INTERPOL
Act this morning. It is important and, of course, in the best
interest of the United States to ensure that information about
criminals and global criminal activities are shared as widely
and as efficiently as possible.
We have also moved forward this morning a resolution that
was considered by the Africa Subcommittee last week. The April
2 terrorist attack at the Garissa University College in Kenya
was a despicable, evil act of terrorism by al-Shabaab. The
victims were innocent men and women attending school, who were
targeted for murder because of their religious faith. I thank
my friend and colleague Congresswoman Bass for sponsoring this
resolution to send the message that such violence and terrorism
will not be tolerated and must be condemned in this strongest
terms.
And regarding another tragedy, H. Res. 235 expresses our
condolences to the people of Nepal in the wake of the
earthquakes that have devastated their country. I have
supported the international disaster response to date,
especially U.S. Search and rescue teams and humanitarian
contributions, and want to recognize the lives lost while
providing humanitarian assistance. I sincerely hope that the
United States will honor their sacrifice and continue to do
everything we can to help with their reconstruction efforts.
And, finally, I want to thank Chairman Royce and Ranking
Member Engel for their leadership on broadcasting issues. When
I meet with international civil society groups, they
consistently raise the concern that the media and the
information dissemination in their country are not free and
fair. Too often, propaganda and censorship are used by
extremist leaders in an attempt to assert control over a group
of people or an entire country. I support this country and this
committee's commitment to providing open access to news and
information around the world, and our passage today of H.R.
2323 will advance that goal.
Finally, I want to thank the chairman and ranking member
for moving these important pieces of legislation and, again,
for always working in a bipartisan way, which I think reflects
on the best values of our country and hopefully of this
Congress.
And, with that, I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, sir.
And now we will turn to Mr. Salmon, the chairman of the
Asia Subcommittee.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
I would to express wonderful support to our chairman of the
full committee, Mr. Royce, and the ranking member, Mr. Engel,
for their great leadership and support of all of the issues on
today's schedule.
I also want to thank the ranking member on our
subcommittee, Brad Sherman, for his great work both on H.R.
1853, which is requiring the President to develop a strategy to
get Taiwan involved in INTERPOL, and then the resolution
expressing our deepest sympathies and condolences for Nepal,
which I think has been made very much better through the
amendment process. I am very excited about what we are voting
on today.
First of all, in the Taiwan INTERPOL issue, H.R. 1853,
folks, this is a no-brainer, and that is why we are seeing such
widespread support across the aisle for this measure. It
doesn't make any sense at all, in a time of great angst and
threat by numerous terrorist groups across the globe, that we
don't have all hands on deck, that just because of political
idiosyncrasies and the flexing of muscles by China, that Taiwan
isn't involved at all in any international institutions, that
we are doing stupid things and not allowing them to be involved
in something as important as this when all hands should be on
deck. So I appreciate the fact that we are moving forward on
this.
Regarding the Nepal condolence measure that we are
introducing today, we had a hearing yesterday with our folks
from State Department, USAID, and our Department of Defense.
And I have to say, I just couldn't be prouder of the job that
they have done and how quickly they responded to not just one
but two major earthquakes. And I am so proud of our military
folks.
Just the other day, I had one of the toughest conversations
with a constituent--actually, not a constituent but somebody
from my State who lost his beloved son, Lance Corporal Jake
Hug, in the terrible helicopter accident that happened during
the search and rescue in Nepal.
I am so proud of those brave men and women that put on the
uniform every day and go out to fight for freedom and put the
United States' best interests forward. And I am so thankful
that will we were able to get a measure in that is also
thanking them and honoring them for the great service that they
do for our country.
Again, this committee I think is the most bipartisan
committee in the entire Congress, and I just hope that a lot of
the media is taking note at how well we work together. There is
an old saying, when the going gets tough, the tough get going.
And I am certainly proud to serve with the members on both
sides of the aisle on this committee. It is a great testament
of the way things should be.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Salmon.
Lois Frankel from Florida.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And I, too, want to thank the chairman and ranking member
for this bipartisan approach and how you all run this
committee.
And I also want to particularly thank Mr. Chabot for his
leadership on the Girls Count Act, which I am proud to be a
cosponsor. And I want to reaffirm some of the comments that
have been made by my colleagues, because I don't think it can
be said enough that the more we do for our young girls and
women to reach their full potential, the more that countries
around the world will reach their full potential.
Every year, tens of millions of girls are born in the
developing world and they do not receive any sort of birth
documentation. Without a nationally-recognized birth
certificate, girls and women are often prevented from
participating in the formal economic, legal, educational, and
political sectors of their economy. And, as we have heard, even
worse, they are much more susceptible to exploitation, human
trafficking, forced labor, and child marriage.
So I am very pleased that we have come together in a
bipartisan fashion to help some of the world's most vulnerable
children. And it may just be a play on words, but by counting
girls, we take a positive step toward making sure that girls do
count. And we know that when girls flourish, so do their
communities.
And I yield back, Madam Chair.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Ms. Frankel.
And now Chairman McCaul.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Let me thank Chairman Royce and Ranking Member Engel for
their leadership on this bill, the United States International
Communications Reform Act. I believe enactment of this bill
into law will go a long way in improving U.S international
broadcasting efforts to strengthen our public diplomacy around
the world.
I am particularly grateful to the committee for accepting
my amendment to encourage a U.S. international communications
agency to collaborate with private-sector for-profit and
nonprofit entities to highlight programming content, including
music which promotes peace in countries experiencing high
levels of terrorism and other forms of religious, ethnic, or
political violence.
I just returned from Iraq last week where a car bomb
exploded in west Baghdad, killing 10 people. And rather than
being deterred by that terror, the day following the attack, an
individual by the name of Karim Wasfi, a cellist and former
conductor of Iraq's National Symphony Orchestra, came to the
wreckage site and played his cello.
There is a YouTube video out on this that has gone viral
over the Internet, and it is quite moving to see him in the
middle of the blast playing the cello. And people came out to
this site of horror and murder to listen to one of the nation's
most renowned musicians rather than hide from other would-be
attackers.
You know, when I was over there, I had a flak jacket and a
helmet on, and I could only think of this man being in the
middle of a bomb site, playing his cello freely, while others
were looking on with no protection whatsoever--the courage they
demonstrated that day in the streets of Baghdad.
And when asked why he did this, Mr. Wasfi said, ``You know,
I'm worried that people are losing hope and surrender to the
situation. And I play--I play my cello to show that life is
worth living. I can't beat the bombs with my cello,'' he said,
``but I can bring respect for the dead.''
So to this committee, I say that I believe music--and I
come from Austin, Texas, and, sort of, we like to think of
ourselves as the music capital of the world, in some respects.
Some would debate that, I suppose. But I believe that music can
bring people together in bad parts of the world. It can defeat
radical Islamists; it can defeat the face of terror, as Mr.
Wasfi's cello did that very day. And that is why I think it is
important that we highlight music and other forms of
programming content that promotes peace in places like Iraq
which are so desperate for it.
So, with that, let me thank the committee for its support
of my amendment, and I yield back the balance of my time.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. McCaul.
Do any other members seek recognition?
Mr. Lowenthal is recognized.
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you, Madam Chair.
First, I would like to thank my colleague, Mr. Connolly,
for introducing, with myself and Mr. Sherman and Ms. Bass from
southern California, the amendment to House Resolution 235
recognizing the brave service of search and rescue personnel
from both Fairfax County in Virginia and from my own home
county of Los Angeles County in California. These Americans
traveled all the way to Nepal to help those in need, and we
cannot thank them enough for their service.
I also wish to speak in support of Congressman Salmon's
bill, H.R. 1853. I believe Taiwan is a vital partner of the
United States and a responsible global citizen. Taiwan's
participation in INTERPOL will serve to make us all safer and
promote greater collaboration and cooperation on the
international stage.
Lastly, I would like to express my strong support for the
United States International Communications Reform Act. This
bill will provide a much-needed overhaul of our efforts to
promote freedom of speech and of press across the globe.
I am personally pleased this legislation again includes
language I offered as an amendment last year in support of
shortwave broadcasting. Shortwave broadcasting is a versatile
and effective tool to reach many populations, and I continue to
support its use in regions where repressive regimes do not
allow for independent news sources, such as Vietnam.
I hope the House quickly considers and passes these
important pieces of legislation. And, again, Madam Chair, thank
you, and I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Lowenthal.
And hearing no further requests for recognition, I again
want to thank Ranking Member Engel and all of our committee
members for their contributions and assistance with today's
markup.
And, with that, the committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:47 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Material submitted for the record by the Honorable Brad Sherman, a
Representative in Congress from the State of California

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
