- THE ROLE OF WATER IN AVOIDING CONFLICT AND BUILDING PROSPERITY

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE ROLE OF WATER IN AVOIDING CONFLICT AND BUILDING PROSPERITY

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EUROPE, EURASIA, AND EMERGING THREATS

AND THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON AFRICA, GLOBAL HEALTH,
GLOBAL HUMAN RIGHTS, AND
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 9, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-97

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
96-049PDF                        WASHINGTON : 2015
_________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
Subcommittee on Europe, Eurasia, and Emerging Threats

DANA ROHRABACHER, California, Chairman
TED POE, Texas                       GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
PAUL COOK, California                WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin            TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan

------

Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights, and
International Organizations

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey, Chairman
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         KAREN BASS, California
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
SCOTT DesJARLAIS,Tennessee           AMI BERA, California
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Mr. John Oldfield, chief executive officer, WASH Advocates.......     5
Mr. Denis Bilodeau, 1st vice president, Orange County Water
District Board of Directors....................................    26
Dale Whittington, Ph.D., professor, University of North Carolina.    33

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Mr. John Oldfield: Prepared statement............................     8
Mr. Denis Bilodeau: Prepared statement...........................    28
Dale Whittington, Ph.D.: Prepared statement......................    36

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    56
Hearing minutes..................................................    57

THE ROLE OF WATER IN AVOIDING CONFLICT AND BUILDING PROSPERITY

----------

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 9, 2015

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on Europe, Eurasia, and Emerging Threats and

Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health,

Global Human Rights, and International Organizations,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The subcommittees met, pursuant to notice, at 2:07 p.m., in
room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Dana Rohrabacher
(chairman of the Subcommittee on Europe, Eurasia, and Emerging
Threats) presiding.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I call to order this joint hearing of the
European, Eurasian, Emerging Threat Subcommittee and the
Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights, and
International Organizations for this afternoon's hearing on
issues dealing with clean water, sanitation, and the world.
And I want to thank my fellow members here before I give an
opening statement on my part. Thank you both for the
contributions you have made to this hearing, but also to this
issue over the years. You have both demonstrated such a high
level of morality and concern for fellow human beings that
will, in and of themselves, those concepts and as part of your
soul, will serve our country well in the long run in terms we
do what is right. We do what is good for the world in these
ways, and make it a better world, it is clearly going to have
very positive feedback and blowback on the United States,
rather than negative blowback when all we rely on is weapons
and trying to get things done by sending troops in the last
minute to calm a situation down. So I want to thank you both
for your moral and long-term thinking.
Throughout recent hearings, the Europe and Eurasian
Subcommittee has explored international water cooperation and
discussed examples where water disputes between nations has led
to increased tensions. And today we will be discussing water
from the point of view of human security.
Access to clean water is absolutely essential to each and
every human being. That is why estimates that potentially
billions of people in the coming decades will be living in
water-stressed areas of the world. So this is a very troubling
observation and prediction. Without access to water and the
implications that it holds for personal hygiene, agriculture,
industry, far too many people will be forced to accept lower
standards of living. As Members of Congress concerned with
foreign policy, we must think how this dynamic may spark
conflicts over natural resources or destabilize very fragile
governments.
But this is not only a question for the future. It is a
problem of today. This year, we know hundreds of thousands of
children will needlessly die from diseases caused by a lack of
clean water, plus many more than those hundreds of thousands,
many more will die from some disease that can be traced right
back to a lack of clean water.
The toll in human suffering caused by a lack of water and
dirty water is great, and I am sure witnesses here can explain
those stories and how great a problem and challenge that it is.
Yet, I believe the challenges of access to clean water,
hygiene, and sanitization can be conquered, and we now have it
within our grip, technologically and with the amount of wealth
available in our societies, to actually overcome this enormous
challenge. Our government through USAID has spent over $3.5
billion over the last decade on programs to do just that; not
to mention the efforts of our international partners and
nongovernmental organizations.
I believe that as we continue to advance technologically
and continue to have innovative ideas that we put into
practice, that water scarcity can be managed and mitigated.
Increasing human security when it comes to water access and
hygiene will not only help improve the lives of these millions
of vulnerable people, if not billions of people, but also serve
as the strategic interest of the United States. If increasing
access to clean water at the micro level helps people in
communities to be secure, it follows that their governments
will be better able to find solutions to international water
disputes.
So without objection, all members will have 5 legislative
days to submit additional questions and extraneous material.
But before that, I would like to start off with Mr.
Blumenauer or Mr. Smith. Mr. Blumenauer has sort of been our
partner on this and several other significant matters.
Mr. Blumenauer, would you enlighten us with an opening
statement?
Mr. Blumenauer. Mr. Chairman, thank you. Thank you for the
courtesy of permitting me to join you and Chairman Smith in
this hearing, laying an important foundation. This has been an
area of deep personal concern of mine. I have been pleased that
in recent Congresses we have been able to get a couple of
significant pieces of legislation to focus American foreign
policy on water and sanitation. And I would say that there have
been no two stronger champions in this bipartisan effort than
the two of you. And so I am deeply appreciative of your
leadership and your partnership, and it is truly an honor for
me to join you.
You laid it out, Mr. Chairman. We have got some certified
smart people here who can round out this picture who have been
active in recent years. I have had a chance to meet some, and
have a new acquaintance here. But the intersection of water,
national security, and massive dilemmas in terms of human
wellbeing, are significant. There are 261 waterways that cross
international boundaries. In some cases, like the Danube, it is
19 countries in the heart of Europe.
An unsettling number of some of the largest rivers in the
world no longer flow to the oceans in the course of a year.
They are dry for some or all of that period. More than 40
percent of the world's population already lives in an area of
physical water scarcity.
And competition is fierce. It is estimated that 20 percent
more irrigation water is going to be needed in the next 10
years to keep agriculture going. The Pacific Institute in
California has drawn up a list of conflicts in which water has
played a part, and they have identified over 200, 204 such
incidents where water figured into international conflict. And
61 of those incidents were recent. Looks like the problem is
getting more serious, not less.
We have seen it in the Horn of Africa. Part of the chaos in
Syria was the result of persistent drought that drove people
out of the countryside and into cities where ill-prepared. The
situation we are going to be facing in Yemen.
And I would say one area that I look forward to consulting
with both of you is to see if we might be able to help focus
the United States' efforts in Gaza. No matter what one thinks
about the conflict there, we have almost 2 million people who
are in an area that the water supply is not going to be, any of
it, is going to be fit for human consumption within 2 years.
And within less than 5 years, we think that that condition will
become permanent. Maybe this is a little area that we could
come together to try and deal in a humanitarian sense.
But let me just stop at this point. The National
Intelligence Estimate points out that this is a serious issue
of national security. You have got some of the best people
here. I appreciate your leadership and focus and look forward
to being your partner; maybe not on the committee, but maybe as
an honorary member of your team. Thank you so very much.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And it is
indeed an honor to join you, Chairman Rohrabacher, and I thank
you for your leadership on this extremely important issue.
And, Mr. Blumenauer, it is a delight to be with you again,
and thank you for your legislation, which did become law, which
I think is a landmark piece of legislation. It was very
bipartisan, but you walked point, and I thank you for that
extraordinary leadership as well.
Like you, Mr. Chairman, my subcommittee has had and held
several hearings on health and water, and it is clear that
without adequate supplies of clean drinking water and proper
sanitation no health programming can succeed. Indeed, the World
Health Organization estimates that because of a lack of access
to safe drinking water and sanitation, more than 14,000 people
die daily from water-borne illnesses which cause more than 1
billion cases of intestinal worms, 1.4 million child deaths
each year from diarrhea, 860,000 child deaths each year from
malnutrition, and 500,000 deaths from all age groups each year
from malaria.
I note parenthetically that I have introduced legislation
that we are really pushing hard to enact about neglected
tropical diseases, and it would really take that whole issue to
a new realm of prioritization and backing. But, again, without
water, and without trying to address water needs, all of those
efforts are stymied. And of course, that is integrated into our
bill.
It is troubling that so many people in the world do not
have ready access to water. The U.N. has estimated 2.6 billion
people have gained access to safe drinking water over the last
25 years, but another 663 million continue to lack access as of
this year. Nearly half of these people live in Africa, another
fifth live in South Asia.
As we know, the U.N. Millennium Development Goals, the
MDGs, included a target for access to safe drinking water and
basic sanitation. According to the U.N., global goals for
access for water are being met, but sanitation continues to be
unmet. Of course, that is defined as having globally the
proportion of people who are without sustainable access to safe
drinking water and basic sanitation. So it is a movement in the
right direction, but certainly not an achievement of universal
access.
Over the past 10 years, the U.S. Government has spent $3.5
billion on water, sanitation, and hygiene, or WASH programming.
Nevertheless, even after several water acts passed by Congress
and great international effort to bring countries up to global
WASH standards, U.S. programming still remains somewhat
disjointed. According to the GAO study just being concluded,
there is no uniform model that has been created for WASH
programming. USAID was supposed to present a comprehensive plan
for WASH programming this year, but none has been released as
of this time.
Even if a model program were to be made adaptable to each
country, by now there should be some overall strategy for how
to design a program, monitor its progress, and evaluate its
outcomes. In too many countries in which USAID operates WASH
programs, there is no comprehensive program. Monitoring is
limited and evaluation fails to adequately assess the
statistics being provided by host governments.
The human cost of failure to provide adequate WASH
programming is too high to allow substandard programming to
continue. We will hear that there has been progress made, and
this is indeed promising, but there is more that must be done.
And, again, we have the experts here today to provide a road
map to our committees as to how we should proceed.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much.
Now we have three witnesses. I will be introducing the
three of them. We will have testimony, and then we will have
questions and answers for all three witnesses at the same time.
Let me suggest to the witnesses, if you can summarize in 5
minutes, that would be great and give us more time to have a
bit of a dialogue on this.
We have three wonderful witnesses, as I say. John Oldfield
is the CEO of WASH Advocates. And I am trying to guess, you
have Water and Sanitation Health?
Mr. Oldfield. Hygiene.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Hygiene.
Mr. Oldfield. Hygiene. Health is a good guess, though.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay, there we go--WASH advocates, an
organization dedicated to increasing the awareness of global
WASH challenges and solutions. Previously, he founded two
implementing nonprofit organizations and was with the National
Academy of Sciences, where he researched science and technology
policy.
And next we have from my home county Denis Bilodeau, who is
the vice president of the Orange County Water District, and was
elected to his fourth term in 2012. He is a licensed civil and
traffic engineer, holds a bachelor degree in civil engineering
from the University of California at Irvine.
And let me just note that we in Orange County are proud
that we have what we believe is the most technologically
sophisticated and up-to-date water system in the world. And we
will let him describe that and the implications of that for
these various countries that are facing a serious challenge.
Dale Wittington is a professor at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill in the Department of Environmental
Science and Engineering, and City and Regional Planning. He is
a member of the Technological Committee on the Global Water
Partnership and has served as consultant on water and
sanitation policies to the World Bank, USAID, and numerous
other organizations.
So we have some very, like I say, witnesses that are very
impressive with their credentials.
And may we proceed, Mr. Oldfield?

STATEMENT OF MR. JOHN OLDFIELD, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, WASH
ADVOCATES

Mr. Oldfield. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was pretty proud
of my opening remarks here until I heard yours. It is going to
be hard to beat that. I am gratified that some of the certified
smart people are up there as well. So thank you for yours.
Thank you, Chairman Rohrabacher, Chairman Smith, Ranking
Member Meeks, Ranking Member Bass, and distinguished members,
Mr. Blumenauer, for the opportunity to provide these brief
remarks, which are a summary of my written statement.
Thank you, before I begin, for your interest and your
support for safe drinking water, sanitation, and hygiene
programs throughout Africa, Asia, and Latin America over the
last at least decade.
I also, before I continue, want to recognize and in fact
applaud the U.S. civic organizations, religious groups, student
clubs, corporations, academics, private philanthropists,
nonprofits, and then my fellow panelists, my fellow witnesses,
who are all working to solve this challenge with us today.
Safe drinking water, sanitation, and hygiene are about, its
most simple terms, about the dignity and personal and economic
security of human beings. A life without WASH is a very
difficult one. You may remember a situation 2 years ago where
two young women were raped and murdered in Uttar Predesh,
India, raped and murdered on the way to go to the bathroom in a
field at night. That story actually, I think, helped galvanize
Congress to support the Water for the World Act that was
referenced and to strengthen appropriations language, so thank
you again for that.
And as I was preparing this testimony, I also learned of an
extraordinarily sad situation from my friends at Special
Olympics in Nigeria. A 15-year-old girl with an intellectual
disability was raped on her way to fetch water from a local
river for her school, a state school for students with
intellectual disabilities in southern Nigeria. Now, that girl,
a Special Olympics athlete, faces challenges in life that most
of us can hardly imagine, and a lack of safe drinking water
should not be one of them.
In both of these situations there were larger societal
challenges involved, but if these women had safe drinking water
and a private, safe place to go to the bathroom their lives
would undoubtedly be or have been more secure and more
productive.
Now, beyond these painful stories, there are hundreds of
millions of women who spend far too much of their time and far
too much of their income acquiring, as you have stated, just
enough water to keep themselves and their families alive, if
not actually healthy, on a daily basis. In 2015, hundreds of
millions of women and girls are wasting their lives carrying
water. Imagine what would each of us do if we had an extra 3 or
4 hours a day, how much more secure would we feel, how much
more economically productive would we be?
This is solvable. I think all three of you have said that.
And Congress has been a key ally for well over a decade here.
The Water for the Poor Act of 2005, of course, made safe
drinking water, sanitation, and hygiene a priority of U.S.
foreign policy. The Water for the World Act of 2014 further
directs USAID to make WASH investments with the biggest
contributions to global public health, alongside improved
monitoring and evaluation, enhanced accountability, and
decentralized ownership.
This year, House appropriators reasserted congressional
intent to prioritize WASH and its fundamental contributions to
health and to the security of the world's poorest people. The
appropriators wrote: ``Access to adequate water, sanitation,
and hygiene is a critical component of disease prevention, and
a lack of access to toilets and adequate sanitation impacts
women and girls in particular.''
The global WASH challenge is both an emerging threat and an
emerging opportunity. For 10 years, Congress and both the Bush
and the Obama administrations have provided bipartisan support,
moving WASH efforts to what I considered to be the leading edge
of foreign assistance reform by focusing on strengthening local
capacity and increasing accountability across Africa, Asia, and
Latin America.
However, Congress can further improve human and economic
security across the developing world and should, A, continue to
provide strong oversight of these issues; B, increase the
amount, the effectiveness, and the targeting of annual
appropriations; C, seek additional leverage for U.S. taxpayer
dollars through additional partnerships and innovative finance;
D, make WASH a more prominent piece of our bilateral
relationships with many countries; and E, prioritize water and
sanitation first of all as an important sector in its own
right, but secondly, as the foundation of long-lasting progress
toward public health, conflict prevention, undernutrition, and
economic development.
Now, years ago an early supporter of the Water for the Poor
Act that became law in 2005 said: ``It is the human condition
that must be improved if national security is to be
strengthened.'' You might recall that quote. Sitting here
today, I see no better way to improve the human condition than
by providing safe drinking water, sanitization, and hygiene to
more families and communities across the globe. And I and many,
many others are grateful for your continuing support. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Oldfield follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Rohrabacher. Mr. Bilodeau.

STATEMENT OF MR. DENIS BILODEAU, 1ST VICE PRESIDENT, ORANGE
COUNTY WATER DISTRICT BOARD OF DIRECTORS

Mr. Bilodeau. Thank you, Chairmen Rohrabacher and Smith and
members of the subcommittee. I am Denis Bilodeau and I appear
before you today as an elected member of the Board of Directors
of the Orange County Water District. I am honored to appear
before you to discuss global water scarcity. I will summarize
my statement and request that it be submitted into the formal
hearing record.
As background, the OCWD is located in the 48th
Congressional District in Southern California. We provide
groundwater to 19 cities and water agencies with a population
of 2.4 million. OCWD has led the way in developing innovative
water solutions across a range of technology and
infrastructure.
In the late 1980s, we recognized that to preserve our
region's economic vitality we needed to address groundwater
depletion, seawater intrusion, and unreliable surface water
supplies. We implemented an aggressive program to develop a
water treatment process with our sister agency, which is the
Orange County Sanitization District. This is called the
Groundwater Replenishment System. This system takes treated
wastewater from the Orange County Sanitation District--and when
I say treated wastewater, I speak of sewage--that would
otherwise be discharged into the Pacific Ocean. It implements a
three-step advanced treatment process that consists of
microfiltration, reverse osmosis, and ultraviolet light with
hydrogen peroxide. This treatment and purification process
produces high-quality water that exceeds all State and Federal
drinking water standards and delivers enough water to serve
850,000 people with the production of 100 million gallons a day
currently.
When we think about global water supply needs and the ways
in which to reduce tensions that arise from constrained potable
water supplies and the ability to share experiences,
collaboration is important. OCWD shares its knowledge in
advanced water purification technology.
For example, Singapore enhanced its water security using
our experience and expertise. The country of Singapore has been
principally reliant on water from Malaysia. With political
differences between the nations, and the expiration of long-
term agreements for water transfers between Malaysia and
Singapore, the Public Utility Board of Singapore was tasked
with finding ways to make Singapore more water self-sufficient.
The Singapore PUB reached out to us to learn about technology
that our district was using to purify wastewater and put it
back into the groundwater supplies. Water leaders from
Singapore visited us to see what we were doing to recycle and
purify wastewater and to see how we were communicating with the
public to bolster public support for potable reuse.
Working with us, Singapore developed both purified water,
which they call NEWater, and seawater desalinization to
diversify their portfolio of available water for sources for
the drinking water system, as well as to protect against
depletion of their reserves during drought or interruption of
imported supplies. Singapore also built a secondary system to
enable it to serve high purity water to its high-tech
customers, such as wafer fabricators and circuit board
manufacturers that require highly purified water.
This system of water distribution helped to make Singapore
a desirable place for valuable industrial customers and to help
locate manufacturing facilities.
In 2014, the Orange County Water District was presented
with the Lee Kuan Yew Water Prize for our efforts toward
solving the world's water problems by applying innovative
technology solutions.
We are proud to serve as a global water leader in the water
industry, and at the same time it is just a start. Greater
investments must be made to implement similar projects around
the world. We must continue to create opportunities for water
experts to engage with one another and to exchange information
to keep pushing the envelope and develop new and innovative
solutions to global water problems.
The Singapore-Orange County Water District collaboration is
an example of how American technology transfer can lead to
solutions for global water supply and quality needs for regions
around the world. Again, the Orange County Water District
greatly appreciates the subcommittee's decision to explore this
important national and international water security matter.
Thank you very much for having me.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bilodeau follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Rohrabacher. Mr. Whittington.

STATEMENT OF DALE WHITTINGTON, PH.D., PROFESSOR, UNIVERSITY OF
NORTH CAROLINA

Mr. Whittington. Mr. Chairman, just by chance, I just got
back from 7 weeks in Singapore and had the privilege of seeing
these facilities that Denis has just described. So everything
he is saying is true here. I just was at the Lee Kuan Yew
School.
Thank you very much for the invitation to speak today on
the role of improved water and sanitation services and avoiding
conflict and building economic prosperity. I would like to make
three points in my testimony.
First, there is good news from the public health field.
Thanks in part to the efforts of the United States and the
international community, childhood mortality rates are
declining in developing countries and the rate of decline is
accelerating. And as we look ahead over the next few decades,
economic growth should enable East Asia, Southeast Asia, Latin
America to solve their water supply and sanitation problems and
thankfully water-related mortality will be a thing of the past
in these regions. The remaining challenges are going be to be
in South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa, but even here childhood
diarrhea and mortality rates are falling rapidly.
However, the economic benefits from investments in water
and sanitation infrastructure consist of both health and
nonhealth outcomes, and Denis has just described some of the
nonhealth outcomes in Singapore. There is a shift occurring in
the relative magnitude of these two components with the health
benefits declining and the nonhealth benefits, such as time
savings, increasing.
The nonhealth related benefits of improved water services
vary depending on location, but they can be surprisingly large
and are often increasing. For example, in a recent study
conducted in Kathmandu, Nepal, researchers at the Institute of
Water Policy at the National University of Singapore found that
from 2001 to 2014 the real cost after adjusting for inflation
that households were incurring coping with water shortages and
intermittent contaminated supplies actually doubled from $7 a
month to $14 a month on average. These coping costs include the
value of time spent collecting water from outside the home,
investments in water storage, in-house water treatment, and
expenditures to water vendors, all of which most Americans
never experience.
Investments in improved water services that reduce or
eliminate these coping costs free up a household's time, just
as John just mentioned, and money for other priorities and
increase economic growth. It is really hard for an urban
economy to function efficiently if everyone is worried about
getting home from work to meet a tanker truck in order to have
sufficient water for a week.
I think that this shift from health to nonhealth benefits
has important implications for donor assistance in the WASH
sector. In places where coping costs are high, one can be
confident that the economic benefits of improved water supplies
will also be very high. But the coping costs are not high
everywhere, and careful economic analysis of water and
sanitation infrastructure projects is needed to ensure that
assistance is targeted to communities where it will have the
greatest economic impact. This will also go a large way to
reducing conflict. The best way to avoid conflict is for a
country to get on a high-growth development path.
My second point is that the world's population is becoming
increasingly urbanized and the largest economic benefits of
improved water and sanitation infrastructure usually will be in
cities in developing countries. So if the objective is to
promote economic growth, then it is important to prioritize
investments in urban areas.
Large economic benefits can be obtained not only from
infrastructure investment, but also from policy reforms.
Utilities in cities in low- and middle-income countries almost
always provide water and sanitation services to customers far
below cost. They rely on subsidies from higher-level
governments and donors to pay these subsidies. And recent
research has shown that these subsidies are very poorly
targeted. The majority don't reach poor households.
For my third point I want to shift from the economic
benefits of water and sanitation investments to the
relationship between water and conflict on international
rivers. I know this subcommittee has heard from Paul Sullivan
and his testimony on the implications of the Grand Renaissance
Dam in Ethiopia. However, I have been studying and writing
about the Nile for almost 40 years, and I would be happy to
answer any further questions you have about the situation that
is emerging on the Nile. I would like to just say a few last
things and comments on that situation.
The construction of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam
started in 2011 on the Blue Nile near the Ethiopian-Sudanese
border. It is now about 40 percent complete. When it is
finished the Nile riparians and the global community will face
a new situation in transboundary hydropolitics. There will be
two very large dams, the Aswan High Dam and the GERD, with
over-year storage capacity on the same river in different
countries in a water-scarce basin, and there is presently no
plan for coordinating the operation of those large storage
facilities.
In my judgment, the Nile riparians need assistance from the
international community immediately in reaching a fair,
equitable agreement on the joint operation of the Aswan High
Dam and the GERD based on best global practices. This is a
matter of urgency. Ethiopia will likely begin filling the GERD
in 2016, just next year.
So in summary, I have four recommendations. First, in order
to promote economic growth, assistance in the water supply and
sanitation sector should be focused on South Asia and Sub-
Saharan African cities.
Second, if USAID wants water and sanitation investments
with high economic returns, it should assist countries to do
the economic analysis to identify where economic returns will
be greatest. President Reagan's Executive Order 12291 required
that all major regulations in the United States pass a cost-
benefit test. Why not have USAID assistance to the water sector
pass a similar test?
Third, the United States Agency for International
Development's global water coordinator and the Department of
State's special advisor for water resources should give high
priority to the reform of municipal water pricing and tariffs
in developing countries and to improve the targeting of
available subsidies to poor households.
And finally, fourth, the United States Department of State
should encourage international organizations such as the World
Bank to reengage in the Nile mission. As I said, this is a
matter of urgency for the international community.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whittington follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much.
We have been joined by Dan Donovan.
Do you have any opening statement that you would like to
make before we go into some questions?
Mr. Donovan. No, Mr. Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Rohrabacher. All right, thank you.
Just I will proceed with my time period here. First of all,
about Orange County, I bring people in from all over the world.
I must have in the last 10 years brought in 20 or 30 different
groups of people from foreign countries to see the operation
that is going down there. And it is based on, yes, two
elements. One is a new technology with this membrane technology
being developed to the utmost, but also it deals with the
cooperation of various levels of government. And as you say,
the sanitation department and the water district, I don't know
if sanitation and water districts get along in other places,
but from what I understand, sometimes it is hard for one
department of government to talk to the other department of
government, whether it is Federal, State, or local.
But just as they are doing that, we need to make sure that
at the Federal level we are cooperating between the various
departments and agencies that can have an impact on this issue.
And I have already drawn attention to the fact that when
you have so many people who are facing a future of billions
people without--or a billion people--without clean water, that
is a volatile situation where people are seeing their families
die, and thus undermine the security and the tranquillity of
whatever area that is going on in. For all we know, and I
haven't looked at it yet, but I would hope to find out about
it, that some of these refugees that are pouring into Europe
right now and creating an enormous chaos that Europe just has
not been used to, I would say that there probably is a water
connection there, and several witnesses have alluded to that.
So when our European friends talk about what can be done to
help prevent that, number one, let's make sure people aren't
watching their children die of some disease that wouldn't be
there if they had clean water, and thus they don't feel
compelled about taking their entire family and going to Europe
where they think they can get clean water.
Let me ask this. Has there been an assessment? We were
talking about trying to have some kind of real assessment as to
how effective a program is. Is this lacking? Maybe you could go
into a little more detail on that.
Mr. Whittington. It is hard to do economic analysis of
water projects because it is difficult to measure all of these
benefits. At the same time, I think we have to try. I mean, the
World Bank does it. The Inter-American Development Bank does
it. And I think USAID can do it too.
Warren Buffett doesn't get high returns on capital just by
chance. I mean, he does the economic analysis to figure that
out. And I think it is the same in the water sector. I mean,
there are lots of good investments everywhere, but we should be
focusing our taxpayer dollars on those investments with the
highest economic returns, and you have to do the economic
analysis to figure that out.
Mr. Rohrabacher. And one question for the panel just very
quickly. We had the example of Singapore, where you have this
huge number of people with a very limited amount of water, and
now it is clean water and they are prospering. Is this an urban
challenge or are we talking about more of a development
challenge in terms of clean water? Just go down the row there.
Mr. Oldfield. Sure. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is a fair
question. We have read the demographic data, 51 percent of the
world now lives in cities and urban and peri-urban or informal
settlement environments. So I would certainly second Dr.
Whittington's suggestion to focus on cities to a certain
extent.
But the data also shows that 70 to 75 percent of the
remaining problem, 70 to 75 percent of the 663 million people
without access to safe drinking water, the 2.4 billion people
without a private, safe place to go to the bathroom, are in
rural communities.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Could you please repeat that statistic
that you just gave us?
Mr. Oldfield. Seventy to seventy-five percent of the
remaining need for safe drinking water and sanitation across
the developing world is in rural communities, across Africa,
across Asia, and across Latin America.
Now, that is changing. People are migrating to cities and
informal settlements around cities and so on. So the need is
pervasive everywhere.
I think what ties this all together is what I think the
three of you said in your opening statements: We know how to
solve this. And regardless if it is urban, peri-urban, or rural
villages, in Africa, Asia, or Latin America, we know how to
solve these problems, they now how to solve these problems, and
they need to be solved in a fashion that is both appropriate in
technical terms, in financial terms, and in sociocultural
terms, and these problems need to be solved in a fashion that
is resilient, that is going to build systems that are able to
withstand population shifts, droughts, floods, and so on.
So the systems, whether it is urban, peri-urban, or rural,
need to be both appropriate in a number of terms, a number of
facets of appropriate and resilient.
Mr. Bilodeau. In terms of the Orange County experience, the
technology we are using is primarily applicable to urbanized
areas because you need to have a central collection point for
the wastewater. Then you can then harvest and reuse that water
and deliver it back out to your customers. So it wouldn't be so
applicable in sparsely populated areas, but definitely for
urbanized areas. And our type of system would go hand in hand
in terms of development of a sewage collection system, as well
as a recycling system along with that.
Mr. Rohrabacher. So what you have got is sanitation and
clean water, again----
Mr. Bilodeau. Combined.
Mr. Rohrabacher [continuing]. The importance of putting
those two together.
Mr. Bilodeau. Yes, developing those in conjunction.
Mr. Whittington. So I agree with John that there are huge
problems in rural areas, but I think that there is a tension
between humanitarian aid and pro-growth economic aid. I am not
arguing to do less in rural areas. I just want to focus also on
urban areas because that is where the economic benefits and the
real chance to move economies to a high growth dynamic
trajectory is.
And so as people move from rural areas into cities, there
is a package of infrastructure investments that are critical to
getting economic growth moving, and they include
telecommunications and roads and health and education.
And water is a critical component. Piped water services in
urban areas are what people want. People in developing
countries are just like you. They want 24/7 water that is
potable, that they can drink. And this is feasible. And it is
not only feasible from a humanitarian point of view, it is the
right thing to do from an economic development perspective.
Mr. Rohrabacher. And of course the cleaner water in the
urban area, the less money has to be spent for taking care of
people's health problem, and investment in the water would
negate some of that cost.
Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, all three, for your very, very expert and
informative presentations.
Let me just ask, Dr. Whittington, you have made four
recommendations. Thank you for those. I think they are right on
the money and in terms of things we should be doing.
When you talk about the GERD and the Aswan High Dam and the
status of the negotiations, my question is, what might a
prudent agreement look like? I mean, the time seems to be, you
know, coming and quickly passing. I mean, as you pointed out,
filling of the dam might begin as early as 2016.
You talk about the U.S. Department of State should increase
its diplomatic efforts. What is it doing? How engaged are we?
How would you rate it? Is it enough? Is it something we should
invite State and USAID to be here to give us some insights and
then we could prod them along to try to make this much more
serious?
The GAO study has said USAID WASH interventions don't cover
large water issues such as dams, as you know. So if you could
just give some information or some guidance along those lines.
With regards to sanitation, perhaps one of you, Mr.
Oldfield, perhaps you, might want to provide insights and
recommendations as to why the international community has
failed to meet the MDG targets for sanitation. And even meeting
those targets for the accessibility to clean and safe water,
yeah, we are talking about having the number of those who don't
have access, and that still leaves us, as you know, with over
663 million people who have lacked access to safe water. So it
is a step in the right direction, but it is certainly not the
achievement of the hope is, which would be universal access.
But why is sanitation a laggard?
And let me also ask, in Africa, if it accelerates, as it
is, its march to electrification, the Power Africa and other
initiatives, how should these emerging economies integrate best
practices? And perhaps our friend from Orange County might
speak to that.
As you mentioned Mr. Chairman, you have invited delegations
from other countries to go and witness what they are doing to
share that best practice.
But, I mean, is our government integrating the experts in
the field like yourself so that, you know, Nigeria, Ethiopia,
name the country, you know, can say: Why reinvent the wheel?
This has been perfected to the point, and now that we have
access to electricity that we hadn't had before, that state-of-
the-art sanitation can be deployed in a way that provides for
safety and efficacy of the whole operation.
So if you could speak to that because it seems to me we
have written the book on this. We have done this on a whole lot
of other issues. We have learned from others, but we also as a
country, and I think Europe can say the same thing, has much to
share. But if we are not actively integrating that sharing
process--you are--but, you know, can it be accelerated, should
it be accelerated, and if you could speak to that.
Mr. Bilodeau. Okay, I will go first.
In terms of our experience, we are fortunate that we have
very highly qualified engineering companies, private companies,
that actually designed and built our facilities for us. The
companies are multinational, so they, of course, can go to
Singapore, or there is another plant similar to Singapore's in
Kuwait that General Electric actually built there and operates
it currently.
So in terms of exporting the technology, it is really the
American corporations that are leading the way and that have
the engineering skill and know-how in terms of the design and
the construction.
In terms of at our facility, one thing that we have lended
our expertise to is we do a lot of pilot testing of new
technologies. There is a new technology called graphene that is
in research and development right now that may revolutionize
reverse osmosis membranes and bring the cost of reverse osmosis
treatment down substantially. And so that is something we are
working with Lockheed currently in bench testing basically,
their innovation and trying to bring the cost of treating this
water down, which, of course, will help to export this
technology around the world, and for other applications around
the world.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Mr. Oldfield.
Mr. Oldfield. Great. Thank you for that question, Mr.
Chairman, about sanitation and the MDGs.
There is no easy answer to why the world missed by such a
significant amount the Millennium Development Goal for
sanitation. I will try in about 10 seconds here. Lack of
political will, not just in this country, certainly not just in
this country, but more importantly in developing countries, in
Africa, Asia, and Latin America, simply a lack of political
prioritization, and a lack of financial resources primarily
from developing countries for sanitation.
And then in some places where these things did come
together, I would use India as an example that made a
significant commitment to sanitation throughout 2000 to 2015,
there was an imbalance between hardware and software. They
built a whole lot of toilets and didn't do the behavior change.
They built a lot of hardware and didn't have a lot of software
to back that up. So all of a sudden not just in India, but in
many other parts of the world you have toilets used for
unintended purposes.
If I might take 10 seconds to address the flip side of
that, which is how we are going to address the Sustainable
Development Goals commitment to universal coverage of
sanitation by 2030. It is exactly the opposite. Increased
political commitment and prioritization for sanitation,
appropriate sanitation solutions, so that all 7-plus billion of
us have a place to go to the bathroom on the planet. Political
leaders--and I don't mean sanitation ministers or water
ministers, I mean prime ministers, finance ministers, heads of
state, and heads of government--need to prioritize this, and
that is something that we are trying to work on an a bit. And
therefore, increased financial support for sanitation primarily
from developing countries themselves.
There are a lot of efforts within USAID and up on Capitol
Hill to figure out how to best address this concept of domestic
resource mobilization, DRM. How can we help mobilize more
public and private resources for development challenges,
including sanitation, not from this country, not from the
international donor community, but from developing countries
themselves?
So more political will, more particularly public sector
finance. I think we need to redress this imbalance around the
world between hardware and software. We need to focus on
changing behavior, on changing minds, then the hardware
problems will solve themselves, I think. If everybody wants a
toilet, the public or the private sector is going to come up
with a way to make sure that every single one of those people
has a toilet.
And then lastly, echoing your concerns, I haven't seen
anything about this GAO audit yet, but from what you have
shared with us very briefly, I think I would agree with their
concerns. What I would like to see, not just in the sanitation
space but in the entire WASH space, is Modernizing Foreign
Assistance Network principles of foreign assistance reform,
increased accountability, increased capacity, decentralized
ownership, and increased transparency throughout our foreign
assistance.
Mr. Smith. On that point, do you believe the political will
is emerging, is there, perhaps, to have universal access to
adequate sanitation by 2030, facilitated in the post-2015
goals?
Mr. Oldfield. I do, whether you mean in the developed world
or in the developing world. I mean, this hearing is a
manifestation of increased political will for sanitation in
developing countries from the United States as one member of
the international donor community. The Dutch Government is
doing a fantastic job with this, the British Government, the
German Government. We have a lot of allies in our renewed focus
on sanitation.
But, again, more importantly than that, we are seeing a lot
of increased efforts to prioritize sanitation in developing
countries. And the one example I would give you is Prime
Minister Narenda Modi's commitment to Swachh Bharat Abhiyan,
the Clean India campaign.
A year ago, he committed to universal coverage of
sanitation in India by October 2, 2019, Mahatma Gandhi's 150th
birthday. He is committed to ending open defecation and
providing a toilet and making sure it is used for its intended
purpose to all of India's 1.25 billion citizens within a very,
very short period of time, one example of heightened political
will.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Doctor.
Mr. Whittington. So I will go back to your questions about
the Nile, and I think there were two: What would an agreement
look like and what is the State Department doing? They are both
great questions.
What would an agreement look like? If you go to the Murray-
Darling in Australia or you go to the Colorado where you have
large over-year storage facilities on big rivers in water-
scarce areas, those agreements are hundreds of pages long. And
so the first thing is this is not an easy task. I mean,
somebody has to actually write these agreements and negotiate
these agreements and that takes time and it needs to start very
quickly.
Technically, what has to happen in the agreement is that
Ethiopia is going to be filling the GERD Reservoir, but they
have got to pass enough water down to Sudan and Egypt during
that time so that those countries can meet their essential
needs. Egypt has the Aswan High Dam, so they can buffer this a
little bit if they have storage in the High Dam. Sudan does
not. There is no over-year storage in Sudan. So there has to be
enough water passed to meet the essential needs of Egypt and
Sudan during the filling.
But more importantly, in the long run, there needs to be
coordinated management on the droughts, because that is where
the real conflict could come, if Ethiopia wants to hold back
water on the droughts, and that water is really needed
downstream in Sudan and Egypt.
So this is not hard to do technically, but it has to be
negotiated. And so the key point on the agreement that we are
missing right now, we don't have an agreement, but we also need
a trustworthy, binding arbitrator, and that is where I think
the global community can come in.
I would say that the State Department is active. They are
in Salzburg. The special advisor on water has been working
hard. But I think the visibility of this issue really needs to
rise. There has not been a coordinated international response
on this. It is not just a U.S. concern. It is a concern for
Europe and the World Bank. The World Bank has moved back from
the Nile, they are not as engaged as they were in the past, and
I think this has to change.
Mr. Smith. Thank you. Thank you.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Just one thought before we go to Mr.
Blumenauer. Cairo, Egypt, do we know how many times it reuses
its water? I don't. In many of these countries that we are
talking about, they don't reuse it at all. They just use it
once and it goes into the ocean. In Orange County, California,
how many times do we reuse our water and clean it and reuse it
and clean it and reuse it before it goes back into the ocean?
Mr. Bilodeau. Well, now it is infinite. It is dozens of
times we continually reprocess the water that comes to us.
Mr. Rohrabacher. So at least 9, 10 times we are reusing
that water. We are purifying it again and then reusing it. And
in countries like Egypt on the edge of a desert, this could
mean everything, and especially if you end up with a war or
something between someone upstream and downstream as compared
to just making sure the water you are using, you reuse it over
and over again.
Mr. Blumenauer.
Mr. Blumenauer. Thank you. And, again, I appreciate the
courtesy in permitting me to join the panel.
Dr. Whittington, you mentioned coping costs and cited a
study in Nepal, Kathmandu, where they have doubled to being $14
per----
Mr. Whittington. Per household per month.
Mr. Blumenauer. Per household per month, in a nation with a
per capita income per household----
Mr. Whittington. Yes, you have got me there, I think----
Mr. Blumenauer. Six hundred dollars, $800?
Mr. Whittington. Yeah, it is around $1,000, I think. I
would have to check, you know. It is a good question. I mean,
these may not seem like big numbers to you, but for poor people
in developing countries these are high costs. And when
households save this money, and as John said, save the time,
these can be put to more productive uses and start a country on
a path to, you know, economic growth.
But it is really hard to do that if you are spending all of
your time, you know, scrambling around a big city trying to
figure out how to get water for your family.
Mr. Blumenauer. But it struck me, that seems like a very
high number to me, thinking about what happens in these
developing countries. And it raises the point, I think we are
looking at, the number I have heard quoted, 155 million hours a
day is spent by women and girls, often, as Mr. Oldfield points
out, putting themselves at risk, to secure water for the
families, often dirty water. They end up in many developing
countries paying a huge amount of their disposable income, to
say nothing of money that is not being spent.
I am wondering if you, Doctor, or actually any of the
members of the panel would care to comment on our capacity to
actually self-fund much of what needs to be done if we are able
to get an early intervention, maybe help a little bit of
capital expenditure, help a little bit with the planning and
development, and as our chairman says, where there are some
pretty fundamental areas of savings that aren't being employed.
You want to talk about the potential of self-funding this?
Mr. Whittington. It is a great question, and actually
Water.org is doing just this right now with microfinancing
water projects in developing countries. So they are putting
money into communities that are borrowing and then repaying
those loans to get sustainable high-quality water and
sanitation services. So I think your point is exactly right.
Where coping costs are high, and those savings are real, you
know, in dollars and time, there are great opportunities for
self-financing water and sanitation projects.
Mr. Oldfield. Yeah. If I might add 30 seconds to that, I
would ask you to consider taking a look at USAID's recent
``Safeguarding the World's Water'' report. I was looking at it
in preparing for this hearing, looking for success stories of
how water contributes to economic prosperity.
I would highlight that the partnerships office of the
Development Innovation Ventures team at USAID has recently
provided financial support to a group called Sanergy. It is the
sort of front-end catalytic financial support that you are
talking about, Mr. Blumenauer. And Sanergy then takes these
funds, franchises toilets to entrepreneurs outside of Kenya who
collect the waste, turn it into organic natural fertilizer, and
make a profit--I think it is per toilet--of up to 2,000 U.S. a
year, and several of these entrepreneurs have much more than
one toilet. So it is a real business opportunity.
I would highlight USAID's SUWASA, the Sustainable Water and
Sanitation in Africa Program, as well, which is not just
focused on one technology or one business or financial model,
but doing what it can to promote various commercial solutions
and financial stability.
It is the sort of, I won't get into too much detail on this
right now, but it is the sort of, I think, catalytic front-end
financial and technical assistance that the U.S. taxpayer,
through its trustees, through their trustees, and through
USAID, should be providing. We should be first in, not last
out. We should be the catalyst, not the one running around with
the used drilling rig drilling wells. That is my take. I think
we get a much bigger bang for the taxpayer dollar with programs
like that.
Mr. Bilodeau. Yes. And briefly, I agree with Mr. Oldfield
in that. USAID has led the way in terms of international
financing. In our case, our entire program has cost $600
million to build. Much of that was financed by ourselves and
some help from the State of California, and also we have
received $20 million from the Title XVI Program.
But we provide water for 850,000 people now with our
system, and so you can understand the economies of scale there
and the metrics.
Mr. Blumenauer. Thank you. It is part of what we have
attempted to do in the more recent reform legislation, is to
focus on investments that the United States is involved with
that are more sustainable, not using inappropriate technology
or getting people started and then they don't have the
wherewithal to continue with it.
Mr. Chairman, I would hope that as a result of some of this
conversation there would be an opportunity to do a little
deeper analysis of what we can do on the ground to help provide
the foundation, because done right, it seems to me clear the
evidence is that we can have programs that are actually
affordable if they get over that initial hurdle in terms of
understanding the technology, maybe having a little upfront
financing, maybe not even grants, but financing, that there is
enough money involved with some of these really in some cases
tragic conditions that we could make a big difference.
Mr. Rohrabacher. We do plan a second and probably third
hearing on this issue in which we will be covering exactly the
type of areas you are suggesting.
Mr. Blumenauer. Great. Thank you very much.
Mr. Rohrabacher. And now we have Mr. Dan Donovan.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am the newest
member of this committee. I have been in Congress for 4 months.
I don't want you to get confused. This is my first time sitting
on the upper tier. I am usually down there by where it says
``staff only.'' So this is my first exposure----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Don't get used to it.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Chairman.
This is my first exposure to your expertise to the probing
questions of my colleagues. My understanding of the issue is
just what I have read over the years. So my limited
understanding and it is more general is that the problem is
caused by droughts, it is caused by having adequate water but
it is not safe water, there is safe water that is adequate for
people but there is not infrastructure to get it to people. It
is regimes or governments who have adequate water and
infrastructure but won't allow their people access to it.
Are these the problems that you are facing, that these
countries that you are talking about are facing, and is our
country doing its share or enough to help? To anyone.
Mr. Oldfield. Well, thank you, Mr. Donovan. I think the
easy answer to your question is yes. It is all of the above.
Name a challenge associated with safe drinking water,
sanitation, or hygiene, and people are facing it. Sometimes it
is a lack of water.
But I guess I would quote an academic named Hans Rosling
who said: The biggest environmental challenge on the planet
today is that 1 billion people are drinking their neighbor's
lukewarm feces. These people are not dying of thirst, they are
dying of shit in the water. They are drinking each other's
feces. And that is what is killing 500,000 children minimum
each year.
The key, the flip side of your question is that this is
solvable. The folks at this table, the folks up on the dais
there understand how to solve this problem. I believe that the
U.S. Government is doing a lot. I think you heard a figure of
$3.5 billion for water and sanitation programs over the last
10, 12 years. That is a lot.
I personally am up here to advocate that we can do not just
more, but that we can do better by addressing some of the
concerns that Chairman Smith brought up earlier about how to
build local capacity, how to decentralize ownership, how to
make sure that we are actually working ourselves out of a job,
not creating further dependencies in Africa, in Asia, and Latin
America. And I would be happy in your first year here to spend
some more time with you or your staff on this to bring you up
to speed. And I would also direct you to Mr. Blumenauer's
office and to Mr. Poe's office, who were the key sponsors of
the Water for the World Act last year.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you.
Mr. Bilodeau. Yes. And briefly, as he mentioned, the key is
that many of these areas are lacking the proper sanitation
facilities. The sanitation facility is essentially the river.
And if we could help developing countries develop proper
sanitation facilities in concert with water reuse facilities,
it solves two problems simultaneously.
Mr. Whittington. I will just tell you about a puzzle that
we have in the sector. We have a lot of nonpipe technologies
that work and are cheap, they are effective, and they save
lives. But household demand for these services is often low.
And on the other hand, household demand for pipe services, 24/7
water supply, bottled water, like you have got, is very high.
But the problem is these are very expensive and they are very
capital intensive.
So those are the two kind of things that we wrestle with in
this sector. And it gets back to this issue of financing. How
do we finance improved pipe systems for urban areas to promote
growth and dynamic economies? I mean, that to me is one of the
real challenges we face. We know how to save lives, and we
should do it, with cheap, cost-effective technologies. But
people want more than that, and they want economic growth, and
they want the convenience of piped water in their homes. And so
that is the challenge that we struggle with in this sector--one
of the challenges we struggle with.
The other thing I would say about struggling, water
problems are local and solving them requires local capacity,
local institutions, and local expertise. So one of the
challenges we have got is building local capacity, building
local institutions, because the solutions are not the same
everywhere. So it is an educational task that we have got, an
institutional building task, and we all know those are really
hard.
Mr. Donovan. I thank you all for your enlightenment.
I yield the rest of my time, Chairman.
Mr. Rohrabacher. And last but not least, Mr. Clawson.
Mr. Clawson. Thank you for coming today. I have got two
questions or comments that I would like you all to respond to,
so I will throw them out one at a time.
So my district is--the southern tip is Marco Island. I have
got the west tip of the Everglades, go up north along the
coast, Naples, Bonita Springs, Fort Myers, Cabbage Key, great
place. I think I have got the best district of all--wonderful,
welcoming people, and I love it there. That is another
conversation.
I am always concerned about diseases from mosquitos that
come from water because we don't do well with drainage and
pooling. And I am worried about that personally because I see
chikungunya right around the corner. I see dengue fever right
around the corner. It is all over the Caribbean, as far south
as Brazil. And it just feels like it is knocking on our door
and it is just a question of time.
And I am always worried about how we do with--you know,
when I drive around my district, I am looking at a lot of
pooling water and I compare that to the developing world where
they don't do anything, particularly if it is a bad rainy
season. And then you have 10 percent of the population of the
world gets dengue fever; chikungunya is blowing up everywhere.
We have this conversation today and until now I don't think
anybody has even brought it up.
And I think of Southeast Asia and the rainy seasons there,
and India. And, look, I am all with you on toilets and wells,
but it feels like the global conversation about water
sanitation and usability is behind the curve with respect to
mosquitos because we beat malaria, which is a nocturnal, rural
problem, and now we have chikungunya and dengue fever which is
an urban, daytime problem.
So that is number one. Do we, as a country and as a globe,
do we do any work on that?
The second thing is to Mr. Oldfield's comments, my
experience in development in South America and Southeast Asia
is that if folks are at risk a little bit, skin in the game--on
the well or on the toilet, the septic system--however basic it
is, that they tend to keep it up more. And that a lot of the
500,000 that are dying every year--I am a lot more open-minded
to spending taxpayer money if the end user has skin in the
game.
And that is not a conservative's way of saying I don't want
to help, because we have all spent a big chunk of our life
trying to help. But if the model makes everyone in the supply
chain have skin in the game, then I think what I have seen is
that we have better usage of the money.
So I would just ask you all's quick response to my two
comments. First of all, if you think I am all wet on the
mosquito thing, just tell me right up. And then, Mr. Oldfield,
you can comment on the other one.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I don't think all wet was what you really,
wet.
Mr. Whittington. I don't think you are all wet on dengue. I
think it is a serious concern. I would say that there has been
rapid progress on a dengue vaccine and I would get ready to use
it. You need to be ready to deploy that in your district when
it is----
Mr. Clawson. I am really glad you--look, Dr. Whittington,
if you ever have time for a conference call with my team we
would love to hear it. I read a year or 2 ago that they are
working on a vaccine in Singapore or in Asia somewhere. I
assume it is from outside the U.S. Is that right?
Mr. Whittington. It is outside the U.S. The International
Vaccine Institute in Seoul has made great progress on this and
some of the pharmaceuticals. And so I would be happy to talk to
you about----
Mr. Clawson. And does it work on all four strains of dengue
fever or----
Mr. Whittington. You have got me on that. But they are very
happy about the preliminary results from the trials on this. So
that is something that I would get ready to use.
Mr. Clawson. We are very interested because we see
ourselves right behind the Keys in terms of----
Mr. Whittington. I just mentioned I got back from
Singapore, and they are monitoring very closely dengue cases
when they pop up, they send people in to figure out where it
came from, and they are really trying hard to stay on top of
mosquito control. But I think your concern is exactly right. I
mean, this is a real risk.
Mr. Clawson. Yeah. My guys tell me the type of mosquito
that spreads dengue is there, but the infection is not yet in
south Florida. So it just feels like a question of time before
we, and I am going to be dealing with this, and if we can see
it coming----
Mr. Whittington. I think you are right.
So your second point was about wells and skin in the game,
and I also agree completely with you on that point, and it
relates back on the other question about financing and
microfinancing, getting people to pay for these services as
well.
I would say that from our perspective competition in this
business is useful. And one of the great advances, one of the
best things that has happened in Sub-Saharan Africa in the last
couple decades in the WASH sector has actually been the
presence of Chinese contractors competing for contracts in the
rural water sector, and they really halve the price of wells.
So the price of drilling wells, in old technology, you
know, we have been having wells around for 5,000 years, but the
Chinese contractors have come and competed in a market-based
system for those contracts to drill wells in rural areas and
have won contracts and cut the price in half. So there is a
market in this business that----
Mr. Clawson. My experience in this is that when we do the
financial calculation, the return, either a net present value
or IRR, we leave out the cost avoidance of hepatitis C or the
other things that bad toilets cause, and therefore developing
countries understate the return on investment for proper
sanitation. Am I right about that? Mr. Oldfield maybe?
Mr. Oldfield. Well, I think that is right, and I would just
add time savings to that. Once you factor in the 3, 4, 6 hours
a day that a lot of these women around Africa, Asia, and Latin
America spend hauling water contaminated with human feces on
their heads, pretty much every WASH project is financially
viable. And I know that doesn't satisfy you from an NPV or an
IRR perspective, but it needs to be factored in there.
Mr. Clawson. No, I think if you take cost avoidance in--no,
I disagree. I mean, I think if you take cost avoidance in and
the cost of ringworm and everything else that goes with bad
water--I mean, I am conservative, but I am right with you all
on that. I mean, I think the financial models, if we take all
aspects into account--first of all, saving people's lives,
which is always more important--then I am right with you. But I
think that if we ignore the cost avoidance and if we leave the
end user out of the risk stream, then we come up with
corruption and other problems.
Do you agree with me on that, Mr. Oldfield?
Mr. Oldfield. Well, I do. I think you are on the right
track here. And I am constantly looking for more ways to
justify, my job is to encourage Americans, both public and
private, to do more and better in tackling the world's WASH
challenge, water, sanitation, and hygiene. One of our key
messages is that every dollar invested in WASH provides a $4
return, according to the World Health Organization, and that $4
in return, it is not a financial return, it is barely an
economic return. What it is, it is a social return.
Most of that comes from increased--well, I guess it is
economic ROI--increased economic productivity because of extra
hours in your day. But a significant percentage of that 4-1 ROI
does come from decreased healthcare costs as well.
It is not an emerging field, but there is new research
coming out on this all the time because it is, exactly as you
said, it is awfully difficult to quantify precisely.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I would like to thank our witnesses today.
This is, again, a second in a series of hearings that we will
have on water. And some of the areas that have been outlined by
Mr. Blumenauer we are going to be looking at. And we want to--I
think that we have really opened up an area of discussion on
policy that could be of great value and accomplish some things
in a very cost-effective way.
So I want to thank you for helping start this dialogue on
water, and we will continue in the next hearing, but this one
is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:20 p.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
