- GET IT RIGHT THIS TIME: A VICTIMS- CENTERED TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

GET IT RIGHT THIS TIME: A VICTIMS CENTERED TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS
REPORT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON AFRICA, GLOBAL HEALTH,
GLOBAL HUMAN RIGHTS, AND
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 22, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-185

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

99-554 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            GRACE MENG, New York
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights, and
International Organizations

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey, Chairman
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         KAREN BASS, California
CURT CLAWSON, Florida                DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          AMI BERA, California
DANIEL DONOVAN, New York

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

The Honorable Mark P. Lagon, president, Freedom House............     6
Mr. Matthew Smith, executive director, Fortify Rights............    20
Ms. Jinhye Jo, president, NKinUSA................................    37
Ms. Maria Werlau, president, Free Society Project................    43

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

The Honorable Mark P. Lagon: Prepared statement..................    10
Mr. Matthew Smith: Prepared statement............................    23
Ms. Jinhye Jo: Prepared statement................................    40
Ms. Maria Werlau: Prepared statement.............................    47

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    84
Hearing minutes..................................................    85
The Honorable Christopher H. Smith, a Representative in Congress
from the State of New Jersey, and chairman, Subcommittee on
Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights, and International
Organizations: Preliminary list of political prisoners in Cuba.    86

GET IT RIGHT THIS TIME: A VICTIMS-
CENTERED TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT

----------

TUESDAY, MARCH 22, 2016

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health,

Global Human Rights, and International Organizations,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2 o'clock
p.m., in room 2167 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon.
Christopher H. Smith (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Subcommittee will come to order,
and good afternoon to everyone and thank you for being here.
Just I'd like to begin this hearing first noting that in
President Obama's press conference with Raul Castro yesterday,
Raul Castro said that there were no political prisoners, daring
people to come up with a list of political prisoners in Cuba.
I have in my hand a list of 50 political prisoners,
compiled by my good friend, Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, from
information provided by a number of democracy and human rights
organizations.
And without objection, I would like to make that list part
of the record. One of those people is Alexander Reyes,
sentenced to 5 years in prison on March 2, 2016, just a few
days ago.
His crime? Tossing fliers with anti-government messages on
the street. In fact, to punish him further he went from one
prison to the notorious Kilo 8 Prison.
Then there's the example of Yasiel Espino Aceval, who went
on a hunger strike last year in protest of the abuses and
torture meted out to political prisoners by the Castro
brothers' goons.
And just this past Sunday, hours before President Obama was
to arrive in Cuba, Baptist pastor and religious freedom
activist, the Reverend Mario Felix Lleonart Barroso, was
arrested by the Castro regime, as well as his wife, Yoaxis, who
was placed under house arrest.
I want to welcome you to today's hearing, ``Get It Right
This Time: A Victims-Centered Trafficking in Persons Report,''
at which we will look closely at the records of several
countries, including Cuba, China, Malaysia, Oman, and Burma and
others, whose trafficking tier rankings were manipulated and
falsified for political reasons in last year's report.
As the sponsor of the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of
2000, America's landmark law to combat human trafficking, which
among its many policy provisions created the Trafficking in
Persons Report and the tier rankings, I am extremely
disappointed and concerned that last year's TIP Report gave a
pass to several countries meriting a Tier 3 ranking, countries
whose trafficking victims desperately needed protection and
America's powerful voice.
The 2015 TIP Report failed many of the victims, and the
victims deserve better. The politically contrived passing grade
for failing governments was exposed by a series of
investigative reports by Reuters, and I and many others and
anyone involved in human rights are grateful to Reuters for
those articles.
And they found that the professionals at the State
Department at the TIP office made one set of recommendations,
only to be overruled at a higher level for political reasons.
For example, the TIP office recommended the Tier 3 ranking
for Cuba, China, Malaysia, and Oman--14 countries in all--and
this was rejected by the Obama administration at a higher level
in last year's report.
Each of the 14 countries were then given passing grades.
Alexandria Harney, Jason Szep, and Matt Spetalnick of Reuters
authored several incisive reports, including an expose, on
China's politicized ranking, finding, ``Two years after China
announced it was ending the reeducation through labor system,
extrajudicial networks of detention facilities featuring
torture and forced labor thrive in its place.''
China had deceived the United States in 2014 and when that
became apparent last year, we let them keep on with their ill-
gotten upgrade on the tier ranking.
The State Department must get the TIP Report right or we
will lose the foundational tool created by the TVPA to help the
more than 20 million victims of trafficking enslaved around the
world.
In the end, the Trafficking in Persons Report is all about
victims. The threshold question must be, as Ambassador Mark P.
Lagon included in his 2008 TIP Report, ``a country's
performance is based strictly on this trafficking-specific
criteria stipulated by the TVPA.''
A tier ranking is about protecting vulnerable lives--lives
destroyed or saved by the on-the-ground impact of a
government's action or inaction.
We have seen many countries take a Tier 3 ranking seriously
and make real, systemic, and sustainable changes that improve
their tier rankings but, more importantly, protected
trafficking victims, and countries such as South Korea and
Israel come to mind.
When the Bush administration branded South Korea and
Israel, two of our closest allies, but based on their records
branded them as Tier 3, both countries reacted, enacted and
implemented robust policies to combat human trafficking, and
were given earned upgrades for their verifiable actions.
But today we've seen other countries attempt to end-run
around the accountability system with endless empty promises of
action or mostly meaningless gestures of compliance.
Congress, in 2003, created the Tier 2 Watch List for those
countries, which many have undertaken significant anti-
trafficking steps late in the evaluation year.
Unfortunately, this ranking is being misused to reward
insignificant actions and to enable irresponsibility. How would
the 16-year-old girl being pimped, legally, in Cuba's sex
tourism industry rank Cuba on human trafficking? I can assure
you, not with a politically motivated passing grade.
How would a Rohingya migrant trapped in Malaysian forced
labor rank Malaysia when his trafficker laughs at the mention
of penalties?
How would the sex trafficking victim forced to do labor in
a Chinese detention center year after year, or be sent back to
torture and death in North Korea rank China?
How would a young boy rank Burma, when he has been forced
to labor for the military while his sister is turned into a
modern-day ``comfort woman''?
Tier rankings are about real prosecutions, real prevention
and real protection for real people who are suffering as
slaves.
Cuba is an egregious example of a nation being given an
unwarranted passing grade because of other non-human
trafficking considerations.
Just read the report. The report leads you to the
inevitable conclusion--stamp it Tier 3 egregious violator.
Yet, President Obama is there today hobnobbing with the
very people who are kept in power by the profits of slave
labor. The very people who do not have a law against labor
trafficking. The very people whose hotels are filled with sex
tourists who come to Cuba specifically to sexually exploit
minors.
My latest anti-trafficking law, it's the fourth so far, the
International Megan's Law fights sex tourism but assumes a
willing, not profiting, partner country. Some tourists go to
Cuba because Cuba facilitates sex trafficking. Cuba also
harbors criminals--just ask the family of Werner Foerster, a
New Jersey State Trooper who was gunned down at a traffic stop
by Joanne Chesimard. Cuba protects Chesimard to this day.
Maria Werlau will testify this afternoon that, ``What makes
the Cuban case unique, as well as astounding is, that
trafficking is a huge operation run by the government through
numerous state enterprises with . . . accomplices,
participants, sponsors, and promoters all over the world,'' and
that the Cuban dictatorship is involved in ``four main sources
of human trafficking--export services for temporary workers,
forced labor and sex trafficking, state-sponsored or forced
migration, and export sales of human body parts. Our State
Department Trafficking in Persons Report, however, ``addresses
only two of these aspects and, in my view, quite poorly,'' she
says in her testimony.
The trafficking rankings should not be used as cheap chits
and sweeteners than can be compromised in the hope of bringing
about better governmental relations with Cuba, or any other
nation. Rather, better relations with Cuba or any other nation
should be preconditioned on real protection for Cuba's
prostituted children and women and recognition of labor
trafficking.
The President, seems to me, is lending his stature,
particularly as a Nobel Peace Prize winner, to the very people
who are imprisoning human rights advocates at a higher rate
than ever.
Cuba's actions prove once again that lifting accountability
only emboldens evil. The TIP Report was meant to hold countries
accountable for their failures to fight human trafficking.
It was meant to speak truth to power. It was meant to speak
for the trafficking victims waiting, hoping, and praying for
relief. In 2016, the TIP Report must rank the governments on a
country's performance that is ``based strictly on the
trafficking-specific criteria,'' as Ambassador Lagon has said
is ``stipulated by the TVPA.''
Every ranking must be assigned without--I repeat, without
any political manipulation and without any dishonesty. Get the
tiers right in 2016. The lives of many of the weakest and the
most vulnerable and U.S. credibility hang in the balance.
I'd like to yield to Mark Meadows for any comments he might
have.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ambassador, good to see you again. Thank you for your
work. Mr. Smith, welcome back, and certainly nice to meet you.
And Mr. Chairman, I would be remiss if I didn't mention the
fact that you had been not only tenacious on this particular
topic but unrelenting and unyielding in your resolve and I
appreciate that, but more importantly, express my appreciation
perhaps for the hundreds of thousands of children that are
being trafficked across the country, across the world, that the
political nature of manipulating the TIP Report directly harms.
And I think that that's the underscoring message that
should be brought forth here today is when we play politics
with the TIP Report, those nations who see the need to become
more aggressive in combating human trafficking and go from Tier
3 to Tier 2 put actions with their words.
And if, indeed, they believe that for political reasons
that they can bypass the TIP Report, either through economic
manipulation, through bilateral trade agreements or the like,
then they never addressed the underlying problem.
They start to address it in other ways to make sure that
they get off of that list, knowing that it has very little to
do with human trafficking and everything to do with either
their diplomacy or how they get involved in other aspects that
are important to the United States.
So I look forward to your testimony today. I've been one
of, I believe, six of my colleagues who have signed on to a
letter asking for the split memos as it relates to the TIP
office's decisions that have been made because there is a
recommendation was made and obviously those split memos would
give us real insight from the State Department on the why of
those decisions and who made those decisions.
And with that, I look forward to the expert testimony. It's
good to have you back and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Thank you very much, Mr. Meadows.
I'd like to now introduce our distinguished witnesses,
beginning first with Ambassador Mark P. Lagon, who is currently
the president of Freedom House, the first independent American
organization to advocate the advancement of freedom and
democracy around the world.
Ambassador Lagon's long and distinguished career also
includes the distinction of being our third Ambassador-at-Large
to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons who leads the
Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons at the U.S.
Department of State.
His record of involvement in human rights is long and
diverse, spanning from Deputy Assistant Secretary in the Bureau
of International Organization Affairs, with responsibility for
human rights, humanitarian issues, and the United Nations
reform through academia where he was the chair for global
politics and security at Georgetown University's master of
science in foreign service program and adjunct senior fellow
for human rights at the Council on Foreign Relations.
Notably, Ambassador Lagon has also served as the executive
director and chief executive officer of the anti-human
trafficking nonprofit the Polaris Project.
We'll then hear from Mr. Matthew Smith, who is founder and
executive director of Fortify Rights and a 2014 Echoing Green
global fellow. He has previously worked with Human Rights Watch
and Earth Rights International.
Mr. Smith's groundbreaking research has exposed wartime
abuses and forced displacement and crimes against humanity and
ethnic cleansing, multibillion-dollar corporation development
induced abuses and other human rights violations.
He has also written for a variety of major media outlets.
Before moving to Southeast Asia in 2005, Mr. Smith worked with
Kerry Kennedy of the Robert F. Kennedy Center for Justice and
Human Rights on Speak Truth to Power. He also worked as a
community organizer and an emergency services case worker.
Mr. Smith flew halfway around the world to be with us today
so we're very grateful for that sacrifice that he has made to
be with us today.
We'll then hear from Ms. Jinhye Jo, who was born in North
Korea, and she lived there from 1987 to 1998. During this time,
she lost her father, grandmother, and younger brothers because
of hunger.
Her older sister disappeared and is believed to have been
trafficked into China. In 1998, she escaped from North Korea to
China with her mother and younger sister, Grace.
They suffered tremendously in China for about 10 years,
surviving four repatriations to North Korea because they were
considered illegal migrants by China.
Finally, in 2008 Jinhye Jo and her family were able to come
to the United States with refugee status. She formed a
nonprofit organization called North Korean Refugees in the
United States and has directly rescued North Korean females who
were victims of trafficking and other refugees--and assisted
other North Korean refugees with resettlement in the United
States. Thank you again for traveling so far to be here with us
today.
And then we'll hear from Ms. Maria Werlau, who co-founded
in 2002 the Free Society Project and still heads the project, a
nonprofit organization to advance human rights through research
and scholarship.
Its leading initiative, the Cuba Archive: Truth and Memory
Project, focuses on transitional justice issues and human
exploitation.
Ms. Werlau is a former second vice president of Chase
Manhattan Bank and a longtime independent consultant
specializing in Cuban affairs and other international issues.
Her extensive publications on Cuba cover a wide range of
topics including policy, international law, foreign investment,
and other economic issues.
She has served on task forces on U.S.-Cuba relations for
the Council on Foreign Relations and the American Enterprise
Institute. Thank you as well.
I'd like to now yield to Ambassador Lagon such time as he
may consume.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MARK P. LAGON, PRESIDENT, FREEDOM
HOUSE

Ambassador Lagon. Thank you very much, Chairman Smith, Mr.
Meadows, members of the subcommittee.
I'm really pleased to again take part in your annual
oversight effort. I'm very happy to be back. I appreciate your
annual oversight effort to anticipate an upcoming Trafficking
in Persons Report.
Many associate trafficking with movement and migration of
people, one of the vernacular connotations of trafficking. But
while trafficking often involves migration, it need not.
Words also associated with poverty, trafficking is seen as
created by poverty. But I'd really like to drive home today
that trafficking is not so much solely about being poor as it
is about poor governance, poor rule of law, and poor access to
justice.
The most vulnerable to trafficking are groups denied equal
protection under the law: minorities, migrants, women, and
those who happen to be in multiple ones of those categories.
When I was the director of the TIP office at State, I asked
for the following passage to be placed into the introductory
analysis in the 2008 report and I've included the passage in
full in my written testimony that I'd ask you to admit to the
record kindly.
But let me read a short part:

``Our broad study of the phenomenon of trafficking
corroborates that healthy vital democratic pluralism is
the single most prevalent feature of states conducting
effective anti-trafficking efforts. A vibrant democracy
is the best guarantor of human dignity and respect for
the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all
persons including women, children, prostituted people,
and foreign migrants who are among the most vulnerable
populations susceptible to trafficking.''

One official at the State Department actually fought with
me about including this passage, questioning whether it was
necessary to become democratic to fight TIP.
My response to him in negotiating the final text of the
report was no, but it sure helps. Governance, rule of law,
access to justice, and democracy in full, and not just
elections, are at the heart of Freedom House's work. My
executive vice president lauded me for what I included in the
2008 report as if I knew I was going to be working for Freedom
House later.
Well, Freedom House started putting out reports that gave
grades to other countries and to the United States 29 years
before even the first TIP Report.
The latest Freedom in the World report that was released in
January shows that more countries have gone in the wrong
direction--72 countries--than in the right direction--the
largest gap between those figures in 6 years.
In every one of the last 10 years, more countries have
declined in political rights and civil liberties than those
that have improved and that is the first time of a decade-long
slide in the 44 years of the report.
If you look at the subscores of political rights and civil
liberties measured consistently by Freedom House since 1972,
the biggest declines are in three areas, all pertinent to human
trafficking: freedom of expression for civil society and the
press to call attention to the problem, freedom of association
for labor unions and civil society groups to stand up for the
vulnerable, and the rule of law to fight corruption.
Anticipating the 2016 TIP Report, let's look at a few
countries of particular concern in Freedom House's analysis and
some countries of hopeful improvement in my organization's
estimation.
As for countries of particular concern, let's look at
Malaysia in East Asia. It's ranked partly free in the 2016
edition of Freedom in the World. If the best score for Freedom
House is a one and the worst score, least free, is is seven, a
one to seven scale, it gets a four for both political rights
and civil liberties.
That country represented the single most striking and
suspect ranking in last year's report, upgraded rather than
getting Tier 3, presumably to keep it viable for the Trans-
Pacific Partnership.
Let me say, I and Freedom House are for the Trans-Pacific
Partnership to create a context of rule of law, rules of the
game, for states. But as it stands today, Malaysia doesn't
deserve to be part of that amalgam.
In the Middle East and North Africa, Qatar is ranked not
free in Freedom of the World, receiving a score of six for
political rights and five for civil liberties.
Revelations in the press about construction of facilities
for upcoming international competitions and for American
universities' campuses make Qatar all the more troubling than
the standard vulnerability for women and migrants that exist in
Gulf countries.
It's gotten Tier 2 Watch List for 2 years. A very sceptical
eye is due, if it were to be given a waiver or a change.
Saudi Arabia is one of the 12 worst human rights abusers in
the world, according to Freedom in the World, receiving the
lowest possible score of seven for both political rights and
civil liberties.
It doesn't even have the pretext that exists for other
countries in the Gulf that say that their foreign workers
massively outnumber their local population. It's only a 56-
percent total for the foreign workers in Saudi Arabia.
It is most important to the region if Saudi Arabia were to
make reforms. It's the big player on the block. Smaller players
have pretexts for not acting if the big player doesn't act.
It shouldn't be given a carrot to induce change. It needs
to be rewarded for real change. The Tier 2 Watch List ranking
last year deserves scrutiny.
And Cuba is ranked not free in Freedom of the World, with a
seven for political rights and a six for civil liberties. It
hasn't made much progress whatsoever despite the resumption of
diplomatic relations.
It was raised to Tier 2 Watch List and that raised some
eyebrows, properly. Profoundly unfree conditions for workers
without an independent voice from state power and the raucous
sex trade that Chairman Smith has already referred to marketed
to tourists abroad remain reasons for close examination.
There are some rays of hope. In Asia, Myanmar is ranked not
free but with signs of improvement with its huge voter turnout
for an overwhelming victory for Aung San Suu Kyi and her party.
Yet armed military attacks against religious and ethnic
minorities in the Kachin State and widespread discrimination
and attacks against the Rohingya remain serious problems.
Myanmar ought not to be given a pass or an unfounded bonus
despite some reasons for optimism.
Sri Lanka is ranked partly free in Freedom of the World.
Importantly, in 2015 voters in Sri Lanka ousted the
increasingly authoritarian President Mahinda Rajapaksa and
replaced him with Maithripala Sirisena.
Sirisena, when taking office, overturned some of the most
repressive policies that existed before and, again, repairing
relations with the country's Tamil minority and the
international community.
Trafficking in Sri Lanka could involve a number of reasons.
The South Asia bonded labor syndrome, one might call it--Sri
Lankan migrant workers given insufficient help by their
government abroad, male and female sex trafficking, among other
reasons.
Just because there are reasons for optimism isn't a reason
for grade inflation.
In the Middle East, Tunisia is the one country that has
truly flowered since the Arab Spring with a score of one for
political rights and three for civil liberties.
But with its new Constitution and free elections it's
crucial for the United States and our democratic allies to
provide robust support. If Tunisia doesn't implement the
written plan that it supplied to the U.S. to avert a downgrade
in 2015 or if it doesn't pass a comprehensive law on all forms
of trafficking, the United States will do it no favor at all
with a mercy ranking or a mercy waiver.
In conclusion, there are a number of governments to watch
closely that lie on that cusp between modestly addressing the
problem of human trafficking, which we call Tier 2 Watch List,
and not appreciably trying at all, which we call Tier 3.
These include Malaysia, China, Myanmar, Sri Lanka, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, and Cuba. It's worth looking where such
nations fall in the larger picture of trends in governance and
human rights in the last year and in the last decade, which is
Freedom House's job to monitor.
Slavery is a special abomination. But it's inextricably
part of a larger global scope of meaningful democracy--not just
elections but meaningful democracy in which all human beings
resident in a country get justice in practice, or they don't.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lagon follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Mr. Lagon, thank you very much for
your testimony.
As usual, your written statement too is extremely well
documented and without objection it, in its entirety, will be
made a part of the record as well as the full statements of all
of our witnesses and any extraneous matter you'd like to
include in the record.
Mr. Smith.

STATEMENT OF MR. MATTHEW SMITH, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, FORTIFY
RIGHTS

Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Meadows,
distinguished members of the subcommittee.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to be here today.
I'd like to focus my testimony and share some information about
three countries where Fortify Rights works--Myanmar, Thailand
and Malaysia.
In Myanmar, or Burma, the Army's Border Guard Force and
non-state ethnic armies continue to recruit and use child
soldiers. Forced labor also continues with impunity in public
works projects and in situations of armed conflict in the
country.
Most recently we documented how the Army forced ethnic
Rakhine civilians to carry weapons and rations in a conflict
zone and to dig graves for soldiers who were killed in the
conflict, under the threat of death.
We've also documented the forced labor of ethnic Rohingya
in northern Rakhine State including thousands of children.
We've received no information to suggest perpetrators have been
held accountable or victims have been protected in these areas.
Last year, tens of thousands of Rohingya Muslims fled
western Myanmar in ships operated by human traffickers. We
documented how Myanmar state security forces were actually
complicit or directly involved in the trade. Perpetrators have
not been held accountable.
Today, boat departures of Rohingya have reduced greatly
but, unfortunately, that's not due to any notable change in the
behavior by Myanmar authorities. Appalling abuses against the
Rohingya continue.
Myanmar had elections in November. We're very hopeful about
the prospects of the NLD-led government. But it's essential
that this year's ranking for Myanmar be objective.
Despite the optics of democracy in the country, the Myanmar
military remains the strongest political institution in the
country. The State Department, in our view, should downgrade
Myanmar and encourage the military to work closely with the NLD
to end all forms of human trafficking.
With regard to Thailand, in the last year Thailand devoted
unprecedented attention to human trafficking. Less than 12
months ago criminals and complicit authorities were holding
Rohingya refugees and Bangladeshi nationals captive in illicit
torture camps, buying and selling them by the thousands.
Those who couldn't buy their freedom were killed in some
cases or sold into situations of continued exploitation. Today,
to our knowledge, those camps no longer exist.
Less than a year ago, Thai officials acknowledged mass
graves of Rohingya and Bangladeshi victims of trafficking and
this month the human trafficking trial of 92 defendants
resumed, including members of the Thai Army, Navy, and Police.
On the fishing sector, which has used slave labor for many
years, Thailand passed legislation in December to address
illegal fishing and establish monitoring and traceability
mechanisms.
Despite all of these efforts, however, severe problems
remain. Extensive use of slave labor in the seafood sector has
continued. Just 3 months ago, horrific slave labor in the
shrimp-peeling sector was exposed.
In terms of prosecutions, just 3 months ago a police Major
General who was the chief investigator and key witness in the
Rohingya trafficking trial feared for his life and fled to
Australia where he's seeking asylum.
It's important to note that he feared government officials
and state security forces. Other witnesses in that particular
trial have also been threatened and we're concerned that these
threats may prejudice the trial.
The investigation of trafficking of Rohingya in Thailand
and Bangladeshi nationals in Thailand was also prematurely
closed in 2015.
Our information suggests there are additional mass graves
in Thai territory and Thai officials recently told us that
human trafficking syndicates are still active in southern
Thailand. These facts alone, in our view, would indicate the
need for an ongoing investigation.
In terms of protection for survivors, we recently visited
two government-run shelters in southern Thailand where Rohingya
witnesses in a high-profile trafficking trial are being held in
detention.
In the last year, some Rohingya in the shelter have
reportedly gone missing. Needless to say, this is very
concerning and remaining witnesses in the country remain at
great risk.
As of December, only 12 of 500 witnesses in this particular
trial were receiving formal witness protection through the
Ministry of Justice.
Following discussions we had with government officials a
cabinet resolution passed last week that would provide
witnesses in human trafficking trials automatic witness
protection under the Ministry of Justice.
This is encouraging indeed. However, Thailand still
maintains a push-back policy with regard to migrants including
potential survivors of trafficking arriving by boat.
Last year, Thailand pushed boats of migrants out to sea,
despite that alleged traffickers operated the ships. Thailand
also callously refused disembarkation for thousands of
desperate Rohingya who were adrift at sea. Their boats were
abandoned by human trafficking syndicates and this cost untold
lives.
The push-back policy, in our view, is deadly and has no
place in a regime intent on combatting human trafficking. In
Malaysia last year we recommended that Malaysia remain at Tier
3, as the government had done little to combat human
trafficking.
We share the view of you, Mr. Chairman, that Malaysia was
upgraded to Tier 2 Watch List for the wrong reasons and to make
it eligible for the Trans-Pacific Partnership. This threatened
the objectivity and integrity of the TIP Report.
In the last year, Malaysian authorities uncovered more than
100 grave sites of Rohingya and Bangladeshi victims of human
trafficking.
Unfortunately, however, there was no apparent effort to
investigate those responsible for creating those grave sites.
Dozens of known traffickers roam free in the country with
little fear of arrest and this is just from the information
that we've managed to collect.
When thousands of Rohingya refugees and Bangladeshi
nationals were stranded at sea in May 2015, Malaysia stepped up
and allowed disembarkation. But this was not before authorities
towed hundreds in these boats out to see, cut the tow line and
sent them adrift.
Today, those same survivors who were allowed to disembark
in Malaysia remain detained in an ill-equipped immigration
detention facility in Malaysia. This is hardly protection for
survivors of human trafficking.
Refugees and survivors of trafficking in Malaysia live in
hiding. They're commonly fearful of police, who routinely
extort money from them. They feel they can't report crimes,
including the crime of trafficking.
I've personally witnessed a community of Rohingya refugees
intervene to rescue a 15-year-old Rohingya girl from a
trafficking syndicate that was preparing to sell her into sex
work.
The community told me that they could not report the crime
to the police for fear that they would end up in detention.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, we believe Myanmar, Thailand,
and Malaysia fail to meet the minimum standards in the last
year and deserve Tier 3 status.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smith follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Mr. Smith, thank you very much for
your testimony and for your insights and I do hope the State
Department is listening to your wise counsel.
I'd like to now invite Jinhye Jo to provide her testimony.

STATEMENT OF MS. JINHYE JO, PRESIDENT, NKINUSA

Ms. Jo. Good afternoon. My name is Jinhye Jo and I am the
president of North Koreans in USA, a nonprofit organization
representing to North Korean refugees in the United States.
I would like to thank you, Members of Congress, and Ms.
Suzanne Scholte for giving me the opportunity to testify about
the situation in North Korea, my home country.
I have already testified about my family's story in a
similar hearing on several occasions. Of the nine members of my
family, only three survived and escaped North Korea to gain our
freedom.
However, today I stand here not to testify about my own
experience 18 years ago, but to speak about North Korea and
China, two countries that have not changed their ways.
As is well-known to the international community, 3 million
North Koreans have starved to death, powerless in the face of
brutal dictatorship. Furthermore, those who were caught trying
to escape the country were deprived of their rights.
Suffocating under the yoke of oppression, they died unjust
deaths in mobile labor brigades and political prison camps.
Kim Jong Il, a dictator who atrociously murdered his own
people, died before he could be brought to justice. Kim Jong
Un, the third leader of their dynastic regime, continued to
murder countries, ordered North Koreans tortured and
starvation. During Kim Jong Il's rule, the North Korean regime
was brought of shame before the international community as
videos of North Korean children dying on the street spread on
the Internet.
In response the regime mobilized groups of discharged the
soldiers into arresting kotchebi, or orphaned street children,
who were imprisoned in cold dark detention centers and put into
forced labor.
Many children die slow painful deaths from malnutrition,
barely surviving on lumps of corn and potatoes, the children
whose parents went to search for food and did not return, the
countless souls of those who perished behind bars. They all cry
out in pain to this day, asking to be granted the freedom of
peace, free from the pain of hunger.
I know this first hand from what my mother, my sister, and
I experienced when we were forcibly repatriated from China in
June 2006. The fathers who escape in search of food to save
their family are forcibly repatriated by Chinese Government.
Once repatriated into the custody of North Korea's State
Security Department, its agents forcibly kick in the refugees'
teeth and break their ribs. They are forced to endure the pain
and humiliation of being beaten all over by metal rods.
Their noses are smashed in and their arms and legs are
broken. The mothers and daughters who escaped North Korea are
broken apart by Chinese brokers who traffic North Korean women.
The parents who have left their children behind, leaving great
pain knowing that their children most live on the street as
orphans.
They shed tears of great sorrow and resentment with no
country to call their own. Some younger North Korean women are
dragged away by Chinese police and locked into dark windowless
rooms where they are forced into sexual slavery in front of
webcams.
It is said that Chinese men use cigarettes and hot spoons
to burn the skin off North Korean women who do not obey their
sexual demands. Women who try to resist, hiding beneath their
blankets, are stomped on so severely that they almost die from
internal bleeding.
These women are then thrown in front of police stations,
left to die on the street. The organization I lead, NKinUSA,
was able to rescue such women with the generous supports of
ordinary Americans and Korean-American church groups.
I would like to speak about the 17-year-old North Korean
girl who has now resettled in the United States. She was
arrested in China and forcibly repatriated while trying to
escape. After bribing the security agents with Chinese money
she was released successfully and escaped North Korea once
again.
However, because she could not speak Chinese she was
dragged away by human traffickers. She was raped and forcibly
impregnated. The broker then force-fed medication to this 17-
year-old girl to induce abortion.
This girl who already survived was rescued and brought to
the United States. I would also like to speak about the
heartbreaking story of the North Korean mothers. Her two
children, one of them 2 years old and other 3 years old,
starved to death.
After burying her children next to her husband's grave, she
left North Korea to find a way to survive. However, she became
ensnared by human traffickers and was raped several times.
She was forced to give birth to children whose fathers she
did not know. One of the men she was sold to tried to sell the
baby to another family. Furious that she would not give birth
to his child, he beat her whenever he became drunk.
I have spoken of only two of the many women that our
organization was able to rescue. The People's Republic of China
continues to violate the refugee convention, assisting Kim Jung
Un by forcibly repatriating North Korean refugees.
Moreover, the Chinese border security unit in the Tumen
County, Yanji, Liaoning Province treats North Korean refugees
in the same way that the North Korean regime does.
The guards torture and abuse the refugees after locking
them up behind bars. My family was also arrested for the
supposed crime of helping North Koreans escape and imprisoned
for 1 year and 3 months.
After making all the female prisoners in the cells stand in
line, they kicked and beat all of us, at one time, even
pregnant women, the elderly and children are forced to squat
for hours on end with their arms raised.
Anyone who leaned on a wall out of exhaustion was beaten
with rubber club until they were bruised all over. The U.S.
Government and the international community cannot ignore the
suffering and misery of North Korean refugees. It must not turn
a blind eye of such unspeakable human rights violations taking
place across China.
I bear no ill will toward the Chinese people. I only speak
to criticize the wrongdoing of the Chinese Government which
knowingly returned North Korean refugees to certain death.
Many of the individuals who brazenly treated North Korean
women like animals and engaged trafficking are also Chinese
Government officers.
It is not befitting of a country that claims to be a great
power to murder people and aid and abet the appalling crime of
trafficking women. The People's Republic of China must first
recognize its past wrongdoing. It must recognize North Korean
refugees who have been deprived of their freedom as refugees.
Kim Jong Un and the North Korean regime, which clings to
its hopeless and absurd policies, cannot be allowed to exist
any longer. If the Chinese Government continues to cooperate
with the North Korean regime it will only become the object of
scorn to the entire world.
As stated in international law, our fellow North Korean
brothers and sisters are refugees. I respectfully call upon the
Chinese Government to respect and abide by its obligation under
international law.
I would like to thank you, God, for granting me the freedom
to speak my mind. I would like to ask all of you to not ignore
our suffering by questioning the truth of our stories. North
Korean defectors including myself will continue to speak out
until the day Kim Jong Un is brought to justice in an
international court for his atrocious crimes.
I would like to ask the United States Congress and the
entire world to listen to our voice and to help us in every way
that you can.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Jo follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Ms. Jo, thank you very much for
your testimony.
We do have five votes that have been called to the floor of
the House. It will take about approximately 25 minutes. There's
a 5-minute vote after this initial 15 so we will stand in
recess for about 25 minutes.
I apologize for the inconvenience. Then we'll come back and
conclude. Maria, you'll be next and then we'll go to questions.
So I hope your calendars permit you to remain.
We stand in recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. The hearing will resume and,
again, I apologize for that lengthy delay because of the votes.
I'd like to now introduce Maria Werlau and the floor is
yours.

STATEMENT OF MS. MARIA WERLAU, PRESIDENT, FREE SOCIETY PROJECT

Ms. Werlau. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to
offer this testimony. Please allow me a few words about the
grave situation of Baptist Pastor Mario Felix Lleonart, husband
and father of two children, arrested Sunday at noon a few hours
before President Obama arrived in Cuba.
He's quite ill and suspicious of a needle prick he received
in the arm from a stranger some days ago after which he
developed some puzzling symptoms that have worsened. I have
photos of his arrest as well as of his arm. His wife is under
arrest.
I've been in communication with her through her cell phone.
The pastor has refused to eat or drink since yesterday morning.
He does not feel safe in Cuba and I believe he's not safe
in Cuba, where several activists have died in the state-run
facilities in questionable circumstances and surrounded by the
secret police.
I call on President Obama and Secretary Kerry to request
his immediate release and that he be brought to the United
States with his family for immediate medical treatment,
hopefully, with our huge official delegation or before it
leaves Cuba.
Now, on the topic of this hearing I will speak about Cuba
based on considerable research over the last 6 years on human
trafficking and exploitation. Let me briefly address some key
issues the committee is considering.
One: What is Cuba's track record, particularly in the last
year in fighting human trafficking? I consider four main
sources of human trafficking in Cuba. One is the export
services of temporary workers; two, forced labor and sex
trafficking; three, state-sponsored or forced migration; and
four, the export sale of human and body parts.
Cuba derives most of its revenues from the export services
of temporary workers and forced migration. Our State
Department's Trafficking in Persons Report address only two of
these aspects for Cuba and, in my view, disappointingly. They
do not pay attention to the other two.
Contrary to fighting human trafficking, the Cuban
Government is itself likely one of the largest and most
profitable traffickers in the world.
This business had been growing enormously and
exponentially, especially in the last 10 years. What makes the
Cuban case unique as well as astounding is that trafficking is
a huge operation run through numerous state enterprises with,
for the most part, accomplices, participants, sponsors, and
promoters all over the world, including from well-known
corporations, large foundations, key international agencies,
and some of the leading world democracies, including ours as of
late.
Regarding the export labor force, it is quite diversified
and consists of generally highly-qualified temporary workers,
doctors and other health professionals, teachers, sports
trainers, engineers, construction workers, entertainers,
sailors, scientists, architects, et cetera. They can be
dispatched overseas at short notice and are oftentimes sent as
part of labor brigades. The greater part of their wages go to
the Cuban Government. Many different services are sold through
large state entities including two very large health
conglomerates and 84 smaller state entities. It is a huge and
expanding business. The latest official data for the year 2011
indicates that Cuba's export services net of tourism grew from
$1.5 billion in 2003 to $7.8 billion in 2011.
Last year, reports from Cuban officials put the annual
figure at around $8.2 billion. From tourism Cuba derives, to
give you a comparative idea, $2.5 billion a year. So it's over
three times that. It's impossible to tell how many Cuban
workers are involved from conflicting official reports. But
around 65,000, perhaps more, are said to serve in 91 countries,
75 percent, or close to 50,000, are in the health sector. This
is according to different reports from Cuban officials; it's
not official data published.
Cuba's business of exporting indentured workers and its
unique brand of health diplomacy are only possible in a
totalitarian state in which a pool of guaranteed captive low-
paid workers can be exploited as exportable commodities.
Violations are too numerous to list here but amply documented
in my published work and more detailed in my written testimony.
In my mind, there is no doubt the practice constitutes a
form of slavery and violates many international agreements to
which Cuba and most countries where these workers serve are
parties, including the trafficking protocols.
Regarding state-sponsored or forced migration, this is not
a usual form of human trafficking, by a state per se, but it is
taking place at a very large scale and results from direct and
indirect practices of the Cuban state that force, push, and/or
enable its desperate citizens to migrate in the tens of
thousands each year.
It alleviates political and economic pressure on the
government and generates billions in revenues from assorted
fees and assistance from the ever growing diaspora, which just
from the United States alone is estimated to be sending over $5
billion a year.
I have anecdotal evidence of elaborate criminal schemes run
covertly by operatives or agents of the regime that merit
further investigation by the appropriate authorities.
I understand that certain U.S. law enforcement agencies
have looked into this and have specific cases under
investigation.
The mass migration has been fueled in recent years by three
factors: One, a huge outflow through Ecuador, a close ally of
Cuba, starting in 2008, whereby thousands have made and are
making their way north by land into the United States, where
they are mostly automatically admitted; two, by changes to
Cuba's migration law beginning January 2013 permitting travel
without an exit permit; and three, beginning in 2009 by the
Obama administration's comprehensive relaxation of travel and
remittance regulations under the embargo.
I estimate that in 2015 alone at least 92,000 Cubans were
admitted into the United States--43,159 during Fiscal Year 2015
by all points of entry without prior entry visas.
Since 2008, at least 325,000 Cubans have come, with the
trend rising exponentially in the last few years. With those
numbers we can only imagine that revenues will only grow for
the regime to solidify itself and continue repressing.
Regarding forced labor and sex trafficking, the following
are also taking place in Cuba. The prostitution of girls just
16 years old on the streets, but also in schools with the
participation of teachers and even the complicity of
authorities, apparently maintained to increase Cuba's
attraction as a tourism destination.
The uncompensated labor of prisoners and child labor,
particularly in agricultural fields; the government states that
this is voluntary labor. Because most Cuban workers, migrants,
minors put to work, and prostitutes seemingly consent to the
practice for different reasons, this doesn't mean that it's not
trafficking.
It's important to clarify that the trafficking in persons
protocol states that the consent of the victim to the intended
exploitation is irrelevant once it is demonstrated that
deception, coercion, force or, other prohibited means have been
used.
In addition, the definition of trafficking in persons
includes the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability
or of the giving and receiving of payments or benefits to
achieve the consent of a person for the purpose of
exploitation.
Finally, number four, Cuba has been exporting, at least
since 1995, an average of $30 million a year in blood products
in international markets mostly, it seems, to state entities
within countries that are close allies.
This is done without consent from volunteer or coerced
donors in Cuba tricked into believing their donations are for
altruistic purposes. In the 1960s, Cuba drained the blood from
prisoners awaiting execution, including at least one American,
Robert Fuller, in October 1960. It reportedly sold it to
countries such as Vietnam. We, at Cuba Archive, have also
published reports of the sale by Cuba to Brazil rising to
around $80 million in 2013 of human tissue glands and other
body parts of unknown origin as well as of unreported cases of
suspected deaths or the plundering of bodies to harvest body
parts that are suggestive of state sponsorship. We strongly
encourage our Government and that of other countries to
investigate this.
The committee also seeks to examine: Are there glaring gaps
in prosecuting traffickers, preventing trafficking or
protecting victims? Because in this case the main perpetrator
of the trafficking is in fact the Cuban state directly or
indirectly, rather than gaps, I see a huge black hole into
which the victims fall systematically, and mostly hopelessly,
with little international awareness or support.
In Cuba, there is no legal protection for victims or
individual or collective rights outside of those allowed by the
Communist Party. What's worse, that these victims serve a
dictatorship all around the world in blatant violation of
international law is an open, accepted, and even encouraged
fact.
Few international mechanisms of protection and redress have
been put in place. Some of the temporary workers find safe
haven in the countries where they serve and especially health
professionals to the U.S. under the Cuban Medical Professional
Parole Program, that since 2006 has welcomed 7,117 applicants
through 2015.
The program, which Cuba fiercely denounces, is under review
now as part of the normalization of our bilateral relations
with Cuba.
Meanwhile, we, our own Government, our own country, has
started to support or cooperate with Cuba's medical brigades in
Haiti and last year in the West African countries fighting
Ebola.
As we have seen above, it is hard to understand how any
informed analysis of Cuban reality could lead to the conclusion
that Cuba has improved its record of human trafficking.
My written testimony is much more extensive and includes
substantive data. I respectfully request that it be taken into
consideration and entered into the record.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Werlau follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Ms. Werlau, thank you very much
for your testimony. Without objection, your statement and all
of the others will be made a part of the record in their
entirety, as I indicated earlier.
Let me ask you, beginning first with Ambassador Lagon--and
again, thank you for your extraordinary insights on Cuba. I
think your testimony is the most expansive authoritative that
we've had to date.
And I have, as Ambassador Lagon knows, chaired dozens of
these hearings both while we were preparing the Trafficking
Victims Protections Act and two of its follow-ons that I
authored, and the oversight hearings that we held both before
and after the TIP Reports were handed down by State that you
have provided.
I've read the TIP Report for Cuba as well as the other
countries in question. There is much that you have suggested by
included that they need to seriously take under their wings
including that statement you said about the child sex tourism
and the confidential report by the Royal Canadian Mounted
Police in which you said that Cuba is one of the primary
tourist destinations for sex tourism that includes minors of
both genders.
It appears that the child prostitution rings are maintained
and promoted to increase Cuba's attraction as a tourism
destination. Over 1 million Canadians, you point out, visit
Cuba each year.
Ambassador Lagon, you might want to speak on this as well
because when Cuba was a Tier 3, obviously we knew much of this,
but we didn't have that report which said that this was
occurring.
I remember being at the U.N. Human Rights Council with a
great leader of Cuban human rights who had actionable
information about what was happening with child sex tourism in
Cuba.
As a result of this, some Cuban thugs knocked him out. A
van pulled up and hit him right in the jaw and knocked him. So
this is a land of the gulag and a Potemkin village as well and
it's about time our State Department and our President takes
seriously this substantive information. So you have provided
that and you might want to speak to that, Ambassador Lagon.
You were the one who made sure that the TIP Report finally
at long last looked at the gendercide that has occurred in
China and the missing girls in China, and we are talking about
tens of millions of girls, who are the victim of sex-selection
abortion and the disparity which is again noted in this year's
TIP Report of 117 boys to 100 girls.
It happens nowhere else except perhaps in India. But it's
not the normal process. They are exterminated because they are
girls. And but it has led to the consequence of sex trafficking
that has grown exponentially as that lack of or that dearth of
women in the country have just set up this skewed sex male to
female ratio.
If you would speak to that, Ambassador Lagon, because it's
not getting better in China. It appears to be getting worse. I
spoke recently at NYU-Shanghai and I spoke extensively to the
issue of the missing girls and the nexus of that with
trafficking.
If you could also speak to Vietnam. There was a great deal
of hope by some that when there was a rapprochement with
Vietnam when the bilateral trade agreement was consummated with
Vietnam that human rights might break out.
I was a skeptic at the time. Sadly, my skepticism has been
affirmed as they are in a race to bottom with China and places
like North Korea when it comes to human rights in general,
trafficking, particularly labor trafficking in Vietnam, if you
could speak to that.
And finally, Ambassador Lagon, China had 35 convictions in
a land of 1.2 billion people with a huge labor and sex
trafficking problem.
As we know, the reform through labor elimination has not
happened and I've been in one of those camps, Beijing Prison
Number One, where 40 Tiananmen Square activists were held and
forced to labor.
They have just put a different sign out in front and they
continue to use that exploitation and yet that's not reflected
in China's tier ranking, having gotten a passing grade.
But China had 35 convictions. Thailand, a Tier 2 country,
had 151, Cuba 13 convictions and, Malaysia a mere 3, dropping
from nine in the previous year to three.
So they even trend in the wrong direction. So Thailand has
been singled out as Tier 3 and, of course, convictions is not
the only barometer but it's certainly a very useful one.
And yet, Malaysia, China, and Cuba, just to name three,
have far fewer in terms of convictions and yet they were placed
on the Tier 2 Watch List.
Could you try to explain that for us?
Ambassador Lagon. Sure, and a welcome set of homework
assignments to address on these.
Cuba, first of all, I said in my testimony and a bit more
elaborately in the written version, that one of the reasons
that I think the ranking for Cuba in last year's report was
suspect is this proactive effort to sell the sex market in Cuba
to an international buyer base.
I wrote a piece in the Washington Post on February 1 saying
that it's time to address the sex trafficking issue through
dealing with demand.
And it's one thing when there are so-called johns that are
let off the hook while those who are in prostitution or who are
trafficked are punished. But when a state is involved in a
proactive policy to encourage people to travel and treat women
as commodities, it is a hazard zone for trafficking.
As for Vietnam, Vietnam is part of a picture of a U.S.
policy of cultivating relationships with illiberal states that
are ostensibly moving in the right direction to counterbalance
China.
I'm all in favor of working to dialogue with Malaysia, to
dialogue with Myanmar, to dialogue with Vietnam in that
context.
U.S. foreign policy should not let such nations off the
hook on human rights. We need to look very carefully at
Vietnam.
Corruption, limits on free press and civil society, lack of
basic protections for migrants entering into Vietnam and
leaving, these make for great dangers for human trafficking and
Vietnam has had a Tier 2 ranking for 4 years and it's really
worth asking whether the implementation is going farther.
I had the honor of hosting the Deputy Secretary of State,
Tony Blinken, to speak at a conference we had on democracy
promotion at Freedom House in October. He noted he loved
working with Freedom House and expected me to be a scold. I was
on Vietnam because the picture he portrayed is really rosier
than is deserved.
Now, on China, first of all, with respect to the population
policy and a second important factor, the treatment of North
Korean refugees, their drivers that make for a danger for
gendered human trafficking, namely the longstanding population
policy limiting the number of children and then both policy and
culture favouring male babies has created this kind of
insidious form of the gender gap.
And even if population policy appears to be moving in the
right direction, in that there is somewhat more choice for
people to choose having more than one child, there's still a
big residual problem that's a driver of sex trafficking and the
kind of human trafficking that is bride sales.
But when it's combined with the treatment of North Koreans
not as refugees but as economic migrants who if sent back to
North Korea, as my colleague on the panel here indicated, would
be punished, that together creates a situation of a danger for
sex trafficking.
Finally, on the number of convictions--I have said here and
elsewhere that despite the great wisdom that you and others had
in the Trafficking Victims Protection Act and the rather
similar Palermo Protocol there's a heavy emphasis on
convictions in those. Oftentimes, some of the most illiberal
states in the world over interpret that and they have what one
might call the cruel law and order version of an anti-human
trafficking policy.
Malaysia, China--these are the very states that you would
expect to tilt toward a law enforcement approach over a
survivor re-empowerment policy. But China's conviction rate is
utterly anaemic, as you say, and taken with the problems of
people when they move to opportunities in the city, losing
their social services and the gender disproportion that you
were raising and the fact that the so-called elimination of the
reform through labor policies as a chimera, I think China
deserves great scrutiny and ought not to be given a pass in the
report.
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Professor Lagon, thank you very
much.
Mr. Smith, what would happen if Burma did receive a
downgrade, especially, would it affect the military? As you
point out and I couldn't concur more with your statement, that
Malaysia and Burma need to be downgraded just based on the
record.
The record is overwhelming and hopefully State will look at
your analysis as well because I think you lay it out in great
detail. But what would happen especially in Burma because we
know the impact that the military has on that country.
Mr. Smith. Yes, I think that if Burma or Myanmar is
downgraded to Tier 3 this would send a very clear message to
the military that it needs to shape up with regard to human
trafficking, that forced labor is completely unacceptable, and
that they have to do more.
I think there may be those voices out there who would
suggest that a downgrade from Myanmar would somehow disrupt the
political transition. We would disagree with that notion.
Myanmar's people have struggled very long and hard to
ensure the forces of democracy move forward in the country and
but apart from that, as I mentioned before, the situation now
has the optics of democracy but there is a certain
authoritarian system still at play in the country and the
military has ensured that the democracy that does take hold
that they have a very active role in that.
So I guess, in short, a downgrade for Myanmar would send a
very clear message to the military that it needs to cooperate
with the new NLD government to combat human trafficking and we
feel that that would be the wisest course of action. Thank you.
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Last year's TIP Report noted that
the demobilization of some 376 child soldiers from the
military. But does the military's practice of recruiting child
soldiers continue? Is it a replacement? Have some of those kids
perhaps aged out?
Mr. Smith. The use and recruitment of child soldiers
throughout the country does continue, unfortunately. This is
continuing not only within the Myanmar Army but also within the
Border Guard Force and the non-state ethnic armies.
Conflict is continuing particularly in the north of the
country and as a result both the ethnic armies and the Myanmar
army are seeking to increase their troop strength and in this
sort of perverse recruitment process they believe that
enlisting children within the military somehow helps them
achieve that objective.
There's been little to no accountability. In fact, last
year the Myanmar authorities only prosecuted one civilian for
the recruitment of children and the recruitment process is
happening throughout the country.
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Let me ask you, with regard to
Malaysia's plan to deal with the thousands of Rohingya refugees
being detained in Immigration Detention Centers have the
refugees been screened for trafficking as far as you know and
why are NGOs and UNHCR not allowed to visit them?
Mr. Smith. No, sir, we do not believe that they have been
screened for human trafficking, and while Malaysia was getting
some international praise for finally allowing people who were
stranded at sea to disembark, they did shuffle them very
quickly to detention where they remain today.
As far as we understand, there is no good reason why the
UNHCR or other service providers would not have access and one
additional concern is that refugees, asylum seekers in
Malaysia, many of whom have endured horrific experiences of
human trafficking, now have a very difficult time registering
with the UNHCR and this opens them up to other forms of
exploitation.
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. And one final question on
Malaysia. As I noted, three convictions down from nine the year
before, now I would agree with Ambassador Lagon, the other
aspects of the TIP initiative, prevention, prosecution, and
protection are all extremely important, mutually reinforcing
provisions of a coordinated strategy.
If you're serious about law enforcement, you need to look
at convictions and it's only three for Malaysia.
But my question, the State Department upgraded Malaysia
last year in part for a trafficking victim pilot program. Many
of us think it was all about the TPP, we think that something
they should have emphasized was to allow victims to leave
shelter and detention and work.
However, subsequent information has shown that exactly none
of the four victims who were cleared to participate in that
program were able to do so, mostly because of the Malaysian
Government's failures.
Are you aware of any victims free to leave detention and
participate in a work pilot program?
Mr. Smith. We are not aware that that is occurring in
Malaysia at all.
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Thank you.
I'd like to ask Ms. Jo, if I could. You know, the Chinese
Government has signed the refugee convention. I, and others on
this subcommittee have repeatedly asked the Chinese to honor
the provisions of that refugee convention, that treaty, and not
send people back to North Korea where they are usually either
killed or certainly sent to prison. We've had several witnesses
previously who have actually been trafficked who told their
stories before the subcommittee.
They made it across the line into China and thought they
were home free only to find that they were then subjected to
the cruelty of modern-day slavery. And I'm wondering has there
been any diminution of the exploitation of trafficking? Because
it seems like they get hurt either way.
If they're sent back to North Korea they are incarcerated
or killed and if they stay in China they are trafficked. Has it
gotten any better or is it still as bad as it has been?
[All of the following witness's answers were given through
an interpreter.]
Ms. Jo. Just 3 days ago I had a phone conversation with
some North Koreans currently residing in China and compared to
the time I left North Korea compared to the time I left China
in 2008 they tell me that there has been no change.
Basically, what we know about North Koreans today is that
there are some black market activities and people can make
money out of this black market activities.
However, in order to be involved in these markets they do
need money. They do need capital. In order to do that, they
have to cross the border into China.
If they are apprehended by the Chinese authorities they're
subjected to very aggressive interrogation and very aggressive
treatment.
They're actually separated from the regular Chinese prison
population and they're subjected to treatment that is in many
ways similar to the treatment that they suffer if they're
forcibly returned to North Korea.
Since January of this year, we have been able to rescue 13
North Koreans. Two North Korean women as far as we know were
forcibly returned to North Korea where they were subjected to
interrogation by the state security department. This is North
Korea's main internal security agency.
They were sent to a so-called mobile labor brigade and as
far as we know they may have well been sent to a political
prison camp because it was disclosed during the interrogation
that they came across, for example, South Koreans.
So basically there's a group of four who need rescue who
were apprehended. We know that the time that it takes to return
apprehended North Korean refugees from China to North Korea is
25 days.
It used to be about 17 days. As you can see, there isn't
such a big difference compared to the time when I was there.
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. In the TIP Report that we have
under scrutiny today where China falsely was given a Tier 2
Watch List designation, they point out that Chinese women and
girls are subjected to sex trafficking within China.
They are typically recruited from the rural areas and taken
to urban centers. Well-organized criminal syndicates and local
gangs play key roles in the trafficking of Chinese women and
girls and in China.
Victims are recruited with fraudulent employment
opportunities and subsequently forced into prostitution. Girls
from the Tibet Autonomous Region are reportedly sent to other
parts of China and subjected to forced marriage and domestic
servitude, and it goes on. A tale of indictment, really, about
how China is dealing with it.
And we get to the protection part. It says the government
did not undertake adequate efforts to protect victims and did
not directly provide data on the number of victims identified
or assisted in services it provided.
And yet, they didn't get Tier 3. It's almost comical except
that it's a tragedy. My question to you is are there any
services that you know of for either indigenous Chinese women
or refugees if they are identified as a trafficking victim?
And you mention in your testimony that Chinese Government
officials are involved in the trafficking of women. Are they
making profits over that cruelty or are they just grossly
indifferent?
Ms. Jo. The surveillance in the border areas has been
increased. There are numerous road blocks. There are numerous
searches.
Frankly, it is impossible for an ordinary individual to get
through all of these check points and road blocks and that is
why actually Chinese policemen, Chinese cops take many of these
individuals in their patrol cars and thus it is law enforcement
agents in China who are involved in this process.
Actually, in our case as well, we paid one of the locals to
help us out and they told us that they got in touch with the
local cops, the local law enforcement agents who participated
in the process and he assured that we got out.
There are no Chinese groups, institutions, or organizations
that rescue women or children who are victimized by human
traffickers. The only ones who do this are American or South
Korean missionaries who make phone calls and invest in this
operation of rescuing victims of human trafficking.
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Ambassador Lagon, does that
comport with what you knew as Ambassador-at-Large during your
time and currently now as head of Freedom House?
Ambassador Lagon. Yes. The problem in China is a tilt away
from victim services in general. For those who are North
Koreans it's not only China's flagrant failure to live up to
its obligations under the refugee convention but also a lack of
existing help.
In the region, some of the best equipped countries, such as
Japan, have not stepped up to the plate to provide the fullest
of victim services such as translation for women who are in
shelters, who are trafficking victims. But we're talking about
a truly anaemic null set in terms of helping the victims,
particularly those who are Koreans.
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Thank you. Let me ask Ms. Werlau,
and before I go I just want to note that in the past we had a
number of hearings.
Suzanne Scholte actually brought some unbelievable
witnesses--they were believable, because they were--but it was
just astonishing to hear them speak of their ordeal coming out
of North Korea into China, and one of those witnesses talked
about a mother and a daughter.
The daughter left, was trafficked. The mother went looking
for her and she was trafficked, and only by the grace of God
and some very humane people were both of them able to find
freedom.
But it was harrowing in terms of the experiences that they
relayed to our subcommittee previously. So I want to thank Ms.
Scholte for arranging that in the past.
It was extraordinary and, again, it's unabated, unchanged,
as Ms. Jo just said.
Ms. Werlau, if I could address some of the Cuba issues, the
Trafficking in Persons Report says the government took no
action to address forced labor.
If you say you're going to do nothing and take no action,
it doesn't exist, which is foolish beyond words. And yet they
were upgraded from Tier 3 to Tier 2 Watch List.
So my question--if you could speak to it--you did in your
testimony and but it would be worth some reiteration because
you did speak about the whole issue of doctors and others being
compelled and the huge profits gleaned for the Cuban
Government--what happens if a physician or health professional
says no, I'm not going to be deployed somewhere around the
world, and how much money does this actually bring in to the
government by forcing them to do so?
Ms. Werlau. Let me preface this by saying that for 2 years
in a row the State Department Office for Trafficking in Persons
has called me to inquire specifically about the situation of
the doctors and I have had long conversations that are partly
reflected in the report.
But they have sustained for 2 years in a row that these are
``allegations.'' Yet, I have interviewed dozens of doctors who
don't know each other, who have served in different countries,
that repeat the same thing over and over.
We have more than 7,000 testimonies taken in our Embassies
all over the world and before these visas are issued for the
Cuban Medical Professional Parole Program these people are
interviewed.
So I told them, go to the Embassies or just get on a plane
and go to Miami and find these doctors walking around. They
will tell you that this is not an allegation. This is happening
systematically.
So I'm dumbfounded by this approach.
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. So they're hiding in plain sight?
Ms. Werlau. There are thousands of these doctors all over
the world enduring these conditions and this situation. The
report says that the Cuban Government is the dominant employer.
What it doesn't say is that it's a sole employer of medical
professionals. So these people have no choice. But, you were
asking about what happens if doctors refuse to serve.
I've asked about that and some doctors have told me that
they're punished, they're sent to a little clinic in the
mountains, et cetera.
But most doctors want to serve and there's a corruption
going on within the state mechanisms employed to recruit these
doctors because certain destinations are more palatable than
others.
It's certainly better to go to Portugal or Uruguay or even
some areas of Brazil than to go to the jungle in Central
America or remote areas of Africa.
So actually, this goes back to these people wanting to
serve because they want to improve their lot in life and
whereas a doctor in Cuba earns around $60 a month, they then
get a little bonus in hard currency, they're able to see the
world, they're able to save some money to repair the roof in
their house. When they gp back home, they get certain rewards,
et cetera.
So it's a unique situation.
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Just ask you with regards to the
child sex tourism. The newest law that just has been signed is
called the International Megan's Law and it does a number of
things, but the first thing it takes our database of Megan's
Law and every state has it and anyone who seeks to travel if he
or she--and they're almost all men--is a convicted sex
offender. We notice the country of destination within about 3
weeks of that departure and the penalty for not giving us--us
being the U.S. Government--that information is very
significant, up to 10 years in prison, and if they travel
they--at least the country--can either deny the visa or be very
much more vigilant about their presence because the propensity
to recommit these crimes is very high.
It also establishes the hope within this administration and
the next one to set up a reciprocity so we know when these
folks are travelling to the United States.
That's not a bill, it's a law. And the hope is that now
that there's an opening with Cuba that when anyone seeks to
travel to Cuba we know it's been a destination for child sex
tourism.
The man I mentioned earlier, Frank Calzon, the one that was
knocked out by a sucker punch, he had serious documentation of
this and my hope is that our new Embassy will be robust,
aggressive in trying to track down the parameters of this
horrific entanglement of pimps and the government, often one
and the same, and does not whitewash it, which I'm very worried
that they may do.
So if you would speak to the issue of child sex tourism and
sex tourism in general to Cuba.
Ms. Werlau. That's not my area of expertise. However, I
have read about it, talked to people about it, and I reference
in my written testimony an amazing documentary that was filmed
in Cuba and that has great evidence, one everybody should see.
The person who filmed it was then put in prison by Cuba and
it took several years before the Spanish Government was able to
get him out.
So this is happening and he has the evidence and I think
it's a horrific thing that is only going to probably increment
with the increase in tourism we're seeing in Cuba. And now, you
know, probably people from the United States will be
participants just as the Italians, Canadians, and others that
are going to Cuba for this.
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. I'd like to yield to our
distinguished colleague, Congressman Clawson, from Florida.
Mr. Clawson. Sorry for being late. I had some other
meetings; you know how it is with a double, triple booking. Got
another one waiting.
Thank you for coming. I wanted to express, and I'm sorry I
missed it. So what I'm going to say and you reaction is
probably going to be redundant from what's already been said
today.
Of course, I support the chairman in his efforts to reduce,
eliminate trafficking globally. Like a lot of things in this
world I feel like the economic power of the United States could
have a bigger influence than it actually does.
Whether it's in these matters, whether it's dealing
intellectual property, which of course is not anywhere near as
serious as what we're talking about today or anything else. If
we're almost one-third of the global GDP and everybody wants to
have access to our markets, if we really wanted those folks
that wanted access to our markets to eliminate trafficking I
believe that they could do so.
And my view has always been, as I've studied up on this for
Chris' subcommittee, that to the extent that we allow folks
that aren't serious about ending trafficking to participate in
our marketplace we send a message that's not even a mixed
message but rather if you're an important spot economically for
us as in one of these trade deals or if you're an important
spot in terms of global diplomacy, meaning in the Middle East
or in Cuba, then none of these things about trafficking really
matter to us.
And therefore what is the message that we send around the
world to victims of this and whether we really care. And so I
want to make sure that I showed up today and maybe that summary
is off in some way.
But I'd like to hear what you all's response is and, you
know, in the context of what's going on in Cuba today or the
trade deal or even the Iranian deal. It just seems to me that
our interest and our commitment to stopping trafficking always
takes a back seat when something important comes diplomatically
either for trade or for other things that the administration
might think is important.
Ambassador, you want to start? Am I wrong? Am I overstating
the problem here or my position on this?
Ambassador Lagon. No, you're not. First of all, I agree
with the premise that one has to look at this as a phenomenon
in a market, and where something heinous is going on.
I don't believe that globalization inevitably needs to lead
to slavery but it requires open eyes, and I think we're in this
mode in the United States and we feel this very strongly at
Freedom House that we somehow think we have less influence
than, you know, than we have.
Mr. Clawson. We have more. We have more, right?
Ambassador Lagon. This is a situation where the driver of
human trafficking is the fact that for the trafficker, whether
it's the recruiter or the person who is locking someone in a
brothel or someone who is actually supervising forced labor,
that person feels that they can make huge profits off the backs
of enslaved people--essentially enslaved people--and have very
little prospect of being punished. That's a market force. We
need to change that, make it more likely that they will be
punished.
And while labor trafficking is 75 percent of the incidence
of trafficking overall in the world, more money is made on the
backs of those who are sex trafficked and you see both of these
phenomena in places like Thailand, Cambodia, and so on.
Mr. Clawson. Can I jump in on you for a minute?
Ambassador Lagon. Sure.
Mr. Clawson. Now, if I were running a manufacturing
business exporting from the Midwest, I would say in addition to
what you've said, folks from Midwest factories lose their good-
paying jobs and we pay an economic price--at least an economic
fairness price, if you will, in our country, while cheaters who
may cheat in trafficking or any other way that they can cheat,
get an economic transfer of welfare in some other country.
Is that right? So there is losers here and there and all
for a cheaper product, by the way.
Ambassador Lagon. Well, it should be--it should be
particularly galling to American citizens if they see jobs
being exported elsewhere.
If it's to a place where there is not only kind of cheap
labor or even exploitative labor but in fact trafficked labor,
I will say and said this earlier, that I favor the Trans-
Pacific Partnership and TTIP.
But you need to do it with open eyes. So Malaysia, being
kept viable to be part of the TPP, has a reason or a rationale
for its ranking in the TIP Report makes no sense to me.
I'm in favor of appropriately negotiated bilateral trade
deals. But I noticed when in served as the anti-human
trafficking Ambassador that there were opportunities the United
States was completely throwing out the window to place leverage
on states we were forming bilateral free trade arrangements
with.
Mr. Clawson. Could I ask you a question? Is there any
example that you can think of where we have used our economic
leverage, 30 percent of global GDP, to force people to behave
with respect to trafficking, human rights, religious freedom?
Ambassador Lagon. Sure, and your colleague sitting in the
chair helped invent it. The Trafficking Victims Protection Act
creates a situation where there is sanctions or threatened
sanctions or threatened sanctions for Tier 3 countries.
Mr. Clawson. Well, most of the time in practicality it gets
ignored or am I wrong?
Ambassador Lagon. This is true. That's why----
Mr. Clawson. I mean, my point is we yak about it up here.
We have all the power as the United States of America. We're
the driver of global trade and people that cheat and therefore
hurt kids, women, whoever, we don't do anything about it.
Ambassador Lagon. We have the leverage. I've noted before
the political scientists, Beth Simmons at Harvard and Judith
Kelley at Duke have shown that in fact the TIP Report gets
countries to change their laws.
One case I can think of of moving a country was Cambodia
being faced with Tier 3 ranking and thinking that it would--
having just gotten the introduction of forms of American aid it
would get off.
Now, I entirely agree with a longstanding critique offered
by Chairman Smith that the sanctions on Tier 3 countries are
not used and it's appalling.
But that's an example of leverage working. Actually, there
are many examples. I am personally an advocate of the global
Magnitsky sanctions legislation which would target officials
who are responsible for corruption and for human rights abuses.
That really makes it painful for the people who are
responsible. So you can, as you argue, place overall pressure
in using leverage on a country. But you also can make life
miserable for----
Mr. Clawson. But let me interrupt just for a minute,
Ambassador.
You would agree with me that there's a whole lot of
countries that run trade surpluses with us that abuse their
people, correct?
Ambassador Lagon. True.
Mr. Clawson. Okay. Then we're not doing very well.
Okay. Now, let me go to Cuba. Is--do you all do--does any
of the witnesses here believe that the opening--that the
economic awakening, opening, whatever we want to call it with
Cuba right now, is that going to help or hurt in efforts for
folks to get treated in a humane dignified way?
Ambassador Lagon. If I may begin, but I really want to
defer to my colleague, Ms. Werlau, I think that the record is
clear that there have not been changes since the diplomatic
opening in human rights in general.
Anything more than the most minor economic reforms haven't
changed a whit. At a previous hearing held by Chairman Smith
looking at those rankings that were considered politicized in
the 2015 Report, we heard witnesses from the State Department
say now there's more information available from Cuba because
we're having diplomatic dialogue with them.
So we have better information and we can tell that they're
Tier 2 Watch List rather than Tier 3. I think that's rich.
Mr. Clawson. Ms. Jo? Thank you, Ambassador.
Ms. Werlau. Respond on Cuba? Yes.
Congressman, I have long favoured exchanges that make sense
in policies that advance the interests of the United States and
have for a long time argued that our policy toward Cuba, which
I considered schizophrenic and contradictory in different
aspects of it, needed a revision.
However, I strongly feel that lending credibility,
legitimacy, and impunity to a criminal dictatorship without
conditions and making unilateral concessions is very troubling
and counterproductive to our own interests.
The idea that commercial engagement, including tourism, is
going to bring about reforms in Cuba has already been tried.
First, by the rest of the world that has been investing,
trading, and sending tourists to Cuba for over 20 years since
the fall of the Soviet bloc and of massive subsidies, and Cuba
had to restructure its economy, et cetera.
For example, more than 1 million Canadian tourists go to
Cuba every year and this has been going on for years. I don't
see a whole lot of difference between Canadian and U.S.
tourists.
And second, because there have been for years many
exceptions to the embargo, including from 1988, the Berman
amendment, that has allowed the free sale and exchange of
informational material, videos, music, art work, et cetera.
Yet, no Cubans can buy directly from the United States.
It's the same thing with the agricultural products and
medical products that have been exempt since 2000.
The Cuban Government controls all those imports from the
United States.
Mr. Clawson. Let me interrupt. So are you saying there's
going to be more or less trafficking of kids and women, et
cetera with what we're doing now? More or less?
Ms. Werlau. My prediction is more because there will be
more tourists and will be participating and it's one state that
is behind it, as I described the judicial system.
Mr. Clawson. So the Melia Hotel chains from Spain on
Varadero Beach and other places has not done anything but make
the problem--I'm not disrupting, I'm just making sure we're
clear.
Ms. Werlau. I have found no instance of any reform from
those exchanges.
Mr. Clawson. And if the representative of the Obama
administration were here today he would say what we've done
ain't working so if we try this you'd be wrong and the rest of
the folks up here would be wrong. Is that right?
Ms. Werlau. Well, I think that what we've done was not
working. As I said, the policy had many contradictions. It was
schizophrenic and we were not able or not interested in pushing
a multilateral approach that makes sense with our allies and
partners, other democracies that would like to see and would
benefit from having a stable and prosperous Cuba.
Mr. Clawson. Anybody else, anything to add anything I'm
missing here?
Ms. Jo. I don't know about the Cuba. That's why I cannot
answer your question. But I hope North Koreans can become open.
So yes, if you're asking something for North Korea and I'd love
to answer.
Mr. Clawson. And go ahead, since we were--tell us about
what you--if we were to open more trade with North Korea, in
your opinion would that be more or less?
Ms. Jo. What happens in North Korea nowadays is that if one
is officially unemployed they have to go to jail.
I believe that if North Korea were to open itself up to the
outside world to South Korea in particular, this would create
opportunities for North Koreans. There would be different
standards.
There would be less exploitation inside North Korea and
since the situation inside North Korea would improve there
would be fewer or no reasons for North Koreans to escape from
their country and become the victims of exploitation elsewhere,
in China in particular.
There are many who fear the astounding cost of Korean
reunification. They fear that we would need a lot of money to
accomplish that goal.
However, I have a different opinion. I think that both
Koreas will be spending much less on their defense budgets and
there would be significant amounts of money to be spent on the
development of North Korea and North Koreans would no longer be
victimized. They would no longer become the victims of sexual
or labor exploitation.
And I would like to ask the distinguished Congressman here
today a favor, should I call it. I am a U.S. citizen now. I
work hard. I go to school here in the United States. I pay my
taxes. I try to do my best as an American citizen.
There are, of course, many North Koreans who are still
trying to escape. When change comes to North Korea, former
North Koreans such as myself will be instrumental in teaching
the people of North Korea about the freedom and opportunity
that we enjoy here in the United States and that South Koreans
enjoy in South Korea.
And that is why I would like to respectfully ask you that
you see to it that more North Koreans are accepted into the
United States of America.
Frankly, when we came here what truly gave us hope was the
U.S./North Korea Human Rights Act, first passed in 2004. There
have been two more enactments of that act in 2008 and 2012. But
to this date we only have 194 North Korean refugees who have
resettled here in the United States.
I'm not going to name that particular country or those
particular countries but it takes a North Korean refugee
between 1 year and 1\1/2\ years in order to be cleared to come
here to the United States.
There are graduates, former North Korean refugees who
graduated from Harvard University with law degrees. There are
many bright South Koreans who could help.
I would like to ask the distinguished congressmen for their
help in ensuring that we are able to bring more North Korean
refugees here to the United States of America.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Thank you, Ms. Jo.
Mr. Clawson. Thank you, Ms. Jo, for the Korean viewpoint,
and Ms. Werlau, thank you for the Cuban summary as well from
you. Appreciate it. And Ambassador, for the global view.
Yield back. Thank you
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Mr. Clawson, thank you very much
for your excellent questions and for being here and for your
ongoing concern. It's just deeply appreciated.
Let me just conclude. A couple of final questions, if I
could. As we all know, and I mentioned it before, Raul Castro
said there are no political prisoners; give me a list of
political prisoners and I will release them before tonight
ends.
That's the English translation of the Spanish and Jim
Acosta, thank God he asked that question because it's one of
the few times any of the Castro brothers have ever been asked a
serious question about human rights. The culture of denial
which we see now on the trafficking side, no forced labor, they
trivialize if they even respond to any questions about sex
trafficking, my hope is that there will be a much more robust
effort by the TIP office.
And I think while they may get it right, hopefully as it
goes up the ranks they will do their work to ensure that that
Tier 3 designation, which I think is absolutely warranted based
on the record, is conveyed again to the Government of Cuba and
I do hope they listen to you even more carefully, Maria, as you
convey these important points to them at the TIP office itself.
I would ask Ambassador Lagon, we know that India has had
serious trafficking problems, sex and labor trafficking, and
amazingly even with regards to the T visa, which we created in
the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000, that there has
been inability to travel by those individuals who have obtained
the T visa, which then takes our whole process and says it's
somehow less than authentic.
Your thoughts on that? Because India certainly has a
serious trafficking problem that I think is grossly under-
appreciated and under-recognized.
Ambassador Lagon. Well, India is often considered a great
success story of democracy. But there are important ways,
whether if you're a Dalit, other unfavored caste, or women, you
don't have full access to justice.
There have been some troubling things that I've seen over
time. When I was the head of the TIP office at State it was
really remarkable to me.
If you looked at countries that had large numbers of guest
workers abroad, the great heroic example was the Philippines,
whose diplomatic services fought really hard for the rights and
the protection of their migrant workers abroad, running
shelters in every one of their Embassies, they would always
meet with me.
Indian diplomats never ever in any country I travelled in,
particularly in the Gulf, would confer about that. They were
more concerned about the remittances. Now, that was then.
When it was discovered that official personnel at a
multilateral institution for India was complicit in human
trafficking, the Government of India was truly intransigent
about cooperation with justice.
If it is indeed the case that those who have a T visa are
harassed, that is a failure to look out for your citizens and
their access to justice.
And so while India's a success story in many ways, we
should be concerned and remains the demographic of the human
trafficking problem in the world.
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Ms. Werlau, in her testimony, said
that the Cuban Government is likely one of the largest and most
profitable trafficking promoters in the world. Does that
comport, again, with your sense of Cuba?
Ambassador Lagon. Well, there's kind of a correlate of the
main theme of my testimony. The main theme of my testimony is
that democratic governance, rule of law, access to justice--if
they are in place in a country it's more likely that country
will do a good job fighting human trafficking.
At the other end of the spectrum, if it's not only an
autocracy but a command economy with an intrusive state-led
role and forms of forced labor or punitive labor particularly
against those who are not favoured by the government that are
institutionalized, that's quite likely to be a driver of human
trafficking. The Trafficking Victims Protection Act, as you
shaped, emphasizes the complicity of government officials in
human trafficking.
Well, if we look at some diplomat who is engaging in the
abuse of their domestic servant, that's complicity. But if a
government has policies which are in fact contributing to
running forced labor, that's the most flagrant form of state
complicity that you can see.
Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Is there anything further that any
of our witnesses would like to say today--any further insights,
comments?
If not, I do want to thank you for your extraordinary
testimony. I hope that the U.S. Department of State and
particularly the new Ambassador-at-Large, who I think is a very
honorable person, Susan Coppedge, who I've had a meeting with
in the office, we did invite her to be here today. But they
are, as she indicated, working on the report and thought it
might be best not to be here and I certainly understand that.
We will invite her to testify and I hope she will come
right after the TIP Report is released and we will again have a
body of NGOs and expert witnesses to ascertain the pluses and
minuses of the next TIP Report and I do hope that they get it
right this time.
I do want to thank all of you. Ms. Jo, your point about law
enforcement getting to what Ambassador Lagon was just saying in
terms of complicity of government--when we wrote the original
minimum standards to the Trafficking Victims Protection Act and
government complicity, we absolutely included the police, and
you pointed out, because law enforcement is certainly an
integral part of government and very often that is the
Achilles' heel because that's where the bribes and the
interface usually takes place with enabling trafficking or
being part of the solution.
So thank you for pointing that out with regards to the
North Koreans and others who are ill-served by the police who
are part of the problem.
I thank you all again. The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:53 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
