- UNDERSTANDING THE CYBER THREAT AND IMPLICATIONS FOR THE 21ST CENTURY ECONOMY

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

UNDERSTANDING THE CYBER THREAT AND IMPLICATIONS FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
ECONOMY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 3, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-17

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

95-373                         WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                     Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania
Chairman
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          KATHY CASTOR, Florida
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
BILL FLORES, Texas                   YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma               Massachusetts
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       GENE GREEN, Texas
CHRIS COLLINS, New York              PETER WELCH, Vermont
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
JOE BARTON, Texas                        officio)
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Tim Murphy, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Diana DeGette, a Representative in Congress from the state
of Colorado, opening statement.................................     4
Prepared statement...........................................
Hon. Marsha Blackburn, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Tennessee, opening statement..........................     6
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     7
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the state of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................    65

Witnesses

Herbert Lin, Senior Research Scholar, Center for the
International Security and Cooperation, Senior Fellow, Hoover
Institution, Harvard University................................     9
Prepared statement \1\.......................................    12
Answers to submitted questions...............................    74
Richard Bejtlich, Chief Security Strategist, FireEye,
Incorporated...................................................    30
Prepared statement...........................................    32
Answers to submitted questions...............................    86
Gregory Shannon, Chief Scientist, CERT Division, Software
Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon University..............    38
Prepared statement...........................................    40
Answers to submitted questions...............................   101

Submitted Material

Majority memorandum..............................................    66

----------
\1\ Available at: http://docs.house.gov/meetings/if/if02/
20150303/103079/hhrg-114-if02-20150303-sd006.pdf.

UNDERSTANDING THE CYBER THREAT AND IMPLICATIONS FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
ECONOMY

----------

TUESDAY, MARCH 3, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:30 p.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Tim Murphy
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Murphy, McKinley, Burgess,
Blackburn, Bucshon, Brooks, Mullin, Hudson, Collins, Cramer,
DeGette, Clarke, Kennedy, Green, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Charlotte Baker, Deputy Communications
Director; Leighton Brown, Press Assistant; Melissa Froelich,
Counsel, Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade; Brittany Havens,
Legislative Clerk; Charles Ingebretson, Chief Counsel,
Oversight and Investigations; Paul Nagle, Chief Counsel,
Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade; John Ohly, Professional
Staff, Oversight and Investigations; Chris Santini, Policy
Coordinator, Oversight and Investigations; Peter Spencer,
Professional Staff Member, Oversight; Jessica Wilkerson,
Legislative Clerk; Christine Brennan, Democratic Press
Secretary; Jeff Carroll, Democratic Staff Director; Chris
Knauer, Democratic Oversight Staff Director; Una Lee,
Democratic Chief Oversight Counsel; and Elizabeth Letter,
Democratic Professional Staff Member.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. TIM MURPHY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Murphy. Well, good afternoon. I now convene this
hearing of the Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee,
entitled, ``Understanding the Cyber Threat and Implications for
the 21st Century Economy.'' This is the first in a series of
hearings by this committee focused on cyberspace, the Internet,
and the challenges and opportunities that they present for the
21st century economy.
These are big, important issues, so it is imperative that
we establish a clear understanding of the issues we face. So
today we are going to do something a little different. We are
not here to examine a specific cybersecurity incident, policy
issue, or legislative proposal. Today we are going to take a
step back and explore some fundamental questions with our
experts. Such things as what is the breadth and depth of the
cyber threats? Is it something that can be solved? And what
does this mean for the future?
In 1969, computers at four universities connected to the
ARPANET, thus proving a computer networking concept that
evolved into what we now know as the Internet. Since its
inception, the Internet has been an open platform, designed to
facilitate the transfer of data and information between
remotely located computing resources. It doesn't discriminate
against any network or device, nor the transmission of the
data. It is merely a conduit for information. This open
architecture, end-to-end system design is what makes the
Internet such a benefit to society. It provides endless
possibilities for innovation. It gives any individual with an
Internet connection an opportunity to share their opinion with
the world, and to access a nearly infinite amount of
information. It has revolutionized the way we conduct business,
interact socially, learn, and consume information, be it true
or false. As a result, the Internet fostered widespread
development and adoption of computing and communications
technologies, collectively known as information technologies.
Today, we depend on these technologies for everything from
social interaction to home security, the operation of critical
services like power plants and the electric grid. This
integration of the Internet and information technologies into
nearly every aspect of modern life has created the virtual
world commonly known as cyberspace.
The Internet's strength, however, is also its weakness. It
is by nature an open system with many interconnections,
creating multiple opportunities for disruption. Likewise,
information technologies are inherently complex systems,
increasing the probability of ingrained vulnerabilities. As a
result, the same technological and cultural factors that
facilitate real-time global interaction, rapid innovation, and
freedom of expression empower malicious actors to thrive and
create risk in cyberspace.
The challenge arises from the fact that cyberspace creates
an asymmetric imbalance that strongly favors malicious actors.
Anyone, from an individual to a nation state, can target a
victim halfway around the world at minimal cost and with little
risk of being caught. Because the cost of failure and the
consequences of crime are minimal, the threat evolves rapidly.
In contrast, the costs of defense, as well as potential
consequences, are significant. Because this asymmetric threat
is rooted in the fundamental structure of the Internet and
information technology, there is no way to solve cybersecurity
without undermining the benefits of the cyberspace. There is no
silver bullet or technological solution. While we certainly can
do more toimprove the security of cyberspace, these decisions
require a thoughtful cost benefit analysis. How will a
potential security measure affect the cost or convenience of a
product? How will it affect the pace of innovation? What will
it mean for privacy or civil liberties? Cyberspace is no longer
a place that we visit; it is the place where we live. Ten years
ago, smartphones were a novelty, in fact, the iPhone didn't
even exist. Today, mobile devices serve as a credit card, they
can track our health, unlock our homes, start our vehicles, and
document our daily travels. A pacifier can monitor your
infant's temperature and send that information directly to your
computer or mobile device. Through what is known as the
Internet of things, we have connected kitchen appliances, you
can start dinner from the office, check social media accounts
from your grill, or know when you are low on milk.
Cyberspace is, and will increasingly be, the economic
engine of the 21st century economy, and at the same time as the
Internet and information technology become increasingly
entwined in our daily routines, cyberspace becomes a limitless
and adaptive attack surface. The security challenges will be
more diverse and harder to predict, and the consequences will
be more severe. We may not be able to secure cyberspace, but it
is our collective responsibility to understand the threat in
order to minimize its effect on our privacy, civil liberties,
national security, and economic prosperity. We should embrace
this unique opportunity this hearing presents, not to debate
data breach legislation or other specific policy issues, but to
listen.
We are privileged to have an impressive panel of experts
who can help us understand the challenges of cybersecurity in
context. In particular, I want to recognize Dr. Shannon from
Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, home to the Nation's
first computer emergency response team. The Pittsburgh region
boasts some of the Nation's foremost experts in the field of
cybersecurity, and I am pleased to have one of those experts,
Dr. Shannon, joining us here today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Murphy follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Tim Murphy

This is the first in a series of hearings by this Committee
focused on cyberspace, the Internet and the challenges and
opportunities that they present for the 21st century economy.
These are big, important issues, so it is imperative that we
establish a clear understanding of the issues we face.
So, today we are going to do something a little different.
We are not here to examine a specific cybersecurity incident,
policy issue or legislative proposal. Today, we are going to
take a step back and explore some fundamental questions. Why
does the cyber threat exist? Is it something that can be
solved? And what does this mean for the future?
In 1969, computers at four universities connected to the
ARPANET, thus proving a computer networking concept that
evolved into what we now know as the Internet. Since its
inception, the Internet has been an open platform, designed to
facilitate the transfer of data and information between
remotely located computing resources. It does not discriminate
against any network or device, nor the data they transmit. It
is merely a conduit for information.
This open architecture, end-to-end system design is what
makes the Internet such a benefit to society. It provides
endless possibilities for innovation. It gives any individual
with an Internet connection an opportunity to share their
opinion with the world. It has revolutionized the way we
conduct business, interact socially, learn and consume
information.
As a result, the Internet fostered widespread development
and adoption of computing and communications technologies,
collectively known as information technology. Today, we depend
on these technologies for everything from social interaction to
the operation of critical services like the electric grid. This
integration of the Internet and information technologies into
nearly every aspect of modern life has created the virtual
world commonly known as cyberspace.
The Internet's strength, however, is also its weakness. It
is by nature an open system with many interconnections,
creating multiple opportunities for disruption. Likewise,
information technologies are inherently complex systems,
increasing the probability of ingrained vulnerabilities. As a
result, the same technological and cultural factors that
facilitate real-time global interaction, rapid innovation, and
freedom of expression empower malicious actors to thrive and
create risk in cyberspace.
The challenge arises from the fact that cyberspace creates
an asymmetric imbalance that strongly favors malicious actors.
The nature of the Internet and complexity of information
technology enables anyone--from an individual to a nation
state--to target a victim halfway around the world at minimal
cost and with little risk of being caught. Because the cost of
failure is minimal, the threat evolves rapidly. In contrast,
the costs of defense, as well as potential consequences, are
significant.
Because this asymmetric threat is rooted in the fundamental
structure of the Internet and information technology, there is
no way to solve cybersecurity without undermining the benefits
of the cyberspace. There is no silver bullet or technological
solution. While we certainly can do more improve the security
of cyberspace, these decisions require a thoughtful cost
benefit analysis. How will a potential security measure affect
the cost or convenience of a product? How will it affect the
pace of innovation? What will it mean for privacy or civil
liberties?
Cyberspace is no longer a place that we visit. It is a
place where we live. Ten years ago, smartphones were a
novelty--in fact, the iPhone didn't even exist. Today, mobile
devices serve as a credit card, track our health, unlock our
homes and start our vehicles. A pacifier can monitor your
infant's temperature and send that information directly to your
computer or mobile device. Through connected kitchen
appliances, you can start dinner from the office, check social
media accounts from your grill or know when you're low on milk.
Cyberspace is, and will increasingly be, the economic engine of
the 21st century economy.
At the same time, as the Internet and information
technology become increasingly entwined in our daily routines,
cyberspace becomes a limitless and adaptive attack surface. The
security challenges will be more diverse and harder predict.
And the consequences will be more severe. We may not be able to
secure cyberspace but it is our collective responsibility to
understand the threat in order to minimize its effect on our
privacy, civil liberties, national security and economic
prosperity.
I encourage all my colleagues, on both sides of the aisle,
to embrace the unique opportunity this hearing presents. We are
not here to debate data breach legislation or other specific
policy issues. We are privileged to have an impressive panel of
experts who can help us understand the challenge of
cybersecurity in context. I look forward to hearing from each
of our witnesses and the unique perspectives they bring to this
important discussion. In particular, I want to recognize Dr.
Shannon from Carnegie Mellon University, which is home to the
nation's first computer emergency response team. The Pittsburgh
region boasts some of the nation's foremost experts in the
field of cybersecurity, and I am pleased to have one of those
experts, Dr. Shannon, joining us here today.

Mr. Murphy. I will now recognize the ranking member of the
O&I Subcommittee, Ms. DeGette of Colorado, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DIANA DEGETTE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Ms. DeGette. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am glad we are
having the time to do a deep dive into this important topic.
O&I has a long history of exploring issues related to
cybersecurity. Over the years, we have had hearings on
cybersecurity risks. We have passed bipartisan legislation to
promote security and resiliency for critical infrastructure
systems. We have also examined in detail both cyber attacks and
vulnerabilities within many of the sectors under this
committee's jurisdiction. I hope that this series of hearings
will help us have additional productive conversations about how
both to understand the cyber risks and how to respond to them.
Information systems connected to the Internet are integral
to the operation of our economy. While this interconnectedness
is essential, the vulnerabilities that it can pose, pose
serious challenges. Every day, the Internet is under attack by
those with malicious intent. In the last few years, cyber
attacks on federal agencies and also on private entities have
skyrocketed. Every week it seems, there is a new series of
headlines about cyber attacks and vulnerabilities in our
system. Last week, for example, Uber revealed a breach of its
driver database that had gone unreported for months. Anthem
reported that millions of people who were not its customers
could be victims of cyber attacks on their systems. Last year,
we heard of attacks on Home Depot, Target, and JP Morgan Chase
that involved the personal information of tens of millions of
Americans.
So this past year alone has been a stark reminder that all
industries are vulnerable, and neither the private sector or
government is safe from cyber attacks. These attacks are
becoming more and more frequent, and more and more
sophisticated. I am personally concerned about how the loss of
personally identifiable information is affecting American
consumers. It is starting to appear that there are two types of
these Americans. Number one, people whose data has been subject
to a breach, and number two, people whose data will be subject
to a breach. That seems to be how it is breaking out.
So I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today about
the cybersecurity landscape. I have a couple of questions.
Number one, what are the threats that we now face, and number
two, what are our biggest vulnerabilities. Also, I want to hear
what we are doing now, and what we can improve in the future.
What are the existing standards in both the government and
private industry for keeping personal information safe, and
providing notification when there is a breach. How can we make
sure that both the public and private sectors are using their
expertise to ensure that cybersecurity measures are
appropriately tailored to address the specific needs in the
different sectors. More fundamentally, what is the appropriate
role of government and of the private sector in securing the
systems, managing cyber risks, and assessing cyber threats. How
do we promote the optimal level of cooperation and information
sharing within this division of labor. Unfortunately, this is a
problem that doesn't have an immediate or a fissile solution.
So I am hoping that our witnesses throughout the hearings
can advise us on how we can make the right strategic
investments in cybersecurity in both the short and long-term.
They are all smiling because they know what an impossible task
this is. But this is a problem that exists far beyond our
Nation's borders. We should be thinking about how we can ensure
international cooperation to protect against cyber threats
around the world. I understand we need to make substantial
changes in the way we think about cybersecurity. This is not a
problem that we have the tools to deal with immediately. And I
do want to hear from our witnesses about that today, but even
while we rethink our approach to cybersecurity and make
necessary long-term investments, I want to know what we can do
right now to protect consumers and their personal information.
If data breaches have become inevitable, we need to think about
how to make that data unusable once it is stolen, and that
seems to be a short-term key. I want to hear from the witnesses
about creative solutions in the post-breach environment. On the
battlefield, a strategy for preventing the enemy from
successfully using your technology against you is to render it
useless if it falls into the wrong hands. I think we need to
figure out ways to do this now with certain types of consumer
information if it is stolen.
As Chairman Murphy said, this is just the first in a series
to explore cyber threats in a variety of sectors. I want to
thank the witnesses, and I look forward to our continued work.
I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Gentlelady yields back.
Now recognize the vice chair of the full committee, Mrs.
Blackburn of Tennessee, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
the attention to this issue. And witnesses, we appreciate that
you are here as we begin to think through this process.
Cyberspace is really a place where a lot of our information
now resides. It is not just something that we click onto and
off of, but it is a place of residence for what I term our
virtual you, which is you and all of your information. And
interestingly enough, and the chairman noted the end-to-end
open architecture of the system, the backbone that permits
this, and you do have that original platform, that openness,
which makes it what it is, and makes it a successful
information service. So now, we have all of these incursions,
and the malware and the spyware and the bots, and this and
that, and some of these are embedded in hardware, some are
there via software, and we are looking at an increased number
of these attacks on our critical infrastructure every day.
Now, the chairman mentioned a little bit about the Internet
of things, or as I like to say, the Internet of everything. And
we know that by the end of this decade, Sysco says we are going
to have 50 billion, 50 billion devices that are connected to
the Internet. That is a lot of vulnerabilities. So as we look
at the steps that need to be taken for privacy and for data
security, we welcome your expertise and your insights, and we
thank you for helping us think forward on this.
And I yield at this time to Dr. Burgess.
Mr. Burgess. I thank the vice chairwoman for yielding.
Chairman Murphy, thank you for having the subcommittee have
this hearing on reviewing the current state of cybersecurity.
It is an issue that is vital to the future of commerce and our
economy. Developing a strong grasp of the engineering and
technical realities underpinning computer networks, and what
that means for business models is an integral part of
understanding cybersecurity.
I do want to acknowledge, Chairman Murphy, your comments
that this is not a data breach hearing. The Subcommittee on
Commerce, Manufacturing and Trade is working to finalize
legislation establishing a data security requirement, and a
single set of breach notification rules for entities under the
Federal Trade Committee's jurisdiction. But that is just one
piece of the broader puzzle, and I look forward to the broader
discussion of cybersecurity at today's hearing.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back the balance of
the time.
Mr. Murphy. Thank the gentleman.
And now I turn to Mr. Pallone for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to borrow the words of one of our witnesses here
today. Dr. Shannon, in summarizing the cybersecurity landscape,
says this in his written testimony, and I quote, ``Currently
there is no manner in which an entity, public or private, can
be fully protected without simultaneously destroying its value.
Today, there are neither the tools, technology, nor resources
to stop all serious cyber attacks and allow for efficient
function of electronic commerce. We simply do not yet know how
to do both of these together, which makes enabling continued
technology research an innovation essential.'' and that is the
end of his quote.
Dr. Shannon, you captured perfectly the problems we face in
this area, and the challenges in responding. This committee has
a long history on cybersecurity issues, and I look forward to
this series of hearings as we continue to examine this area.
Unfortunately, our ability to protect against cyber attacks
while improving still appears to lack what is needed to prevent
these intrusions. We are seeing more frequent and more severe
attacks in both the public and private sectors. In just the
past few years, millions of Americans have had their
information compromised in data breaches. At the same time, our
dependence on the Internet and interconnected information
systems has only increased. Disconnecting from the Internet is
not an option for a vast majority of individuals and companies
alike.
The private sector seems to be no better at preventing
attacks than the Federal Government. In the last year or so, we
have seen breach after breach where attacks are placing
Americans' personal data at risk. Attacks on Target, JP Morgan,
Home Depot, Sony, and now Anthem have all underscored this
fact. And these attacks illustrate that even the biggest
companies with considerable resources at their disposal are not
immune to these intrusions. We must also face the reality that
it is much cheaper for the attackers to infiltrate than it is
for us to protect and respond, and unfortunately, there is no
one solution at this time to guarantee that stored information
will remain secure. But we can't ignore cybersecurity until we
have a solution. Instead, we need to find ways to manage the
problem, and I hope this series of hearings can bring out some
creative solutions on how to do just that.
In addition, we need to start thinking about post-breach
protections, particularly as it relates to consumers. Clearly
finding ways to strengthen existing systems is necessary, but
we also need to make it harder for thieves to use stolen data
after breaches occur. It is not enough for companies to simply
offer a free year of credit monitoring as an answer. Rather, we
need to explore ways to make consumer data less useful if it
falls into the hands of the bad guys.
So, Mr. Chairman, coming up with effective solutions to
these problems will be a long process, but I applaud you and
our ranking member, Ms. DeGette, for starting this series of
hearings, and I look forward to working with you to better
protect our institutions, companies, and citizens.
I yield the remaining of my time to the gentlewoman from
New York, Ms. Clarke.
Ms. Clarke. I would first like to thank both our Chairman
Murphy and Ranking Member DeGette for having this hearing, and
I would like to thank the gentleman from New Jersey, the
ranking member of our full committee, Mr. Pallone, for yielding
me time.
I thank our witnesses for lending their expertise, time,
and talent to today's Oversight and Investigations hearing.
As you know, I was on the Homeland Security Committee for
the past 8 years, and of those 8 years, I was ranking member of
the Cybersecurity and Critical Infrastructure Subcommittee for
4 years, and chairwoman for 2 years. Needless to say, this
issue is extremely important to me, but more importantly, to
our Nation. There is no doubt that we face a challenge of
incredible proportions when it comes to cyber threats.
Comprehensive and effective cybersecurity policy has always
been a complicated endeavor, but in the face of the
technological landscape that is constantly evolving and
developing new mechanisms that threaten the integrity of our
Nation's virtual presence, we stand in unchartered territory as
we try to shape a government and corporate response that is
effective, adaptable, and a step ahead of any threat we may
encounter.
We hear about a new breach in security or impending cyber
threat almost daily, so it is inarguable that the time to set
our House in order has come and it is now. The security of our
Nation's cyber infrastructure and our response to cyber threats
is not a partisan issue. We have to work together: democrats
and republicans, government and private industry, academics and
public advocates, to not only protect the privacy of our
citizens, but also identify and respond to security threats.
Ultimately, however, it is the expertise of today's witnesses,
and many others across the cyber community, that will allow us
to act in the best interests of our Nation.
I look forward to listening to and learning from what
today's witnesses have to share with us.
I yield back to Ranking Member DeGette.
Mr. DeGette. I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. All right, thank you. Thank you.
We are expecting votes from between 2:15 and 2:45, so we
will move quickly through these questions. 2:45, 3:15? All
right, 2:45, 3:15, so we should have plenty of time.
So now let me introduce the witnesses on the panel for
today's hearing. First, Dr. Herbert Lin, Senior Research
Scholar for Cyber Policy and Security at the Center for
International Security and Cooperation, a Senior Fellow at the
Hoover Institute in Stanford University, his research relates
broadly to policy-related dimensions of cybersecurity and
cyberspace, and particularly interested and is knowledgeable
about the use of offensive operations, cyberspace, especially
instruments of national policy. Welcome here, Dr. Lin.
Next, Dr. Richard Bejtlich. I say that right?
Mr. Bejtlich. Yes, sir.
Mr. Murphy. Good. Is the chief security strategist at
FireEye, Incorporated, and was Mandiant's chief security
officer when FireEye was acquired by Mandiant in 2013. In this
role, he empowers policymakers, international leaders, global
customers, and concerned citizens to understand and mitigate
digital risks through strategic security programs.
Our third panelist is Dr. Greg Shannon, Chief Scientist for
the CERT Program at the Software Engineering Institute at the
Carnegie Mellon University. In this role, he is responsible for
working with the director and SEI leadership to plan, develop,
and implement research strategies, initiatives, and programs
that further the mission of CERT and SEI, as well as
developing, conveying, and executing innovative ideas for the
Nation's cybersecurity research agendas. In addition, he was
recently named chair of the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers Cybersecurity Initiative.
I will now swear in the witnesses. As you all are aware,
the committee is holding an investigative hearing, and when
doing so, has the practice of taking testimony under oath. Do
any of you have objections to testifying under oath? Seeing no
objections, the chair then advises you that under the rules of
the House and the rules of the committee, you are entitled to
be advised by counsel. Do any of you desire to be advised by
counsel during your testimony today? And they have all
indicated no. In that case, would you please rise and raise
your right hand, I will swear you in.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. All the witnesses answered in the
affirmative. So you are now under oath and subject to the
penalties set forth in Title XVIII, section 1001 of the United
States Code. We will recognize you each for a 5-minute summary.
The rules are press the button on the mic, pull it close to
you. Watch for the red light, that means your time is up.
Dr. Lin, you may begin.

TESTIMONY OF HERBERT LIN, SENIOR RESEARCH SCHOLAR, CENTER FOR
THE INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AND COOPERATION, SENIOR FELLOW,
HOOVER INSTITUTION, HARVARD UNIVERSITY; RICHARD BEJTLICH, CHIEF
SECURITY STRATEGIST, FIREEYE, INCORPORATED; AND GREGORY
SHANNON, CHIEF SCIENTIST, CERT PROGRAM, SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
INSTITUTE, CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY

TESTIMONY OF HERBERT LIN

Mr. Lin. Mr. Chairman, members of the subcommittee, thanks
for the opportunity to testify. Testimony today is personal,
although my professional work informs it.
Let me start with two definitions. Cyberspace is computers,
smartphones, the Internet, stuff with computers inside them. It
is also the information inside these things, and our dependence
on all of this is growing.
Here is a definition of cybersecurity that--with words like
negative impact and bad guy. What is important here is that the
definitions of these words are policy matters, and also
cybersecurity isn't just technology. Economics, psychology,
organizations, they all matter because they help to shape user
behavior, which affects cybersecurity.
On security, a computer in a sealed metal box, there is
supposed to be a computer inside that one on the left. There is
one on mine. And it is a sealed metal box, so I guess you can't
see it. That is perfectly secure, but it is useless. OK. The
one on the right is useful but potentially insecure because--it
is useful because you get information in and out of it. You
only want good data to get into it. That requires a judgment
about what counts as good, and such judgments are fallible.
Here is a network of nodes that represents the Internet. At
each node there is another network or a computer. The Internet
is designed with just one function really; to transport data
from A to B without regard for what it means. Usefulness of the
Internet comes from the computers that sit at the nodes, and
this principle is what has really enabled the Internet to grow
so quickly in the past. But if you believe in this principle,
it also means that the network in the middle doesn't handle
security. Many people want to put security in the middle, but
that would violate this basic principle that has driven
Internet growth and innovation, and also the change wouldn't
entirely solve the cybersecurity problem. There are some
exceptions to this description, but they don't really change
the basic story.
Complexity is the enemy of cybersecurity. What we want from
our computers requires complex systems. We put components into
a system. When the system is complex enough, nobody understands
the system very well, and so the system, in fact, may not be
secure. And here is an example of complexity at work. You have
done this before, from a browser you type in the URL, like
EnergyCommerce.House.gov, and then in less than a second the
E&C Commerce site appears. OK. This is what is going on behind
the scene. It is not worth going over each of these elements, I
don't have time for it either, but at every one of these boxes,
an adversary could interfere with your Web experience.
Also, adversaries adapt, and here is an example from
safecracking. Good guys don't get the last move here. When we
put money in wooden boxes to protect them, robbers use axes.
When we used metal safes to stop them, they drilled wedges
between the door and the safe. When you put in step doors, they
poured in nitroglycerine, and so on. And we still haven't
entirely stopped bank robberies.
The result of this is this chart. Over time, we get better
at cybersecurity, that is the bottom line, but the top line,
how much we depend on cyberspace and, therefore, how much the
threat that we face has grown even faster, and that gap,
therefore, is growing. The defenses of today would be good
against the threats of 10 years ago, but the threat has changed
too.
This leads to conclusion one, which is that cybersecurity
is a never-ending battle. You will not find a decisive solution
forever, and so you have to find ways to manage it at an
acceptable cost. This really leads to two questions: why bother
with cybersecurity at all, and how can we manage the problem?
On the why bother, here are some reasons. You deal with the
unsophisticated threats, you make yourself less vulnerable so
the bad guys go after the next guy rather than you. You can
give the bad guy less time to do his dirty work, and you help
law enforcement focus on the harder cases. OK. Second, why is
it so hard to solve this as a policy problem? Well, the reason
is that we want cybersecurity, but we want other good things as
well. We want rapid innovation, and it is always faster to do
something without attention to security. We want convenience on
cybersecurity. It mostly gets in your way. How often have you
been at a computer that you couldn't get on because you forgot
a password? There is also interoperability, which means
sometimes you can't fix a known security problem because you
are afraid of damaging existing programs. And we want privacy
for us but not the bad guys. That means when we try to collect
data on the bad guys, sometimes we collect data inadvertently
on the good guys. And the tradeoff is that we don't know how
much inadvertent collection we should tolerate to gain
security. Tradeoffs are unavoidable, and that means it makes
consensus hard to reach. How do you do better? Well, part one
is you reduce the gap between the average and the best, and
part two is you reduce the gap between the best and what you
actually need.
So here is my summary of this, which is all in your--this
is a one-page summary. And this reference, from which much of
this testimony is drawn, I would like to incorporate that into
the record of the hearing, if I may. And I think it has been
distributed to members. So that is it. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lin follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[The attachment to Mr. Lin's testimony has been retained in
committee files and can be found at http://docs.house.gov/
meetings/if/if02/20150303/103079/hhrg-114-if02-20150303-
sd006.pdf.]
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
Now our next witness, go ahead, 5 minutes.

TESTIMONY OF RICHARD BEJTLICH

Mr. Bejtlich. Chairman Murphy, Ranking Member DeGette,
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify. I am Richard Bejtlich, Chief Security Strategist at
FireEye. Today I will discuss briefly digital threats, how to
think about risk, and some strategies to address these
challenges.
So first, who is the threat? We have discovered and
countered nation-state actors from China, Russia, Iran, North
Korea, Syria, and other countries. The Chinese and Russians
tend to hack for commercial and geopolitical gain. The Iranians
and North Koreans extend these activities to include disruption
via denied service and sabotage using destructive malware.
Activity from Syria relates to the regional civil war, and
sometimes affects Western news outlets and other victims.
Eastern Europe continues to be a source of criminal operations,
and we worry about the conflict between Ukraine and Russia
extending into the digital realm.
I began by saying who is the threat, and that brings about
threat attribution. Threat attribution, or identifying
responsibility for a breach, depends on the political stakes
surrounding an incident. For high-profile intrusions such as
those in the news over the last few months, attribution has
been a priority. National technical means, law enforcement, and
counterintelligence can pierce anonymity. Some elements of the
private sector have the right experience and evidence to assist
with this process. So attribution is possible, but it is a
function of what is at stake.
So who is being breached? In March of 2014, the Washington
Post reported that in 2013, federal agents, most often the FBI,
notified more than 3,000 U.S. companies that their computer
systems had been hacked. This count represents clearly
identified breach victims. Many were likely compromised more
than once. How do victims learn of a breach? In 70 percent of
the cases, someone else, likely the FBI, tells a victim about a
serious compromise. Only 30 percent of the time, the victims
learn of the intrusions on their own. The median amount of time
for when an intruder first compromises a victim to when the
victim learns of a breach is currently 205 days. This means
that, unfortunately for nearly 7 months after gaining initial
entry, intruders are free to roam within victim networks.
Well, what is the answer? Before talking about solutions to
digital risk, we need to define it. Always ask risk of what.
Are we talking about the risk of a teenager committing suicide
due to cyberbullying, or the risk of a retiree's 401(k) being
emptied due to electronic theft, or the risk of a week-long
power outage due to state-sponsored attack? Step one is to
define the risk, and step two is to measure progress by
combining means and ways to achieve defined ends.
To measure success, I recommend that a security team track
the number of intrusions that occur every year, and you will
see this in the FISMA report that was just released yesterday,
although, honestly, it seemed buried in the report. So you want
to count the number of intrusions per year, but more
importantly, you want to measure the amount of time from when
the intruder first gets into the enterprise to when someone
notices, and when from someone notices to when you kick them
out. And these are the metrics that I don't see recorded too
often.
It is also important to think in terms of how to define
risk, and security professionals, like the ones at this table,
tend to think in terms of threat vulnerability and cost. And we
use a pseudo equation where risk is the product of threat
vulnerability and cost. We are not trying to calculate a
number; just show that, as you influence each one of these
factors, you either raise risk or lower risk.
So I think in general, there is a lot of attention paid to
the vulnerability in a computer and an iPhone, that sort of
thing, but we need to spend a lot of time as well on the threat
and the cost. Law enforcement and counterintelligence are the
primary means by which you can mitigate the threat. In an
editorial for Brookings that I wrote, I asked what makes more
sense; expecting two billion Internet users to adequately
secure their personal information, or reducing the threat posed
by the roughly 100 top tier malware authors? So that is the
threat side.
On the cost side, we need to think of ways to reduce the
cost of dealing with a security breach, not only for companies
but also for consumers. So we are seeing this in a couple of
different areas. One step in place is the tokenization of
payment card system data where you replace a credit card number
with a string of numbers in its place. A second step would be
eliminating the value of the social security number to identity
thieves. I recommend reading the Electronic Privacy Information
Center suggestions on effective social security legislation for
some policy changes.
In brief, defenders win when they stop intruders from
achieving their objective. It is ideal to stop the adversary
from entering the network, but that goal is increasingly
difficult. I recommend you quickly detect the intrusion,
respond to contain the adversary, and then kick them out.
And finally, we must appreciate that the time to find and
remove intruders is now. There is no point in planning for
future theoretical breaches. If you were to hire me to be your
chief security officer, the very first step I would take would
be to hunt for intruders already in the network.
I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bejtlich follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
Now, Dr. Shannon, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

TESTIMONY OF GREGORY SHANNON

Mr. Shannon. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Murphy, Ranking
Member DeGette, and distinguished subcommittee members. I am
honored to testify before you today on cyber threats and
implications for the 21st century. I am Greg Shannon, the Chief
Scientist for the CERT Division at the Software Engineering
Institute, which is a DoD, FFRDC, operated by Carnegie Mellon
University.
To sustain and expand our economy, consumers and businesses
need to trust the cyber infrastructure ecosystem upon which
commerce and innovation now depend. Those ecosystems must also
thwart capable adversaries who seek to execute economy-
disrupting cyber attacks. Today, in cyberspace, as noted
before, there is no manner in which an entity, public or
private, can fully protect itself without simultaneously
eroding its own value. There are neither existing technologies
nor any amount of money that would stop all serious cyber
attacks, and allow for the efficient function of electronic
commerce. We simply do not yet know how to do both.
As technologists, what are we to do? In the short term, we
need to push for more and better measurement of outcomes, as
noted earlier. Security successes as well as breaches.
Collectively, if most everyone practices good cyber hygiene, we
are unlikely to be undone by the weakest link, however, you
cannot expect everyone to adopt a new idea without proof of
efficacy, especially when implementation isn't free. The
opportunity of measuring outcomes directly applies to two
promising risk management frameworks, the NIST Cybersecurity
Framework, and the Department of Energy's Cybersecurity
Capability Maturity Model. Both of these frameworks are being
measured for efficacy and will soon produce data telling us
which practices matter. We need that feedback. The best-secured
organizations continuously monitor how their performance
correlates with their practices. Without meaningful feedback,
the state-of-the-art cannot improve.
In the medium-term, we need to improve access to data,
specifically for security and privacy innovation. Cyber
solutions are only as good as the data they are created from.
And currently, researchers and developers have limited access
to data, resulting in subpar solutions and slower innovation.
Sadly, just this morning, I listened to research results based
on 15-year-old synthetic dataset with known serious
limitations. Fortunately, I have also personally seen security
innovation accelerated when scientists and engineers have
access to good data; i.e., when modeling insider threats. If we
can determine which subsets are essential for combatting those
cyber threat, then less data would need to be shared and
thereby possibly moderating privacy concerns.
In the long-term, we need a coordinated national strategy
to sustainably build trust and thwart our cyber adversaries.
For example, we need to eliminate the possibility that a single
weakness can threaten the economy. Considering computational
and human energy as a barrier, it is possible to create and
operate a strategically advanced cyber infrastructure that
would require adversaries to expend exceptional energy in order
to pose serious cyber threats to our economy. Today it takes
only modest computing and human energy to find and execute
economy-threatening attacks, creating an environment that
favors the adversary by orders of magnitude. Given the energy
we already expend on security defenses, we can optimize our
energy investments to create a more robust defense, and
simultaneously apply recent research results and new
technologies that makes the computational cost of finding and
executing a compromise exceptionally high. In June, a DIMACS-
and IEEE-sponsored workshop at Carnegie Mellon will discuss the
technical foundations of this strategy. If we can create and
operate a strategically advanced cyber infrastructure that
requires adversaries to expend astronomical amounts of energy
to find and execute economy-threatening attacks, then energy
becomes the currency in which one traffics to protect or attack
commerce around the world. Ultimately, access to energy could
become a deterrent to economy-threatening cyber attacks.
Over the last 45 years, we have created the Internet and a
modern evolving 21st century economy. Paradoxically, our own
innovation and collective success have created today's trust
and resiliency challenges. Nevertheless, I am optimistic that
over the next 45 years, we will make our 21st century economy
fully trustworthy and resilient.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shannon follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Murphy. I thank all the panelists for their testimony.
And now I am going to recognize myself for 5 minutes for
questions.
So we have heard a lot about the nature of cyber threats
and cybersecurity. We heard it is very asymmetric, it favors
those who wish to misbehave in cyberspace, and defenders have
to spend a great deal of time and money and very complex
systems all at once. So this is a question for any of you. Can
this asymmetric imbalance be corrected to favor defenders
instead of attackers? Any of you want to weigh in on that? Dr.
Lin?
Mr. Lin. Sure. I don't know if it will ever be able to
favor the defense, but you can certainly make it a lot harder
for the attackers. I think there is no question about that. I
think all of my colleagues here basically said that, that we
can do a much better job than we are doing now. For example,
there are known technologies and known procedures, and so on,
that we can deploy that will increase security, but we just
don't use them, for a variety of reasons.
Mr. Murphy. Anyone else want to weigh in on that before I
go on to my next question?
Mr. Bejtlich. Sir, just briefly, I could give you a
tactical answer. The iPhone is an example of a more secure
technology that people love, and the reason is is Apple has an
App Store that it polices closely; it is very difficult to get
something malicious in there. So when you look at
vulnerabilities on phones, there is a fraction of what is on
Android as compared to Apple because Android is much more open,
Apple is more closed. Now, if you want to be able to run
whatever you want on your iPhone, you lose that, but it is more
secure.
At a more strategic level though, we have to realize that
it does take effort for intruders to get their objectives done.
It is not like a silver bullet attack where they press a button
and the end of the world happens. We have seen intruders take
days, weeks, even months, to get to the data that they need. So
sometimes it is a question of your perspective as well.
Mr. Murphy. So let me jump onto that and, Dr. Shannon,
maybe you could follow this. So are there opportunities that we
can increase the cost for the bad guys in doing business, so we
can do some technical things, which you just described Apple
does, but are there other things, perhaps legal or
technological solutions that we can take steps on?
Mr. Shannon. At the technological level, as I point out in
my written testimony, there are some long-term research and
development opportunities. Technology that is coming to
fruition is becoming practical. Essentially, it makes the
computations similar to--if you were to break the computation,
it would be similar to breaking encryption. And so the goal is
to make it so that database queries, remote computation in the
Cloud, is just as difficult of disrupting and compromising as
it is encryption. And these typically are encryption-based
technologies, and hence, my comments about high energy, that
the amount of energy it would take an adversary to compromise
those systems, or to find a way to thwart those systems, would
be comparable to breaking encryption.
Mr. Murphy. Let me jump onto a different part here. So let
us talk about the Internet of things. We are going to have all
these things controlling parts of our lives, from running our
dishwasher to opening and closing garage doors, turning the
heat on and off, tracking where we are, finding where our kids
are, is it possible to keep pace with these threats, and let
alone increase the cost of attackers, as we are talking about
here, to malicious actors? Dr. Lin, can you weigh in on that?
Mr. Lin. Is it possible to do better than they are likely
to do? Sure, but the problem is that getting stuff out first to
market is an effort-intensive thing, and you don't want to put
in effort to focus on security before you can get to market.
And they do this for perfectly reasonable economic reasons, but
it is very hard to get people to focus on cybersecurity in the
absence of some sort of mandate before they have gotten the
product out.
Mr. Murphy. So that becomes something we can work on in
Congress.
Mr. Bejtlich. Sir, there is an opportunity here, and that
is, with traditional security, you have been relying on a
person to secure their computer. Someone who is not an expert,
someone who is just a user. With a vendor, you have a
centralized place where you could apply some pressure of a
variety of means to get them to have their act together as far
as, for example, securing my refrigerator. There is nothing I
can really do to my refrigerator. It is not like my PC. So you
can apply some pressure on the vendor to make sure that they
have their act together.
Mr. Murphy. OK. Let me ask one more question in my brief
amount of time. Dr. Shannon, you referred to the importance of
trust and trustworthy things. We want to be able to trust so
many things that we are involved, with interstate commerce,
with energy, telecommunications, all the things within the
jurisdiction of this committee. So let me go back here, if we
were to redesign, if the Internet was starting up today, how
would we design it differently to take care to have that trust,
still have something that is accessible, but is secure?
Mr. Shannon. A big part of it is to look at the ecosystem
that actually creates the components for the environment, the
software, the hardware. Part of the challenge is that there is
a very large shared base, and those systems have been created
in an insecure manner. And so it provides ample opportunities
for adversaries to work their way into, and they really create
the opportunity to steal the private data and to bring down a
banking site, or whatever. So that is where the real
opportunity is if you designed it properly from the beginning.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
Ms. DeGette, you are recognized for 5 minutes. My time is
up.
Ms. DeGette. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. As I mentioned in my
opening statement, the Federal Government and also private
businesses have been targeted by cybercriminals, and I talked
about Target, I talked about Home Depot, JP Morgan Chase, the
health insurer Anthem. From the Federal Government side, also
we have had substantial attacks. In July of 2013, there were
hackers who stole social security numbers and other information
from over 100,000 employees at the Department of Energy, for
just one example.
So, Mr. Bejtlich, I heard a number that seems high, but if
you add all these together, the number I heard is that over 100
million Americans could potentially be at risk from these cyber
attacks. Does that number sound plausible to you?
Mr. Bejtlich. Yes, just given the Anthem hack alone, close
to 80 million records including social security numbers. So you
get to 100 million pretty quickly.
Ms. DeGette. Yes. And so typically what companies do is
they tell people they can have a year of free credit monitoring
if they have had their data stolen. Do you think that is
sufficient, or do we need to explore additional remedies?
Mr. Bejtlich. I concur that that is not sufficient. I don't
want to blame the victims in this case, but I was personally
affected by the Anthem hack, as was my family, so the ability
to recover from that doesn't exist in our system. It does exist
for something like a credit card number. We have all had credit
cards stolen and not suffered that much damage, but it is a
whole other ballgame when you are dealing with social security
numbers and other data.
Ms. DeGette. And do you have some ideas what we could do,
aside from giving people free credit monitoring?
Mr. Bejtlich. Well, I think the first thing is to go
through an exercise that says what data exists, and what
happens when that data is an intruder's hands, in a criminal's
hands, what can be done with that data. And if there is no
friction from having the data to opening a new line of credit,
getting a mortgage, whatever it is, we need to introduce some
friction there, whether it is some type of physical agreement
that has to be passed through the mail, or something that makes
it more difficult for the intruder, and allows the victim to
know something is going on here and not just wait until you
have gotten an adverse credit report.
Ms. DeGette. Yes, and is that something that you think
Congress should be involved in?
Mr. Bejtlich. It is not my place to say what you should do,
I believe, but I do think we need more industries thinking in
terms of what happens to data post-breach, because I agree with
your statement that we are either post-breach or pre-breach for
most organizations.
Ms. DeGette. Right. Right, and I mean what you are saying
is, if somebody hasn't had their data stolen, it is likely that
they will have their data stolen, correct?
Mr. Bejtlich. Some data, yes, of some type. As we have all
heard, more of our data is out there.
Ms. DeGette. So do you think it might make sense to let
consumers lock their credit down with credit agencies? Do you
think that might be one solution?
Mr. Bejtlich. Ma'am, I am not an expert in the credit
system, although my understanding of the current system is that
that is not an easy proposition. I think we may need to look at
something that would allow that to happen, for example, I have
young children, there is no reason for them to have any credit
taken out in their name until there is some type of formal
approval.
Ms. DeGette. And that was my next question is that would be
one thing that would be easy to do. Is there some other way we
can protect children from early identity theft?
Mr. Bejtlich. I do know that the act of credit monitoring,
and this has come out through the disclosures that I have
received as a victim of some of these cases, the act of trying
to do credit monitoring, or to do a credit check for a child
makes them more likely, or makes it easier for an intruder to
use their identity. So that seems like a situation that needs
to be changed.
Ms. DeGette. So I have one more question for anybody who
wants to answer it. My staff here recently--you met with Sysco?
Voice. Citigroup.
Ms. DeGette. Citigroup? Citigroup. And they did a test on
their own systems, and what they found was that these breaches
were actually interactive. So they could breach one machine and
then it would actually morph when it went to the next machine.
It would actually change. And so that is the sophistication
they are getting now. What can we do to start trying to protect
against those sorts of breaches? Anybody.
Mr. Shannon. Well, the cyber threat analysis is a key part
of that in terms of being able to track an adversary, and track
their TTPs, their tools, techniques and procedures, so that
once you realize there is a breach, you realize what the next
step for that adversary might be. And it is about using the
cyber intelligence----
Ms. DeGette. Do we have the ability to do that now?
Mr. Shannon. There are commercial organizations that
actually do that. I believe that is part of what you guys do
for your bread and butter.
Mr. Lin. The problem that you have described is what is
known as a perimeter defense, and once you have breached the
perimeter of an organization, you can do anything you want
inside. Most organizations believe that they just erect a big
enough of perimeter on the outside and they are safe, but they
are not. And so organizations have to learn to practice and
operate as though they had already been penetrated, and getting
them to do that is a tough thing to do.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. They have called a vote, early as it
is. So what we are going to--no, I guess it is on time. So what
we are going to do is take a break. Don't go far because as
soon as Members come back--I know Mr. McKinley ran so he will
beat me back, so we can just continue on as soon as we get back
here and have a chair. So don't wonder far, we will be right
back. Thank you.
[Recess.]
Mr. McKinley [presiding]. Now that we have some balance
here, we can continue. And so we will continue the hearing. I
believe I am the next questioner. So thank you very much for
your patience on that, and now that we have a balanced panel,
we can continue.
I am trying to follow some of the hyperbolae that goes on
in Washington often about cybersecurity, terrorism, debt,
climate change, I was interested in the last few days the--Lee
Hamilton with the 9/11 Commission came out and said the biggest
threat facing America is not ISIS, but cyber attacks. The FBI
director said it is the greatest threat to national security.
And the director of national intelligence, Clapper, said that
the online assaults undermine U.S. national security.
Do you agree that that is one of our biggest threats if not
the biggest threat that we face is the issue we are talking
about here today? Each of you, just kind of a yes or no.
Mr. Shannon. It is clearly a big threat. I think given that
many other threats will result in direct loss of life, I think
in the cyber arena it is pretty hard to make a compelling case
based on experience to date. Is the potential there?
Absolutely, but it is not, thank God, it hasn't manifested
itself on a regular basis like it has in other areas.
Mr. Bejtlich. Sir, I tend to think in terms of the actor,
so cyber is a vector and a target, but at the end of the day,
there is someone behind it, whether we are talking about the
Russians or someone else, and I think that is why DNI Clapper
elevated the Russian threat as above the China threat right
now. The Russian threat is seen as more acute. It is linked to
geopolitical events. It could be seen as a potential response
to activity that is going on in Ukraine, whereas the activity
from China is more stealing secrets and it is more of a chronic
issue. So I tend to think in terms of who is it that we worry
about, and less the way that they are going to do it.
Mr. McKinley. OK. Dr. Lin?
Mr. Lin. I would agree with my two colleagues here, that it
is one of the biggest threats. I would have a hard time
thinking that it is worse than a nuclear weapon going off----
Mr. McKinley. Sure.
Mr. Lin [continuing]. Improvised nuclear weapon going off,
you know. I----
Mr. McKinley. But if I could just continue with that
because if it is a threat, and I think of small businesses, the
Mildred Schmidt who lives next door to you, lives next door to
me, she has no idea that she has been hacked, and they are
getting into her information. I think if small companies--like
my former company, that we did business with the Federal
Government, and people could hack into my computer, and by
virtue of that, get into the Federal computers. So we know it
is out there. But what I did not like was, I guess it was, Mr.
Bejtlich, something in your testimony, you said it may take 7
months before we know they are in there. This thing is just so
broad, are we spending too much attention trying to focus on
prevention and keeping actors out, or is there a better way to
address this, because we seem like we may be shortening the
time frame. Is this the best thing we should be doing?
Mr. Shannon. Yes, that is certainly a concern. I mean we
want to be able to build better infrastructure. You know, I am
part of the Software Engineering Institute, part of our goal is
to develop better methodologies for creating software
assurance, and part of the challenges, as we were discussing
during the break, is that the libraries that are out there that
developers use, there are 15 million C programmers in the
world, and they all go to places like GitHub and other open-
source repositories to get a lot of their code, or to look at
the code to see how it is done. And those codes haven't been
hardened.
Mr. McKinley. But Doctor, how do we deal with the small
businesses that can't afford to build in all the software
protection? How do we deal with that?
Mr. Shannon. You want to provide a national asset where
they can go to and get that as a given. If you provide
repositories where there are already pre-hardened components,
the developers would be using that if they are going to
actually do some development. That----
Mr. McKinley. Well----
Mr. Shannon [continuing]. Is part of the benefit of
ecosystems like IOS. Developers go there and they already know
that they are using components that have been tested and
approved.
Mr. McKinley. Tested, OK.
Mr. Bejtlich. I think insurance----
Mr. McKinley. Mr. Bejtlich, it looks like you--OK, you
wanted to say something?
Mr. Bejtlich. Sorry, sir. I think insurance is also going
to play a much greater role here. It is important to think in
terms of--cyber is unique in some senses but in other cases it
is not. So there are plenty of other real-world elements we can
bring to bear on this, and insurance would be one of them.
There is no reason for your small business to go out of
business because of a hack if you can buy a policy that would
help you recover from that.
Mr. McKinley. Dr. Lin?
Mr. Lin. And I would say that there is a role for a single
one-stop shopping for help if you have a computer security
problem, that it would be helpful if your small business owner
could know who to call. The problem with something like that is
that what is going on in this person's computer is a very
individual thing and there are going to be problems in
responding, but at least people should be able to get help, and
right now there isn't any good way to do that.
Mr. McKinley. OK. So my time has run out on that, but thank
you very much for that. I hope we can pursue that a little bit
further.
Now, who do we have next? Our chairman is back.
Mrs. Blackburn, 5 minutes.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, sir. I appreciate that, and I
appreciate the patience that you all are showing by hanging
with us as we are back and forth to the floor and different
things.
Let me pick up right where Mr. McKinley left off. And as I
said in my opening, that when you look at cyberspace, it is a
place now where our information actually resides. Our virtual
you lives there. And what we hear from constituents is how do I
protect this, why can't they do something to make this safer?
As my colleagues have heard me repeatedly say, there is nothing
that women hate more than a peeping Tom, and they don't like
them looking at their networks and their pictures and their
photos and their passwords, and things of this nature, and the
way they feel that violation is something that we hear about.
So what I would like to hear from you all, and, Dr. Lin, you
just alluded to this, when you said people want to know where
to get help. So what do you see as a group of best practices
that should be there for companies and their virtual space,
whether they are a click business or a brick and mortar
business, and then talk a little bit about B to C, and how
businesses deal with consumers and inform and educate them as
to what they are doing to make that virtual marketplace, and
prohibit and incursions in cyber.
So let us start and just go down the line. We have 3
minutes, and I would like about 30 seconds from each of you on
it.
Mr. Lin. One thing that businesses can do with respect to
the consumers is to be more transparent about the ways in which
they protect data and are willing to use it. Many companies are
less than fully transparent in the ways in which they----
Mrs. Blackburn. So how they are crunching the data----
Mr. Lin. That is correct.
Mrs. Blackburn [continuing]. And what they are pulling from
it, and go ahead and get permissions on the frontend.
Mr. Lin. Well, that is right, and to be fully disclosive
about what they are actually going to----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Mr. Lin [continuing]. What they could do with it.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Mr. Bejtlich. I would like to hear about the steps they
take to protect data. Lots of times you hear, well, we can't
talk about that because it will show too much to the adversary.
I really don't believe that. I would like to know, for example,
that my bank has an incident response team, that they exercise
at regular intervals, they are staffed with these people that
you may have heard of in the press. That, to me, would give me
some comfort that they are taking that seriously.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Mr. Shannon. I think, actually, the marketplace has an
opportunity to make this decision. I have seen some startups
coming out that are promoting security higher to the users. And
so if the company can indicate we are making things maybe a
little more inconvenient for you, but it also makes it
extremely more inconvenient for the hacker.
Mrs. Blackburn. Dr. Shannon, why do you think companies
have not done that?
Mr. Shannon. Well, because they see it as an impediment to
their profit loss, they want to retain users, they want to make
their services easy to use, and so they haven't been forced to,
essentially, admit that----
Mrs. Blackburn. But then their customers become very
angry----
Mr. Shannon. That is correct.
Mrs. Blackburn [continuing]. When there is an incursion.
Let me--and it is Mr. Bejtlich, right? Am I saying that
right?
Mr. Bejtlich. Bejtlich. Thank you.
Mrs. Blackburn. Bejtlich. OK. I am close. That works. OK,
let us see, Mandiant's M-trends 2015 report, something that
caught my eye there was that you could have some malicious
activity and a malicious actor on your system for 205 days.
That was the average before it was discovered. And I found this
so interesting because we had a company in my district there
around Nashville that had a major breach this year, and the
amount of time that the bad actor was on the system and then
moved the information to a different system before they
exported it and left----
Mr. Bejtlich. Right.
Mrs. Blackburn [continuing]. The country with it. So do you
concur with that 205 days, or is there a different--I know you
all do a lot of remediation work, so----
Mr. Bejtlich. Right. That is absolutely our number. That is
based----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Mr. Bejtlich [continuing]. On our consulting work from last
year. It is down from the year before which--we are moving in
the right direction, but 7 months is still way too high.
Mrs. Blackburn. I agree with you.
And with that, I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Murphy. Now recognize Mr. Collins for 5 minutes.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you
for coming in today to testify. The last Congress, I was the
subcommittee chairman of Health and Technology on small
business. I had a hearing on cybersecurity, and I don't think
we can say this too often to small business, there is a threat
to them, there is a threat to their very existence. And so
maybe today we could just, Mr. Bejtlich, continue this
discussion more as a PR to small business.
What I found was most small businesses are naive to the
threat. They operate under, ``it won't happen to me.'' They are
going to go after Target or Citibank or someone, they are not
coming after my small business, which, in fact, and maybe you
could expand on this, I think many of these folks see small
businesses as the easy way into bigger companies. If they are a
supplier to General Electric, if they are a supplier to a big
company, an attacker can get into that small supplier and work
through their connection to get through the supply chain, so to
speak. But what we found was the staggering percentage of
businesses that are out of business within 12 months of a data
breach. It threatens their very existence because as, and you
can expand on this really as well, if someone gets into their
employee information, they have to provide credit insurance for
that employee for some extended period of time, and that it out
of their pocket, but also if a big corporation finds that that
supplier was the access point, guess what, that big company is
not going to buy from that supplier. If the customers find out,
as we have seen, their data has been breached, they are not
going to shop at that store.
So we are trying to say, and alert to small business--most
of them don't have security policies, cybersecurity policies,
they are sloppy with passwords, and they are just begging to be
the target. So I don't know if you would want to just expand on
a little bit of what I just said to--the warning to small
businesses----
Mr. Bejtlich. Sure.
Mr. Collins [continuing]. It can happen to you, and if it
does----
Mr. Bejtlich. I totally agree. The thing you should do as a
small business is to say, first, what do we have that somebody
else wants. That includes data as well as the money itself. I
mean we have seen cases where ACH transfers of money just
straight out the door and that is it, but it is also what data
do we have, and what would be the consequences if that data
were stolen. And then you have to go through the exercises of,
well, how would that happen? Does it only take, say, an e-mail
from the CEO that looks fake, that authorizes the money to be
transferred out of our account. We have seen that happen as
well. And once you figure out, OK, what do we have, what could
happen to it, now you want to introduce friction into that
system that would not make it easy for an intruder to carry
that out. It could be something as simple as you have an email
address, and if that single email is taken over by a bad guy,
they could reset all your passwords, they could take over your
bank account, so you want to make sure what are we doing to
protect that.
A lot of this is just sort of thinking this through, just
as you would estate planning or that sort of thing.
Mr. Collins. You would think it is commonsense, but it is
not where you are worried about getting an order, getting it
shipped, paying your bills, and it is just the thought that it
can't happen to me. We have found so many companies, they don't
even have a basic policy on passwords where many people use the
same password at 100 different Internet sites. That way, they
only have to remember one. But then these folks will get into
that one, and then in a very short period of time, they can
bounce that password into any number of other sites, and low
and behold it hits. And the next thing you know, they are into
that small business. They don't know it, as you pointed out.
They are either taking their money, but worse yet, they are
stealing customer information, IP, they are accessing the
vendors and other customers. So to me, it starts with, you have
to understand it can happen to you, number two, have a basic
policy. We even published, when I was on the Small Business
Committee, some dos and don'ts and the like, and just as an
alert to small businesses who think it is only big companies.
So you are confirming that small businesses are very much a
target of the cyber----
Mr. Bejtlich. Yes, sir. And I would add, talk to your bank
and find out what can a bank do to tell you if something
suspicious is happening. What is their policy, could they give
you an alert of some kind, could you ask for a phone
verification, an in-person verification. Put this friction in
place so that it is not easy for a bad guy to steal all your
money.
Mr. Collins. Yes, because they are out there.
Mr. Bejtlich. That is right.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Gentleman yields back.
Now recognize Mr. Green of Texas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank our
witnesses. I apologize for goings and comings of the members
because we had votes today. I guess for this hearing, the good
news is that Homeland Security will stay in business.
But as we all know, last month, with the health insurer,
Anthem, disclosed a significant breach of up to 80 million of
its customers and employees. It is my understanding that the
breach does not involve any credit or banking information, nor
that there is evidence at this time that any medical
information was obtained. While I appreciate the steps Anthem
has taken to make it right with their customers, I do have some
general questions on cybersecurity in the healthcare sector.
Dr. Shannon, is there any reason to believe that the
healthcare industry is more vulnerable than other sectors to
these type of data breaches, and do we have any reason to
believe that the health sector is underinvesting in
cybersecurity protections?
Mr. Shannon. No, I think with the HIPAA Act that that has
pretty much incented them to making investments.
Mr. Green. Which--that was in 1996, so----
Mr. Shannon. Well, and that is really what has driven a lot
of the cybersecurity thinking in that sector for the last 15
years. So I think similar to other organizations, they are
investing. Fortunately, they are typically large organizations,
so they often have resources and can--it is not quite the small
business challenge that----
Mr. Green. Yes.
Mr. Shannon [continuing]. We just heard.
Mr. Green. OK. Mr. Bejtlich?
Mr. Bejtlich. Healthcare is definitely a target. They are
not as well defended as the top tier. The top tier tends to be
the defense companies and the financial sector. So yes, there
is definitely an issue there.
Mr. Green. OK. Mr. Bejtlich, a different question. Is the
health sector a particularly attractive target to hackers
seeking to sell that personally identifiable information in the
black market because, even though they didn't get maybe medical
records, but they get social security numbers and everything
else. Is that----
Mr. Bejtlich. Yes, and one way, sir, we can measure that is
how much does that sort of information sell for? You can get
credit cards from $1 to $10, maybe a little bit more for an
Amex or something like that, but if you are looking at a
healthcare record with a social security number and such, you
are looking at $300 perhaps. And so clearly, that information
is more valuable.
Mr. Green. Who are the potential buyers for that kind of
information?
Mr. Bejtlich. It is not something we spend a lot of time on
at Mandiant FireEye, although there are Eastern European
criminal groups that apparently want to trade in that. I don't
know if they are trading it in in bulk or individually. There
is some thought that they trade for that information because it
is so durable. You can change your credit card, you can't
change a social security number.
Mr. Green. OK. Could stolen medical data be used to falsely
bill for medical services, such as Medicaid or Medicare?
Mr. Bejtlich. That is not an area that we work, but I have
heard of that, yes.
Mr. Green. OK. I thank you. I would like to move the issue
of notification of the patients in the event of a breach of
medical information. Under current law, healthcare entities
must provide notification of breaches of unsecured protected
health information. Health information is considered unsecured
essentially if it is not encrypted. Covered entities must
notify affected individuals of a breach of unsecured protected
health information within 60 days following the discovery of
the breach. I think it is important to note that healthcare
entities and medical information are already governed by a set
of federal guidelines. I would like to ask all three panelists
an open question about applying these standards. First, if you
have 60 days to notify them, the cat is already out the door,
it seems like, if you have that much time. Are there some basic
standards such as encryption of certain data, or breach
notification standards, that we may want to consider adopting
as part of a federal cybersecurity guideline or national
standard?
Mr. Lin. One----
Mr. Shannon. One--go ahead.
Mr. Lin. One can certainly imagine mandates, well,
encouragement for healthcare companies to protect their data.
Internally, for example, you can do encryption of data even
when it is within your system.
Mr. Green. Yes.
Mr. Lin. Theft of laptops has historically been an
important vector where people steal information. If you encrypt
the data on the laptop, it is a good thing. I caution that
encryption is a costly--not costly, but I mean it is great--
that results in greater inconvenience for the companies, and so
they are going to complain about such mandates.
Mr. Shannon. One of the challenges with regulations is that
it encourages a compliance mentality, and I think we would all
agree that compliance mentalities do not usually improve
security dramatically. That is why I would encourage the
healthcare industry to look at the NIST Cybersecurity Framework
as a basis for managing cybersecurity risks, as opposed to
compliance as the real driver.
Mr. Bejtlich. And I would briefly like to encourage those
companies to first look to see if there are intruders already
in your network, and secondly, to have someone test to see how
difficult it is for them to get into your network, and then act
on the results.
Mr. Green. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back my
time.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
I know Mr. Mullin was on his way, but that may be it for
the hearing. I really want to thank you. This is valuable
information, and let me--do you have any final closing comments
you want to make? First, Ms. DeGette.
Ms. DeGette. I think this is a good scene-setter for our
future hearings, and I would just advise the--I know, Mr.
Chairman, you will let people know that people might give
written questions after this hearing. I know some of the
Members on our side wanted to come back but they got stuck
after the vote. So we appreciate your wisdom and you may have
some written questions coming after this. Thank you. I yield
back.
Mr. Murphy. I thank you. And we will probably be calling
upon your expertise. We thank you for taking time out, and for
the caliber of this. We will be dealing with a number of
serious issues in this committee. Dr. Burgess is on this
subcommittee, he is also chairman of Commerce, Manufacturing,
and Trade legislation risk committee, but also Mr. Walden is
chairman of Communications and Technology, we have the Energy
and Power Committee, they have the Health and Subcommittee, all
of these things here will be dealing with some multiple levels.
The way I like to review it is we have the dot-coms, the dot-
mils, the dot-govs, the dot-orgs, the dot-edus. Have I left
anything out? We have to do what the committee--the dot-Greens,
the dot-Tex, whatever. But thank you so much for this. To that
end, I ask unanimous consent that the Members' written opening
statements be introduced into the record. So without objection,
the documents will be entered into the record, including the
one that you have, Dr. Lin.
And in conclusion, I want to thank all the witnesses and
Members that participated in today's hearing. I remind Members
they have 10 business days to submit questions to the record,
and I ask that all witnesses agree to respond promptly to the
questions. Thank you so much.
And with that, this committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:41 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Last December, in the wake of the Sony breach, I announced
that the committee would hold a series of hearings to examine
the growing cyber threats to electronic commerce and the
American economy. That effort is now underway.
So much of our daily existence depends on the Internet and
information technologies that collectively comprise cyberspace.
These technologies have brought tremendous convenience,
opportunity, and prosperity to the United States and nations
across the globe. They inspire innovation, freedom of
expression, and international and cultural engagement. They
continue to revolutionize the way we communicate, learn,
innovate, govern, and interact with the world around us.
At the same time, cyberspace has introduced us to new
challenges. For the same reason a business in Michigan can
reach customers across the globe, an unknown bad actor can
target that business' intellectual property, customer
information, or operations. The consequences and costs of such
a breach can be significant, yet the costs of launching the
attack, and consequences for failure, are minimal. As a result,
the incentives strongly favor the bad guys--and they will keep
coming, keep evolving--while the good guys struggle to keep
pace.
As more of our lives are entrusted to cyberspace, the
threats will continue to grow. Already, barely a day goes by
where we do not learn of a new breach or potential
vulnerability. With everything from health records to toasters
increasingly integrated into cyberspace, the challenge can
appear daunting.
We will hear today that there is no easy solution to the
cyber threat. It exists for the same fundamental reasons that
the Internet, information technology, and cyberspace provide
benefit to society--that is, that the Internet remains an open
system accessible to anyone who wants access. This may sound
frightening or overwhelming, but I suggest it presents an
opportunity. Today we have an opportunity to reframe our
understanding of this challenge, to develop a level of context
and perspective that so often gets lost in debates over
specific incidents, policy issues, or legislation.
I encourage my colleagues to embrace this opportunity.
Let's learn from this discussion so we can approach
cybersecurity with fresh perspective and a common understanding
of the challenges it presents.
Cyberspace has been, and will continue to be, an engine of
economic, social, and cultural opportunity. We need to
understand the nature and scope of the threat to the security
of information in cyberspace, and develop an understanding of
how to address these threats without jeopardizing the
fundamental benefits that cyberspace provides.
This hearing is just the beginning as our work continues.

----------

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
