- IMPROVING FEDERAL SPECTRUM SYSTEMS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

IMPROVING FEDERAL SPECTRUM SYSTEMS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 7, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-84

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

_____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
98-660                          WASHINGTON : 2016

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Missouri               JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                     Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology

GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                ANNA G. ESHOO, California
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BILL JOHNSON, Missouri               JERRY McNERNEY, California
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
CHRIS COLLINS, New York                  officio)
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Anna G. Eshoo, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     4
Hon. Marsha Blackburn, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Tennessee, opening statement..........................     5
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................    60

Witnesses

Phillip Berenbroick, Counsel, Government Affairs, Public
Knowledge......................................................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Dennis A. Roberson, Vice Provost, Research Professor in Computer
Science, Illinois Institute of Technology......................    16
Prepared statement...........................................    18
Jeffrey H. Reed, Willis G. Worcester Professor of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University.....................................................    26
Prepared statement...........................................    28

IMPROVING FEDERAL SPECTRUM SYSTEMS

----------

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 7, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:15 a.m., in
Room 2322 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Greg Walden
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Walden, Latta, Shimkus,
Blackburn, Lance, Guthrie, Olson, Bilirakis, Johnson, Long,
Ellmers, Collins, Cramer, Eshoo, Welch, Clarke, Loebsack,
DeGette, Butterfield, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Ray Baum, Legislative Associate, Energy and
Power; Rebecca Card, Assistant Press Secretary; Andy
Duberstein, Deputy Press Secretary; Gene Fullano, Detailee,
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology; Kelsey
Guyselman, Counsel, Subcommittee on Communications and
Technology; Grace Koh, Counsel, Subcommittee on Communications
and Technology; Tim Pataki, Professional Staff Member; David
Redl, Counsel, Subcommittee on Communications and Technology;
Charlotte Savercool, Legislative Clerk; Greg Watson,
Legislative Clerk; Jeff Carroll, Staff Director; David Goldman,
Chief Counsel, Subcommittee on Communications and Technology;
Jerry Leverich, Counsel; Lori Maarbjerg, Detailee, FCC; and
Ryan Skukowski, Policy Analyst.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. I am going to call to order the subcommittee on
Communications and Technology and our hearing on improving
federal spectrum systems.
During my time as chairman of this subcommittee, one of the
most important topics that we have addressed is spectrum, how
to better use it, how to allocate it and how to value it. And
through our work, we found bipartisan agreement on many of the
policy issues around this valuable resource.
Three-and-a-half years ago, the Congress passed the Middle
Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act that included the
spectrum incentive auction provisions the subcommittee brought
to the table. And it properly conducted the upcoming broadband
incentive auction and will successfully free up a wide swath of
valuable spectrum for new purposes. But with worldwide demand
for wireless connectivity expected to grow 400 percent in the
next 3 years, and given that the U.S. Government is nowhere
close to meeting the goal of repurposing 500 megahertz as
called for in the national broadband plan, it is clear we have
more work to do.
One way we can continue to free up additional spectrum is
through the use of the Commercial Spectrum Enhancement Act.
Under the SCEA, commercial providers bear the cost of moving
federal incumbents to clear spectrum. Given the budgetary
pressures facing the country and the significant challenges our
defense agencies face as a result of fiscal belt tightening, I
think we have an opportunity to work together to optimize the
value of under utilized spectrum and upgrade equipment and
services used by the federal agencies.
Although there are many hurdles to overcome in clearing and
reallocating federally-held spectrum, we have proven it can be
done with great success. The best example of this is the AWS-3
Auction which made 65 megahertz of spectrum available for
wireless broadband and raised more than $44 billion.
The AWS-3 Auction worked. Now let us move forward by giving
agencies new tools that will allow them to become more
innovative and efficient in how they use spectrum.
Under current law, federal spectrum users receive
compensation for relocating spectrum-based systems and can
upgrade equipment to further their mission. Carriers get the
opportunity to purchase a resource that they desperately need
and above all, consumers love better mobile broadband service
allowing them to access the services and information they so
clearly want and need.
Building on this successful process, today we are
considering two pieces of legislation that will help move
America forward. First, Representatives Guthrie and Matsui's
Federal Spectrum Incentive Act allows interested agencies to
take part in an incentive auction where they are compensated
for relinquishing spectrum through auction proceeds. Currently,
agencies are only allowed to be reimbursed for sharing or
relocating. This legislation would actually incentivize
agencies to take a hard look at their spectrum use and to give
up the spectrum that they do not need.
We are also considering a bill that would require the FCC
to report back to Congress with draft auction plans. Now this
legislation is intended to help establish a more consistent and
predictable supply of spectrum going forward through a formal
process between the Congress, the FCC, and NTIA and other
agencies.
While the speed of innovation and technology is blindingly
fast, the time line for reallocating spectrum often is
reflective of the tangled bureaucracy of government, and the
fiscal and operational restraints on agencies. This conflict
illustrates the urgent need for legislation to reform the
federal system, bring about predictable and transparent auction
rules, and provide clear incentives for agencies to free up
under used or unneeded spectrum.
We can move forward on this front while at the same time
making sure agencies who rely on the resource for mission-
critical operations have the most modern communications
technology in the world.
I would like to thank Ranking Member Pallone and
Representative Clarke for working with us on this bipartisan
discussion draft and I look forward to our continued
collaboration with all the members of the subcommittee. Working
together we can provide the framework and incentives to
increase efficiency, upgrade government systems, and make more
spectrum available to meet our country's wireless broadband
needs and raise a little money for the taxpayers. With that, I
will yield the balance of my time to the gentleman from Ohio,
Mr. Latta.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Latta follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden

During my time as chairman of this subcommittee, one of the
most important topics that we've addressed is spectrum--how to
better use it, how to allocate it, how to value it. And through
our work we've found bipartisan agreement on many of the policy
issues around this valuable resource.
Three-and-a-half years ago Congress passed the Middle Class
Tax Relief and Job Creation Act, including the spectrum
incentive auction provisions this subcommittee brought to the
table. If properly conducted, the upcoming broadband incentive
auction will successfully free up a wide swath of valuable
spectrum for new purposes. But with world-wide demand for
wireless connectivity expected to grow 400 percent in the next
three years, and given that the U.S. government is nowhere
close to meeting the goal of repurposing 500 MHz as called for
in the National Broadband Plan, it's clear we have more work to
do.
One way we can continue to free up additional spectrum is
through use of the Commercial Spectrum Enhancement Act. Under
the CSEA, commercial providers bear the cost of moving federal
incumbents to clear spectrum. Given the budgetary pressures
facing the country--and the significant challenges our defense
agencies face as a result of fiscal belt-tightening--we have an
opportunity to work together to optimize the value of
underutilized spectrum and upgrade equipment and services used
by federal agencies.
Though there are many hurdles to overcome in clearing and
reallocating federally held spectrum, we have proven it can be
done to great success. The best example of this process is the
recent AWS-3 auction, which made 65 MHz of spectrum available
for wireless broadband and raised more than $44 billion.
The AWS-3 auction worked. Now, let us move forward by
giving agencies new tools that will allow them to become more
innovative and efficient in how they use spectrum.
Under current law, federal spectrum users receive
compensation for relocating spectrum-based systems and can
upgrade equipment to further their mission. Carriers get the
opportunity to purchase a resource they desperately need, and
above all, consumers will have better mobile broadband service,
allowing them to access the services and information they so
clearly want and need.
Building on this successful process, today we are reviewing
two pieces of legislation that will help move America forward.
First, Representatives Guthrie and Matsui's Federal Spectrum
Incentive Act allows interested agencies to take part in an
incentive auction where they are compensated for relinquishing
spectrum through auction proceeds. Currently, agencies are only
allowed to be reimbursed for sharing or relocating--this
legislation would incentivize agencies to take a hard look at
their spectrum use and to give up the spectrum they don't need.
We're also reviewing a bill that would require the FCC to
report back to Congress with draft auction plans going forward.
This legislation is intended to help establish a more
consistent and predictable supply of spectrum going forward
through a formal process between the Congress, the FCC, the
NTIA, and other agencies.
While the speed of innovation in technology is blindingly
fast, the timeline for reallocating spectrum often is
reflective of the tangled bureaucracy of government, and the
fiscal and operational restraints on agencies. This conflict
illustrates the urgent need for legislation to reform the
federal system, bring about predictable and transparent auction
rules, and provide clear incentives for agencies to free up
underused, or unneeded, spectrum.
We can move forward on this front while at the same time
making sure agencies who rely on the resource for mission-
critical operations have the most modern communications
technology available.
I'd like to thank Ranking Member Pallone and Representative
Clarke for working with us on this bipartisan discussion draft
and I look forward to our continued collaboration. Working
together we can provide the framework and incentives to
increase efficiency, upgrade government systems, and make
spectrum available to meet our country's wireless broadband
demand.

Mr. Latta. Well, I thank the chairman for yielding and this
subcommittee has long recognized a demand for wireless spectrum
capacity as technologically advanced products and devices are
becoming an integral part of our everyday lives.
In 2014, the number of mobile-connected devices exceeded
the world's population. It is clear that in order to
accommodate advanced mobile innovation we must examine every
avenue to expand access to spectrum. That is why we are here
today. The Federal Government is the largest single user of
spectrum. Therefore, we have the challenging opportunity to
make spectrum currently used by federal agencies available for
commercial use.
The discussion draft and Mr. Guthrie's and Ms. Matsui's
bill before us today will begin the process to evaluate
approaches that efficiently utilize spectrum. I am confident
that industry experts and federal agencies can find a way to
optimize the cyber real estate to the interest of all parties.
In order to remain the world's leading innovator and ensure
consumer demands, we must work together to utilize spectrum
more efficiently.
Mr. Chairman, I look forward to hearing from today's
witnesses and I yield back.
Mr. Walden. The gentleman yields back. Now at this time,
the chair recognizes the ranking member from California, Ms.
Eshoo, for opening comments. Good morning.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ANNA G. ESHOO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Ms. Eshoo. Good morning, Mr. Chairman. Thank you and
welcome to the witnesses. We appreciate it.
Mr. Chairman and members, I think it is important to take a
moment to consider that Americans use 11.1 billion megabits of
mobile data every day. That is an astounding number. That is
equivalent to about 22.2 million hours of streaming standard
definition moves.
As our dependence on smart phones and tablets for mobile
video and other bandwidths' intensive applications grow, so
will our need for more licensed and unlicensed spectrum. So we
need a plan; a spectrum pipeline for the future that fits with
consumer expectations and also ensures a seamless user
experience.
According to a 2012 GAO report, federal agencies have
exclusive access to about 18 percent of the most highly valued
spectrum. A far larger percentage of spectrum is shared between
federal and nonfederal users. Increasing the efficiency of how
more than 60 federal agencies and departments use over 240,000
frequency assignments, obviously, it is not an easy task. But I
think it is one that our subcommittee should tackle and will
tackle. We did it before and we are going to have it do it
again.
The Spectrum Pipeline Act of 2015 is an important step in
this process. As the chairman said, building on the success of
the AWS-3 Auction, the draft under discussion today calls for a
plan for the reallocation or sharing of spectrum bands held by
federal agencies and a time line, which is very important, for
bringing the spectrum to auction.
Recognizing that federal agencies operate very differently
than commercial wireless providers, we also need a plan to
incent federal agency participation. And that is why I am
pleased to support Representatives Guthrie and Matsui's
legislation as an original cosponsor because the bill directs
itself toward accomplishing that. It will get federal agencies
a direct financial incentive. Money always does it, almost
always anyway--yes, it is the magic ingredient. It gives them
the incentive to either terminate or share with other federal
agencies their existing spectrum.
More than three years ago, our subcommittee established a
bipartisan working group to examine how the Federal Government
can use the nation's airways more efficiently. We put a lot of
time into it and it was time well spent. It was time well
spent. So in pursuit of our shared goals and this is, I
believe, a real bipartisan effort to deliver fast, reliable,
wireless broadband service to all Americans. I want to thank
the chairman and members of the subcommittee that have really
put in time and thought, not only to the bills that we are
going to talk about today, but the efforts that really got us
to step up and prove that we can do it.
So with that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back the balance
of my time.
Mr. Walden. The gentlelady yields back the balance of her
time. The chair recognizes the gentlelady from Tennessee, Ms.
Blackburn, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to say
thank you to the witnesses. We appreciate that you are taking
the time and being here. It is an important topic. As you all
know, it is not the first hearing that we have done on this
issue.
We know that spectrum is the lifeblood of the wireless
industry. It is essential to connectivity. Ms. Eshoo was just
talking about the amount of utilization of spectrum and the
airways that are there.
One of the things we hear from our constituents is the
importance of this as an education and economic development
issue and how the access is incredibly important to them and
having the Spectrum Pipeline Act and Incentive of 2015 is
something that is a good step. It is going to move us forward.
If we are all reading the CTIA report properly, then we see we
need to get to work on making certain that the 350 additional
megahertz that are needed by 2019 are in the pipeline and that
is what the usage is going to demand. So we do have some work
to do. And at this time, I yield the balance of the time to Mr.
Guthrie.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. Thank you for yielding. I
appreciate that and I am pleased to speak in support of 1641.
It is a bipartisan bill that I reintroduced this year with my
colleague from California, Ms. Matsui, Congresswoman Matsui. I
always appreciate working together as co-chairs of the
Congressional Spectrum Caucus and we hope to see this bill
advance.
I said before and I know my friend, Mr. Berenbroick, is
from Radcliff in my district and I said before when I went
around the 2nd District of Kentucky I never had a platform or
sat up and said send me to Washington and I will deliver you
spectrum. It was something that I didn't know I would get
involved in until I got here. But how important it is and it is
important to the 2nd District of Kentucky and people out in the
country because whether you use it to browse apps or news
articles on your mobile phone or you are a first responder just
trying to get resources for an emergency situation, we all rely
on it. And while we can't see spectrum, we know it is a limited
critical resource for nearly every aspect of our daily lives.
And in January, we saw a huge success with FCC's Advanced
Wireless Services Spectrum Auction raising an unprecedented
$44.8 billion. And I am hopeful we can achieve similar success.
I want to thank Chairman Walden for bringing this important
legislation before the subcommittee and I thank my friend,
Congresswoman Matsui.
One of the other great things about being on the Spectrum
Caucus is making a great friend with Congresswoman Matsui and
working together with her. So I appreciate it and I yield back
my time.
Mr. Walden. The gentleman yields back the balance of time.
The chair recognizes the ranking member of the full committee,
Mr. Pallone, for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
opportunity to continue this subcommittee's conversation on
spectrum policy. Spectrum policy is a bipartisan issue and I am
proud of the bipartisan approach this subcommittee has been
taking.
As I have noted before, we are witnessing a mobile
revolution. The consumers' insatiable demand for wireless
service is a critical engine driving our economy. And this
engine is powered by spectrum. Fortunately, Congress, the FCC,
and the National Telecommunications and Information
Administration, have been hard at work to meet this demand and
keep the mobile economy moving forward. With support from this
subcommittee, the FCC completed a record-shattering auction
earlier this year that raised over $40 billion and we are all
hoping for success in the upcoming incentive auction which was
authorized by a law that came out of this subcommittee.
So today, we will continue to drive the effort to free more
spectrum. We are taking the next step to make sure consumers
continue to reap the benefits of the mobile economy. Together,
the pair of bills we are looking at this morning have the
potential to establish a spectrum pipeline to meet consumer
needs well into the future.
Like the broadcast incentive auction, the Matsui-Guthrie
bill would encourage federal users to either vacate their
current spectrum or relocate to another band in exchange for a
percentage of the auction proceeds. This bill demonstrates that
innovative thinking in the tech sector is not confined to the
private sector.
I am also pleased for examining the bipartisan discussion
draft offered by Representatives Clarke and Walden. This is an
important effort that would require agencies to continue to
think about additional innovative ways to expand commercial
broadband. I want to commend Representative Clarke who, of
course, is relatively new to the committee for her immediate
and keen understanding of the importance of addressing
spectrum.
Together, these bills are the first step in authorizing new
auctions that can help serve the skyrocketing mobile needs of
consumers.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the opportunity to
continue this subcommittee's conversation on spectrum policy.
Spectrum policy is a bipartisan issue and I am proud of the
bipartisan approach this subcommittee has been taking.
As I've noted before, we are witnessing a mobile
revolution. The consumer's insatiable demand for wireless
services is a critical engine driving our economy. And this
engine is powered by spectrum.
Fortunately, Congress, the Federal Communications
Commission, and the National Telecommunication and Information
Administration have been hard at work to meet this demand and
keep the mobile economy moving forward. With support from this
subcommittee, the FCC completed a record-shattering auction
earlier this year that raised over $40 billion. And we are all
hoping for success in the upcoming incentive auction, which was
authorized by a law that came out of this subcommittee.
So today we will continue to drive the effort to free more
spectrum. We are taking the next step to make sure consumers
continue to reap the benefits of the mobile economy. Together,
the pair of bills we are looking at this morning have the
potential to establish a spectrum pipeline to meet consumer
needs well into the future. Like the broadcast incentive
auction, the Matsui-Guthrie bill would encourage federal users
to either vacate their current spectrum or relocate to another
band in exchange for a percentage of the auction proceeds. This
bill demonstrates that innovative thinking in the tech sector
is not confined to the private sector.
I'm also pleased we are examining a bipartisan discussion
draft offered by Representatives Clarke and Walden. This is an
important effort that would require our agencies to continue to
think about additional innovative ways to expand commercial
broadband. I want to commend Representative Clarke, who is new
to the Energy and Commerce Committee, for her immediate and
keen understanding of the importance of addressing spectrum.
Together these bills are the first step in authorizing new
auctions that can help serve the skyrocketing mobile needs of
consumers.
Again, thank you, Mr. Chairman for keeping this
subcommittee focused on spectrum in a bipartisan way. I'd like
to yield the remainder of my time to Ms. Clarke.

Mr. Pallone. Again, thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ms. Eshoo
for keeping this subcommittee focused on spectrum in a
bipartisan way and I would like to yield the remainder of my
time to Ms. Clarke.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Ranking Member Pallone. And I also
would like to extend my gratitude to the chairman for this
bipartisan effort. I am thrilled that we are discussing this
bipartisan draft of the Spectrum Pipeline Act of 2015.
As everyone knows here, the future is wireless. Our lives
are more connected every day. It is not just our phones or our
tablets. We are moving to a world of connected cars, connected
homes, connected lives. I can see it clearly when I go home to
Brooklyn. We have become one of the most tech savvy places in
the country. Everyone has a device or two in their hands and
the innovations coming out of start ups in my district are
mobile and data hungry.
It is our job to make sure that these consumers and these
innovators have the spectrum they need. That is why I am proud
of our efforts today, that bipartisan discussion draft that
takes necessary first steps toward creating a spectrum pipeline
to meet that challenge. I made sure to develop this bill to
ensure that will have a steady flow of licensed and unlicensed
spectrum to meet consumer needs and demands.
I hope that this draft helps get the conversation started.
I look forward to hearing ideas from my colleagues and our
witnesses on how to improve the bill as we move forward. I
thank you and I look forward to our continued bipartisan effort
on this important issue. I yield back to the ranking member.
Mr. Pallone. Mr. Chairman, I would like to yield the
remainder of my time to Ms. Matsui.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much for yielding me time, Mr.
Pallone.
Today, the subcommittee's focus is on how to improve the
efficiency of federal spectrum users and free up spectrum for
innovation and commercial use. The success of the AWS-3 Auction
earlier this year highlighted the incredible demand for
spectrum in the marketplace. Spectrum is our nation's invisible
infrastructure of the 21st century. Making more spectrum
available is essential to meet the demands of American
consumers and to keep the United States as a world leader in
the wireless economy.
The Federal Spectrum Incentive Act, a bill that I am
sponsoring with Congressman Guthrie, Chairman Walden, and
Ranking Member Eshoo, is one of the proposals we are examining
today. Our bipartisan bill creates a new approach to spectrum
management by offering new incentives for federal users to
relinquish or share spectrum. It would create the first ever
incentive auction for federal agencies and allow federal
spectrum users to share in the revenues from the auction.
Last Congress, the committee reported the bill with strong
bipartisan support. We need to continue to support additional
solutions to put more spectrum in the pipeline. I look forward
to working with all my colleagues to see this legislation
become law. I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Walden. Thank you. The gentleman yields back the
balance of his time, and the gentlelady yields back and I thank
the gentlelady, both, all my colleagues for their work on these
bills.
We are going to go now to our witnesses. We want to really
thank you all for coming. I have read your testimony. It is
most insightful and helpful and we look forward to your sharing
it with everyone and so we will start with Phillip Berenbroick,
the counsel for Government Affairs at Public Knowledge. Sir, we
are delighted to have you here. Pull that microphone fairly
close. Make sure the light is lit and the floor is yours.

STATEMENTS OF PHILLIP BERENBROICK, COUNSEL, GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS,
PUBLIC KNOWLEDGE; JEFFREY H. REED, WILLIS G. WORCESTER
PROFESSOR OF ELECTRICAL AND COMPUTER ENGINEERING, VIRGINIA
POLYTECHNIC INSTITUTE AND STATE UNIVERSITY; AND DENNIS A.
ROBERSON, VICE PROVOST, RESEARCH PROFESSOR IN COMPUTER SCIENCE,
ILLINOIS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY

STATEMENT OF PHILLIP BERENBROICK

Mr. Berenbroick. Good morning, Chairman Walden, Ranking
Member Eshoo, Ranking Member Pallone, and members of the
subcommittee. I am Phillip Berenbroick, counsel for Government
Affairs at Public Knowledge, a public interest nonprofit
dedicated to the openness of the internet and open access for
consumers to lawful content and innovative technology.
I will make two key points. First, it is critical for
Congress to lay the groundwork for consistent, robust pipeline
of spectrum. As Chairman Walden and Ranking Member Eshoo
referenced, the demand for spectrum continues to grow. Congress
should do so in a way that promotes more competition and
choices for consumers, better service quality, lower prices,
and greater innovation.
Second, unlicensed spectrum has become critical for
economic growth and permissionless innovation. Efforts to
increase available spectrum should strike a balance and
increase the amount of spectrum available for unlicensed use.
Turning to my first point, critical missions across the
government depend on federal spectrum including early warning
missile systems and air traffic control systems. At the same
time, America's broadband providers, consumers, innovators, and
new technologies are demanding more and more spectrum. This is
why we encourage Congress, along with the federal agencies
responsible for spectrum allocation, the National
Telecommunications and Information Administration, and the
Federal Communications Commission, to work together to devise a
consistent and reliable spectrum pipeline that can meet this
growing spectrum demand.
Public Knowledge supports policy initiatives that enable
federal users to accomplish their critical missions in a manner
that also maximizes opportunities for spectrum sharing or
relocating federal users to enhance federal availability for
commercial competition and innovation. If done thoughtfully and
in collaboration with Congress, agencies and other
stakeholders, creative solutions to increase spectrum
availability have the opportunity to be a rare win-win-win in
public policy.
The first win is freeing up additional spectrum for mobile
broadband use to meet the increasing demand on our wireless
networks; second, by encouraging more efficient federal use of
scarce public resources; and third, by expanding the amount of
spectrum available for innovative, unlicensed uses like next
generation Wi-Fi networks.
Legislation under consideration by this committee is a good
start. Public Knowledge supports HR 1641, sponsored by
Representative Guthrie and Representative Matsui. Providing
financial incentives for federal spectrum users to relocate
from their existing bands is a creative way to free up much
needed spectrum for commercial users and unlicensed innovation.
Public Knowledge also supports the goals of the
subcommittee's discussion draft legislation to lay the
groundwork for the FCC to engage in long-term planning on
relocating federal users from various spectrum bands,
auctioning the cleared spectrum, and finding a balance between
licensed and unlicensed uses.
Turning to the importance of unlicensed spectrum, the
economic activity and consumer benefits derived from mobile
broadband use are immense. Today, a majority of mobile device
traffic is offloaded onto fixed broadband networks via Wi-Fi
and that traffic only continues to grow. Unlicensed spectrum
has democratized internet access and encouraged permissionless
innovation. The value unlicensed spectrum contributes to the
U.S. economy is estimated to exceed $220 billion annually.
Unlicensed uses of spectrum include more than just Wi-Fi.
Unlicensed frequencies are open for any person and any device
to use, for any legal purpose. Uses include cordless phones and
baby monitors, Bluetooth, radio frequency identification or
RFID which is used for making mobile payments for paying tolls
on highways and tracking baggage in transit. Unlicensed
frequencies are also necessary for connecting the burgeoning
internet of things which Representative Clarke has referenced.
Given the enormous benefits of unlicensed spectrum, any
legislative effort to increase the licensed spectrum pipeline
should also expand the amount of spectrum made available for
license-exempt use. One option would be to create a cut for
unlicensed spectrum in newly freed up bands. Commissioner
Rosenworcel has called this the Wi-Fi dividends. And to open up
even more spectrum for unlicensed use, Congress may consider
opportunities to allow for unlicensed sharing of bands where
federal users reside including asking the FCC to examine the
possibility of an unlicensed underlay while establishing
mechanisms to protect critical bands and prevent interference.
Thank you to the members of the subcommittee for your time.
I look forward to the opportunity to answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Berenbroick follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. Mr. Berenbroick, thank you for your testimony
and your support of our efforts. We appreciate it as always.
Now we go to Jeffrey H. Reed, the Willis G. Worchester
Professor in--OK, forget that. We will now to Dennis A.
Roberson, Vice Provost, Research Professor in Computer Science,
Illinois Institute of Technology. We welcome you, sir. Please
pull that microphone close. Make sure the light is lit and the
floor is yours.

STATEMENT OF DENNIS A. ROBERSON

Mr. Roberson. Good morning, Chairman Walden, Ranking Member
Eshoo, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to participate in this vitally important discussion
on the management and usage of federal spectrum and related
systems.
As chairman of the FCC's Technological Advisory Council, I
can assure you that there is no more pressing issue than
spectrum use and management. Through the council's expertise
and multi-stakeholder processes, the Technological Advisory
Council, along with the Department of Commerce Spectrum
Management Advisory Committee, where I also serve, have become
ground zero for many of the core spectrum policy issues that
challenge us today.
As these challenges and future issues arise, we must be up
to the task of understanding the data behind spectrum usage and
to develop forward-looking technologies and policies designed
to optimize the most efficient use of spectrum. Such
optimization has been the technical focus and a personal
passion over the course of much of my career, whether it was as
Motorola's Chief Technology Officer, or in my current role as
Vice Provost for Research at Illinois Institute of Technology
and as President and CEO of a technology and management
consulting firm.
With few minor exceptions, our nation's spectrum resources
have, for decades, been fully allocated for various government
and commercial applications. Given this reality, the only way
to expand existing applications and support the introduction of
next generation technology is to either clear and relocate
spectrum or to share it.
The proposition of clearing spectrum, federal or otherwise,
is an increasingly daunting task involving the identification
of applications in spectrum that can either be relocated or
terminated, negotiating and finding the financial means to
support relocation costs or to pay the incumbents for service
termination, and establishing the plans and estimating the time
it will take to accomplish this transition.
The so-called millimeter wave band, a spectral area above
30 gigahertz and extending to 60 plus gigahertz, is an area
where significant quantities of cleared spectrum seem feasible
today. The propagation characteristics of this spectrum pose a
huge challenge, but research into the application of new
technologies, massive, multiple input, multiple output, antenna
arrays, show great promise, especially for this millimeter wave
band and should certainly be encouraged as well as supported
financially.
The process for sharing spectrum is notoriously slow.
However, things can happen at a faster pace, if and onlyif the
new user is able to share the spectrum in such a manner that
the incumbent experiences little to no actual harm or
perceivable impact from the presence of the new service, or if
the harm is outweighed by the benefits flowing from shared use
of the spectrum.
There are several emerging classes of spectrum-sharing
opportunities the committee should be aware of. Satellite
spectrum, similar to the spectrum liberated in the AWS-3
Auction can be shared and reapplied to terrestrial use. Radar
and communication spectrum can be shared, especially for
lightly used weather radar bands, the 2.7s, the 2.9 gigahertz
band and radar altimeters at the 4.4 to 4.6 gigahertz band. Bi-
directional sharing which would, among other things, enable the
government to employ lightly used or unused commercial spectrum
when they need it for government activities such as DOD tests.
And satellite spectrum allocations around the GNSS band that
would efficiently be used for terrestrial purposes.
We cannot make more spectrum, but we can utilize spectrum
more efficiently. The key point in all of this is that nearly
all spectrum that is not currently being fully utilized can
technically be used with spectrum management policies that are
forward looking and driven by efficient use. The emerging use
cases of these particular spectrum frequencies will enable the
rapid transition to next generation technologies like 5G,
thereby maintaining the U.S. leadership in cellular technology
deployment.
Eight years ago, I set up the world's first spectrum
observatory in Chicago where we looked at how heavily
particular spectrum and frequencies are being used over a
period of time, down to the second level. Wide-scale deployment
of similar spectrum monitoring equipment in high spectrum usage
environments could help policy makers identify spectrum for
either clearing or sharing.
In conclusion, we have also learned that another major
challenge to efficient spectrum use is receiver designs that
promote inefficient spectrum use. Poorly designed receivers
have a huge impact on spectrum availability and adjacent bands
encouraging industry to adopt its own standard-setting methods
for receivers will open the door to technological advances that
can potentially produce billions of dollars of GDP growth while
also creating significant spectrum efficiency.
Thank you for your prioritization of this critical issue.
And I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Roberson follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. Mr. Roberson, thank you for testimony. I intend
to follow up on the issue of sloppy front ends and receivers
when we go forward.
We go now to Jeffrey H. Reed of the Willis G. Worcester
Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University. Dr. Reed, we are
delighted to have you here. Please go ahead.

STATEMENT OF JEFFREY H. REED

Mr. Reed. Thank you, Chairman Walden and Ranking Member
Eshoo and the subcommittee for the invitation to speak before
you.
My goals are to address some of the key trends and emerging
technologies that are impacting spectrum management and to
discuss how R&D can make spectrum availability easier, how we
can transition that spectrum in a much quicker way by doing the
upfront R&D.
We all know that wireless traffic is growing very quickly.
Sysco projects that the volume of wireless traffic will
increase by a factor of 7X between 2014 and 2019. And there are
reasons for this growth projection. There is a whole set of new
applications that are just around the corner, applications such
as augmented reality, where you get a super position of
computer-generated images in your field of view. I would like
to call it just-in-time learning and the ability to be able to
do complex tasks through augmentation; ambient intelligence
that predicts the way that we will use things; and telemedicine
and elder care, huge benefits in having wireless technology for
these particular areas. Being able to compensate for cognitive
impairments, being able to keep people in their homes safely
for a longer period of time. This is going to be made feasible
by using wireless technology.
There is a whole bunch of new technologies that will help
us to achieve this goal of greater wireless traffic, things
such as small cells, miniature bay stations, bay stations that
20 years ago would have cost $1 million, now $200 bucks at Best
Buy. Higher frequencies, higher frequencies like Dennis
Roberson talked about, offer the potential of providing huge
amounts of bandwidth. And then there are two technologies that
I think are particularly relevant, spectrum sharing, which we
are starting to see in AWS-3 as well as the 3.5 gigahertz band.
And another one that is probably not quite as appreciated and
that is software-based infrastructure. The basic idea behind
this is that we digitize the signal with the antenna and we
ship over fiber to the cloud to do processing. And that is
going to have some major ramifications on the way that we can
manage spectrum. It is going to enable sharing, both of federal
spectrum and of commercial spectrum for federal users.
This is also going to allow us to greatly reduce cost and
add flexibility.
So the role of R&D to speed this transition will--actually,
I have been very encouraged by the way that policy has
proceeded in the past few years. Changing spectrum policy has
always been known to be incredibly slow and if you look back
over the past few years some amazing things have happened.
However, I think we can do better. And I think we can do better
and be more prepared for this transition by doing our upfront
R&D. For example, AWS-3 transition was very successful in
bringing in revenue. But I think it could have been better. And
the reason is that there are still unknown issues on how the
commercial systems and the federal systems are going to coexist
with each other. Those are R&D issues that should have been
worked out beforehand. And the same with the 3.5 gigahertz
transition. Things could have gone smoother if we had done more
upfront R&D about the channel characteristics. The FCC
struggled in their Notice of Proposed Rulemaking to get this
information.
And in both cases, it delayed the transition of that
spectrum, so I have a number of recommendations and I am
running out of time. I think the key recommendation is to put
funding into upfront R&D to make these bands easy to
transition, quicker to transition. We have to do it anyway, so
we might as well do it up front. And if you remove the risk,
then we will be able to transition these bands quicker and we
will be able to perhaps even save more money for the Federal
Government because risk causes a discount in the pricing of
that spectrum.
So in conclusion, I encourage more forward leaning in the
planning and the R&D and this will shorten the transition times
to make this valuable economic resource available to us.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Reed follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. Thank you, Dr. Reed. We appreciate your
testimony, as well as that of your colleagues at the dais. It
is very interesting, the suggestions you come up with, the work
that you all have done to look at other spectrum.
And I guess the question I would have and some of you lay
out some suggestions in your testimony, if you could give us
some counsel on the specific bands we should be focused in on.
And I know, Mr. Roberson, in some of your research in
Chicago, it is graphically evident what is in use and what is
not because we have limited time and resource, too, and we have
proven that we can bring agencies and private sector together
and work out some of the differences.
I agree with Dr. Reed on the notion of R&D in advance. It
gives you certainty before you go into the auction which could
raise its value therefore. So that is something we will take a
look at, too.
Can you give us some suggestions or can get back to us, Mr.
Roberson?
Mr. Roberson. I would be delighted to. Actually, if we
could bring up the screen that we had earlier?
Mr. Walden. We have enough spectrum capacity, I am sure we
can do that.
Mr. Roberson. What you may have noted as I delivered my
remarks----
Mr. Walden. Could you explain that?
Mr. Roberson. That is what I was going to do very quickly.
I mentioned the world's first spectrum observatory in Chicago
and what you are seeing is the live feed from that observatory.
So this is the spectrum usage in Chicago at this minute.
Mr. Walden. Right there.
Mr. Roberson. Right there. And what you can clearly see,
this is power versus spectrum. The spectrum starts at 30
megahertz which is just below the low end of the TV band and
runs to six gigahertz which is just above the 5 megahertz part
of the----
Mr. Walden. So for lay people, give me an idea. It kind of
does the up and down there and then goes across kind of flat.
Is that satellite band?
Mr. Roberson. Right. The flat parts are all the areas where
to your earlier question where we should be investigating. I
will apologize for the bit of a rise at 3 gigahertz. That is an
artifact.
Mr. Walden. OK.
Mr. Roberson. But the elements that you see going up and
you can see television and FM radio and the like and the
cellular bands and so on, but you see large areas from 1
gigahertz to 1.7 gigahertz where there is very little activity.
You can see other bands, 2.7 to 3.0 in the middle of the chart
and I know that the numbers are so small you can't quite see
them. But there is a blank area there. And as you go out, 4
gigahertz, particularly 4.2 to 4.4 I call out as areas where
investigation would certainly yield----
Mr. Walden. And what would be on those bands today?
Mr. Roberson. The bands, there are a variety of things in 1
to 1.7, but there is satellite activities in those bands, some
radar. In 2.7 to 2.9, this is the weather radar bands. In 4.2
to 4.4 is radar altimeters for airplanes which you would not
normally think of as an opportunity band, but since those
radars are only used during landing and takeoff and we know
where all the airports are and we know where the airplanes are,
so the opportunity to utilize that spectrum carefully is
another significant opportunity area. And there are others.
Mr. Walden. And given the issues with the latest hurricane
and others and the discussion about adequate satellite coverage
for weather event prediction, your point isn't that you blow
all that off the airplanes?
Mr. Roberson. No, no, no.
Mr. Walden. Your point is that there is not much data
coming up and down and we can actually share. Is that right?
Mr. Roberson. Exactly right. In all cases, I am really
suggesting sharing, not to clear. And that is a huge
opportunity. When you think about satellites that are operating
in the vertical direction and terrestrial use which is
orthogonal direction, you have an opportunity to share these
bands, not in any way impacting----
Mr. Walden. Existing----
Mr. Roberson [continuing]. Existing uses.
Mr. Walden. I want to shift to one of my pet peeves and
that is uh-oh, we just had a flood. We will get some help here.
But meanwhile, receivers. What is it that you recommend could
be done here to get better built, better engineered receivers?
This has been a long-time problem. And we don't want to mandate
standards per se, but boy, I would like to see more skin in the
game on the receiver side than what we see today.
Mr. Roberson. Perhaps I could jump on that one since I
called it out. My very good friend, Dale Hatfield, has been
working on this problem for approaching 50 years which is
incredible, but it has been a problem for a very, very long
time.
The new elements that provide opportunity in this area are
two. First, the opportunity for industry to take the lead and
to self-govern itself, but place the requirement that industry
do so. You rightly speak to the point that government should
not, no one should dictate the way a receiver is designed. But
dictating the requirement for having the industry itself self-
govern is a good direction.
A second one that has actually come out the work in the
Technological Advisory Council is something called the
interference limits policy which establishes a harm's claim
threshold where if you are, as a transmitter, if you are above
that threshold the transmitter needs to fix itself.
Mr. Walden. Come back down. Right.
Mr. Roberson. If it is below that and the receiver is
experiencing interference, the receiver has to be fixed. The
beauty of this is it establishes a bar because today the
debates are endless on what is harmful interference.
Mr. Walden. We went through this with Light Squared GPS. Is
somebody listening in? Is it going to be too much power? Back
and forth, back and forth. But you all are smart enough to
figure out a----
Mr. Roberson. And there is no bar. And this would establish
the bar.
Mr. Walden. Right.
Mr. Roberson. And with that bar and a measurable bar, you
can now determine whether, who needs to remedy the situation.
Mr. Walden. Unfortunately, we have a bar and it is
measurable and I have exceeded it by a minute and 37 seconds.
So I thank my colleagues for the indulgence. We will go to the
ranking member from California, Ms. Eshoo.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. But it was worth the
extra minute and 38 seconds in terms of what we just heard.
To each one of you, thank you for your excellent testimony.
It is really highly instructive and it is most helpful to us
when you target specific areas of recommendations to us. It
really is most helpful to us in shaping a work product to
address it.
Thank you, Mr. Berenbroick, for your attention to
unlicensed spectrum. I don't think anyone has come here and
given testimony concentrating so much on unlicensed and the
importance of it. So I appreciate it very, very much.
One of the aspects that appears to be, I think, missing
from the bills under consideration today is the role that the
Spectrum Relocation Fund can play in promoting new research and
development. And you raised R&D and placed a heavy emphasis on
it. It is one of the most important undertakings regardless of
what area we are in, but certainly as it applies to what we are
talking about today, so it can play, I think, a really key role
in promoting new--advancing more research and development.
In an August 31st letter, the OMB recommended removing some
of the restrictions on this fund that prevent funds from being
used for R&D, spectrum planning, and pilot projects. Do you
agree that increased agency flexibility would enhance our
efforts--I am teeing this up for you--would enhance our efforts
to free up additional licensed and unlicensed spectrum and
promote greater efficiency? That is to all of you.
Mr. Reed. Well, maybe I can go ahead. I certainly agree
with that recommendation. I know of no one who disagrees with
that recommendation within the spectrum community. We should be
focusing the funds on solving the problem, not associating with
the specific interests. We made R&D funds available to the
transition after the sale of the band. It is like buying your
product and then deciding to do the R&D.
Ms. Eshoo. I understand. Do you know how much money is in
this fund?
Mr. Reed. I think it is around $500 million. It is quite a
bit.
Ms. Eshoo. That is a good pot. Mr. Roberson?
Mr. Roberson. No, I also strongly agree with the points
that Mr. Reed has made and believe that it is essential to do
the work in advance and in fact, exploring taking off the
testimony already provided, with the bands that can be
identified through the ability to see the spectrum. Several
members made the point that this is invisible spectrum. Well,
it actually isn't invisible for those of us with
instrumentation.
Ms. Eshoo. Yes, you showed that on the chart.
Mr. Roberson. Exactly. And we can use that to identify
bands that have potential. But there is a need for funding for
the researchers to then take the next steps and to really
understand the parameters to allow that----
Ms. Eshoo. I don't know whether this belongs in the Matsui-
Guthrie legislation or the other, but I think that this is
something for us to pay attention to.
Mr. Berenbroick?
Mr. Berenbroick. Thank you. Yes, I think we are all in
agreement. We would like to see creative and innovative ways
that make federal spectrum users more efficient. That way it
can facilitate spectrum sharing or in ways to facilitate
relocating those federal users to free up that spectrum for
both licensed and unlicensed uses. That is one of the reasons
why we support H.R. 1641 and we support the ideas you mentioned
as well.
Ms. Eshoo. That is great. Mr. Roberson and Dr. Reed, you
were both members of the PCAST, weren't you?
Mr. Reed. Yes, we were.
Ms. Eshoo. Have we made any real progress in your view in
implementing the recommendations? I thought it was an
extraordinary report. I know you put and all the members put a
great deal of time and effort into it. And we thank you for it.
In some ways, I think it is under appreciated. But do you think
that--tell us what you think we have not harvested from that
that fits with what we are discussing today?
Mr. Reed. Yes, I think we have made great progress since
that report. The 3.5 gigahertz band, I think is a great example
of that. The FCC pretty well followed the recommendations of
the PCAST committee and how to structure it. I think we could
have done it faster if we had known some basic principles. Here
is the basic principle. If you have a transmitter over here
with so much power, how well will that be received inside of a
building some distance away? I mean that is pretty fundamental.
Ms. Eshoo. It is.
Mr. Reed. But yet, at that band, there wasn't very much
information on that. It should have been done beforehand.
Ms. Eshoo. Beforehand. Mr. Roberson?
Mr. Roberson. Yes. I would agree that there has been a
great deal of progress in the PCAST report. Jeff and I had the
opportunity to write a fair amount of that. So----
Ms. Eshoo. I read it. I read it all very carefully.
Mr. Roberson. Well, good. There are things though that have
not yet been really touched, although they have been talked
about. The wireless model city, the test city that was
described in the report really has had discussions, but no
action taken at this point.
The subject of the bill providing stronger incentives was
another item in the policy proposal that has as yet although I
am delighted to see the work going on here, it is a very
intractable problem, but it still needs more work.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you very much to each one of you.
Mr. Walden. I thank the gentlelady. Thank you, gentlemen.
And let us go now to Mr. Latta, the vice chair of the
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology. The floor is
yours.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to our
panelists, thanks very much for being here.
And Professor Roberson, if I could start with the
questioning for you, a 2011 GAO report found several flaws in
the spectrum management and use monitoring practices of the
NTIA. At the time GAO made three recommendations to improve
NTIA's oversight of agency spectrum use, one of which remains
open, the development of a strategic plan.
Do you believe that there are areas for improvement in the
NTIA's practices?
Mr. Roberson. There are always areas of improvement for all
of our practices, but particularly in this area. One of the
things that is needed and I will really go back to the spectrum
observatory capability, the practice out of NTIA is to solicit
from the users of spectrum their usage models, then to
correlate, collate those and thereby predict the usage across
the country as opposed to independently assessing that use of
spectrum. And that is a huge flaw. If you are asked are you
using your spectrum? If the answer is no, I am going to take it
from you, there is a pretty easy answer that comes back from
that sort of assessment. And that is the difficulty in a very
high contrast way with the approach that NTIA is able to use at
this point.
Mr. Latta. Let me follow up with how have the tools like
their Federal Government spectrum compendium improved our
ability to review and assess the spectrum use? Are you familiar
with that?
Mr. Roberson. I couldn't----
Mr. Latta. How have their tools like the Federal Government
spectrum compendium improved our ability to review and assess
the spectrum use?
Mr. Roberson. You are speaking to spectrum observatory data
that we collect. I think that is what you are asking.
Mr. Latta. OK.
Mr. Roberson. It has been actually enormously helpful
because not only do we have the screen that you have seen, but
we have kept the compendium that you are talking about. We have
eight years' worth of data for Chicago, so we not only know how
it is being used today, but we know how it has been used for
the last eight years. We have begun to expand that and in fact,
we have a spectrum observatory that is resident on Dr. Reed's
campus, so we are able to observe the usage there and again,
capture the data over an extended period of time. So that
enables us to look at the spectrum, to identify the places
where spectrum is ill-utilized and then begin the process of
researching that spectrum and how it could be better utilized.
And we are able to do that.
Often there are critics that say oh, yes, you looked at it
this time, but if you had looked at it three months earlier, it
was heavily utilized. Well, in our case, if you want to look at
three months earlier, we will go back and look at three months
earlier or any time in the last eight years we will look at how
that spectrum was used. And that is a powerful tool in being
able to really understand the spectrum opportunities that
exist.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. And this is a question to all
panelists and so with my remaining minute and 45 here if you
could answer briefly. Do you think federal agencies have the
right incentive to utilize spectrum as efficiently as possible?
And if not, what incentives motivate federal agencies to
utilize spectrum more efficiently?
Mr. Berenbroick. Thank you for the question. To touch on
the question you just asked Mr. Roberson for just one second
before I answer, Public Knowledge actually produced a white
paper in 2010 on possible improvements to federal spectrum. I
am happy to submit that for the record and we will do that
after the hearing.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Mr. Berenbroick. On the question of incentives, right now I
think it is TBD regarding whether agencies have the right
incentives right now. I think we would like to see more
incentives. We would like to see innovative incentives to help
those agencies find ways to (a) use their spectrum more
efficiently; and (b) find ways to consolidate their spectrum
use. That way spectrum resources can be either reallocated for
commercial use and unlicensed use or they can be shared using
more efficient technologies in the band. That is why we are
supportive--we mentioned the Spectrum Relocation Fund issue
earlier with Ranking Member Eshoo. And we are supportive of the
legislation H.R. 1641 and we support the FCC which the
discussion draft would do. We support the FCC having the tools
to take a look at bands and figure out how to make usage more
efficient.
Mr. Roberson. The incentives are not there today. To me, in
short form, probably one of the best incentives is to do the
upfront research so that agencies can be assured that they can
complete their mission in an alternative way.
Today, the real fear isn't that the agencies want to hoard
spectrum or anything like that. They are simply trying to
accomplish their mission. And without the upfront research to
know how they can accomplish their mission in an alternative
way with alternative spectrum, they loathe to give up that
spectrum.
Mr. Reed. Maybe I could comment on that one as well? I
think that incentives can help and incentives may also be
beneficial to flow to commercial companies. What bothers the
agencies is they don't know how to proceed. They don't know
what technology they can use to substitute for the technology
that they have now. And if we do the upfront R&D, then industry
will know, they will be able to develop the products so that
the federal users won't fear transition. They will embrace it
because they will see that in the end they will have a better
system.
Mr. Latta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time has expired and
I thank you for the indulgence.
Mr. Walden. You are more than welcome. We appreciate the
comments from the witnesses and your questions.
We will now go to Mr. Pallone of New Jersey for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The U.S. has led the
world when it comes to fourth generation wireless technologies
and as consumers start looking ahead to new fifth generation
technologies, we need to ensure the U.S. continues to be a
front runner.
So I wanted to ask both Dr. Reed and Mr. Berenbroick what
we can do help the U.S. remain a leader in next generation
wireless technology?
Mr. Reed. Certainly to be out there in front we need to do
the basic R&D. That is obvious. But perhaps less obvious is
what we are doing here today. Actually, I think what you are
doing is quite valuable for 5G because everyone that I know of
within the research community is expecting that 5G will
incorporate spectrum sharing. And because of the changes in
policies that we have been going through over the past few
years, this is positioning us quite well. It is growth through
good policy.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Mr. Berenbroick?
Mr. Berenbroick. So how to enable 5G to keep us ahead of
the rest of world. First, I think as Dr. Reed mentioned, what
this committee is doing is exactly what we should be doing
which is to think about creative ways to find additional
spectrum for both licensed and unlicensed uses and also to have
conversations about how to improve spectrum efficiency and
spectrum sharing. Like the transition from 3G to 4G, the
transition from 4G to 5G will increase traffic on our wireless
networks which will necessitate the need for more licensed
spectrum.
Likewise, the more spectrum we have traveling on our
licensed networks will result in more offload to our unlicensed
networks to Wi-Fi. So we need more spectrum set aside for
unlicensed use as well.
Mr. Pallone. All right, thanks. And we have more and more
consumer data traveling over unlicensed airways, but unlicensed
spectrum is more than just a boon to consumers. It also drives
innovation and significantly contributes to the U.S. economy.
Some estimate that it gives a $220 billion boost to the economy
every year.
Earlier this year, FCC Commissioner Jessica Rosenworcel
proposed that Congress create a Wi-Fi dividend to account for
these benefits.
And I wanted to ask Mr. Berenbroick, in your testimony you
say that a Wi-Fi dividend may be a good idea. Can you explain
more about this and the other options for increasing spectrum
for unlicensed use?
Mr. Berenbroick. Sure. So I referenced Commissioner
Rosenworcel's testimony before a Senate Commerce Committee
where she mentioned the idea of the Wi-Fi dividend. The idea
there would be that when we look at spectrum to free up for
licensed use, we also think about spectrum to free up for
unlicensed use. The rationale is that the traffic that comes
over licensed networks, much of that will eventually be
offloaded on to unlicensed networks, and so you need those two
systems to work together in concert.
I think you are exactly right when you mention the economic
benefits of unlicensed spectrum. Like you mentioned, $220
billion in yearly economic activity. But that is only part of
it. You are also talking about making a bet on the future with
unlicensed. Unlicensed, we are looking at the internet of
things.
We are looking at billions of devices connected to the
network, the ability of anyone to plug in, the ability of
anyone to plug in and to develop a device, develop a product at
relatively low cost and to get it on to the network and to
create a market for that product. So the economic benefits, I
would imagine, are somewhat under estimated by the $220
billion, at least going forward in the future.
Mr. Pallone. All right. I have one more question for you.
Earlier this week, Politico had a story chronicling the
difficulty we face in getting credit in the budget for revenue
generated by spectrum auctions. I know you are not an expert in
federal spectrum valuation, but can you elaborate on the value
to consumers that comes from the reallocation of additional
spectrum?
Mr. Berenbroick. Yes. So I saw the same article that you
referenced and let me preface, I am not an expert on budget
policy or CBO scoring, but we were--the unlicensed community is
disappointed to see that unlicensed spectrum and the economic
benefits of unlicensed spectrum are not really considered by
CBO. And so we would be happy to work with Congress, work with
other stakeholders to figure out how to address that issue to
make sure that allocating more spectrum for both licensed and
unlicensed uses is made possible and that the CBO scoring issue
doesn't continue to be a roadblock.
Mr. Pallone. Thanks a lot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Pallone. We appreciate your
questions. We will now go to Mr. Shimkus from Illinois and have
at it.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. Welcome.
Mr. Shimkus. Doctor, you better be careful for claiming
that we are going growth. There is growth through good policy.
You are in Washington and really nothing good is happening here
these days. So you may not--yes, yes. I will try to reiterate
that. I don't know if my constituents will agree, but we
appreciate those positive words. Thank you.
Besides-- let me go where I want to go here. What are the
benefits of a long term spectrum planning and a consistent
pipeline? If we could just go from left to--my left, your
right.
The business argument is that obviously to have to have
consistency and you have got to be able to plan and execute, so
what do you see the benefits of this?
Mr. Berenbroick. This was mentioned in the opening
statements by some of the other witnesses. The process by which
we have typically allocated spectrum for commercial uses and
for unlicensed uses has typically been a relatively slow
process. We find a band that we want to relocate. We have to
figure out how to move the user off of that band. We take the
time to auction that band and then new services start to
deploy.
And so I think some estimates, I think the PCAST report
said it was about a decade from identification to deployment.
That is slow. I think we would all like to see that process
move faster. So that said, I think the discussion draft bill
that the commission has put forward or that the subcommittee
has put forward is actually very helpful. It asks the FCC to do
that forward planning. And so finding that pipeline spectrum
where we can figure out which bands and which uses go into
those bands and to move forward with that quickly that is an
incredible useful exercise. That way, all stakeholders can
think about what is next, what do we need, what is coming?
Mr. Shimkus. Great. Mr. Roberson?
Mr. Roberson. Yes, the nature of spectrum use is a long
game activity. It is measured in decades. Therefore, there is a
need for a strategic plan that stretches out to an
unprecedented length in the way business operates and even the
way things operate in Washington where we are planning what we
are going to do in spectrum 25 years from now.
So having the data, I keep hitting on that point, that
would support our direction, and then putting together the
strategic plan that would position different spectrum usage
even as it allows for innovation and new things that were not
anticipated when the plan was put in place first is really
critical and something that this body could do great service to
the country by pushing it.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. Dr. Reed.
Mr. Reed. I think it is very important to be consistent and
forward looking in spectrum from a business perspective.
Businesses, in fact, I have talked to VC about this. Sometimes
VC don't want to hear it if it is a communications issue that
requires some sort of regulatory aspect of it because there is
so much uncertainty that is involved in it. If we have
consistency in our spectrum policy, and with a plan, then
businesses are more likely to be funded.
Mr. Shimkus. Great. Professor Roberson and Dr. Reed, you
are both members of I think I pronounced this right, CSMAC or
CMA or whatever it is called.
Mr. Reed. Both of them.
Mr. Shimkus. A federal advisory committee comprised of
spectrum experts that provide advice and recommendations to
NTIA.
Mr. Berenbroick, your colleague at Public Knowledge is a
member as well, I believe. He is back there hiding. Can you all
discuss the current role that the committee and where you see
it being most useful in the examination of federal spectrum use
and are there ways to further and better take advantage of the
expertise that is on this board?
Mr. Roberson. I guess I can take that one because I am
actually the ranking member of this body on that particular
committee. It is an excellent committee in terms of expertise,
in terms of the multi-stakeholder nature of the group. Many
ideas are brought to that committee. There are strong papers
that are put forth. It is still a slow process though. And
expediting that process, giving more problems to that body to
sink their teeth into and to execute on is a very good thing.
NTIA, Department of Commerce certainly do that, but I think
they would be more than open to the questions that this body
would have to be brought to them.
Mr. Shimkus. It sounds like governmental, slow and
methodical. But I appreciate it. Thanks.
Mr. Walden. The gentleman's time has expired. We now go to
a gentleman from Vermont. He is not here, Mr. Welch. Ms.
DeGette is not here. Ms. Clarke, I believe you are next.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Reed, in
your testimony you spoke of for the sake of efficiency it being
necessary to invest in up front due diligence. Based on your
experience, what is the main challenge when it comes to finding
spectrum bands that could be reallocated?
Mr. Reed. I think the main challenge is understanding how
the new systems that would enter in that band would potentially
interfere with the legacy users. And that involves getting an
understanding of the nature of what we call the channel, the
propagation channel, how well will the signal transmit.
It also means looking at the susceptibility of those
systems to interference. And this requires studies, upfront R&D
well beforehand in developing the planning tools. And in some
cases there can be issues in terms of classification and ITAR
as well when you deal with DOD systems. And sometimes that
breaks down the communication between the commercial entrants
and the legacy DOD users.
Ms. Clarke. So having said that, how would you suggest that
we move forward to keep up with consumer demand?
Mr. Reed. Well, I think we need to get commercial entities
talking very early with the Department of Defense. With these
transitions, they will not go smoothly. There are always going
to be things that come up that weren't expected and if we are
transparent on both sides and collaborative on both sides, then
we will be able to work together to solve those problems.
Ms. Clarke. It would seem to me that those discussions
should be underway as we speak, knowing what we know about the
almost inevitability that these requests are coming down the
pike.
Mr. Reed. I agree with you.
Ms. Clarke. Did you want to add something, Mr. Roberson?
Mr. Roberson. I am always delighted to add. But in this
area, I think the key point is doing the work up front to the
degree possible, as Dr. Reed has said. The other point that I
would add though is that having an independent arbiter, if you
will, technical arbiter, that can provide the input on whether
a particular proposition is technically accurate or not is
very, very important. Such an arbiter has been recently
established under the Department of Commerce in Boulder. NASCTN
is the acronym for the organization. And I think this
organization can be extremely valuable in helping to sort
through some of these issues and expeditiously and
independently coming up with resolutions that will stand the
test of time.
Ms. Clarke. Very well, and after the incentive auction next
year, the next major auction could be years down the road, so
what are the next generation technology demands on spectrum? We
have been able to understand what that is and what it looks
like and that is open to the panel.
Mr. Berenbroick. So in your opening statement, you
referenced the internet of things. I think the internet of
things is the next generation demand on that network. Billions
of devices are going to connect to one another, largely through
small cells using unlicensed spectrum. Additionally, as folks
have mentioned on this panel, traffic over the licensed
networks is going to continue to grow exponentially.
So the challenge here is to share spectrum as we have
mentioned on this panel. The process of freeing up and
reallocating spectrum is long and cumbersome and difficult.
Sharing spectrum provides sort of a work around, if you will to
use spectrum that is under utilized. So I think internet of
things, finding a way to deal with increased mobile traffic and
I think spectrum sharing is in the short term I think a great
way to accomplish meeting those needs.
Mr. Roberson. We have an insatiable demand for spectrum.
The demand for data, be it the internet of things or us
communicating with one another or communicating to computers,
deriving information from them or satisfying our entertainment
needs, it is an insatiable demand right now. So moving to
technologies that allow us to re-use that spectrum and use it
very efficiently is absolutely critical and there are many,
many things. I could spend a very long time on your question
because it is a very rich question. But these technologies must
be explored and used in concert with one another and there are
many technologies that have to come into play to even approach
the satisfaction of our needs as a U.S. national organization.
Mr. Reed. I think one thing that we need to be aware of is
that the nature of wireless traffic could change over the
coming years. And by that, today, we are receivers of
information. We receive our email. We don't compose a lot of
the email from our blackberries or iPhones. We download web
pages. We watch movies. But in the future, we may be actually
collectors of information and that traffic may flow from us
into the network.
To be able to accommodate that that means we are going to
have flexible spectrum policies going forward as we tend to do
allocations based upon what direction the information flows.
Mr. Walden. Very interesting. We will have to pursue that
another time with you because that is something we better be
prepared for because we are in the multiples down versus
singular up. We will go now to, I believe, Mr. Long is next in
seniority based on the fall of the gavel.
So Mr. Long, you are up next.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Berenbroick, much
has been made of the proper valuations of spectrum lately.
There has been a lot of talk. And while it is difficult to
predict, what do you view the potential dollar value of cleared
spectrum and the bands considered best used for mobile
broadband?
Mr. Berenbroick. Thank you for the question. Unfortunately,
I am not a spectrum valuation expert. I wish I had that
information for you. I can follow up with you after the
hearing.
Mr. Long. I think that is very vital. I think that is
something that I would like to learn from you if you could have
your folks get back with me, I would appreciate it.
Mr. Berenbroick. Sure, I am happy to follow up. Thank you.
Mr. Long. OK, and Dr. Reed, how do you strike an
appropriate balance between allowing industry to participate in
the research and development phase, repurposing spectrum, and
avoiding concerns of agency abuse of the process?
Mr. Reed. Let me see if I understand your question. Are you
saying----
Mr. Long. How do you strike an appropriate balance between
allowing industry to participate in the research and
development phase, a repurposing spectrum, and avoiding
concerns of the agency's abuse of the process?
Mr. Reed. That phase ``avoiding the agency's abuse of the
process,'' I take that to be that sometimes there is a clash
between legacy federal users and those that want to enter the
band. And you know, it is understandable. It is human nature.
We want to protect what we have.
I think what needs to be shown up front is that this is
going to benefit the current users of that spectrum by doing
this transition, that the commercial entities will help make
that transition go smoother, although in the end potentially
have even more capabilities through that collaborative
activity. So we have to build trust and transparency.
Mr. Long. OK. Thank you. And this is for you, Dr. Reed, and
Mr. Roberson. Is it Roberson?
Mr. Roberson. Either is fine.
Mr. Long. I will call you either then.
Mr. Roberson. I do that, too.
Mr. Long. In seeking to maximize the value of spectrum to
be auctioned, it seems to me that we need to do a few simple
things like minimize impairments and provide potential bidders
with as much information as possible about spectrum that they
are bidding on. And being a former auctioneer for 30 years, I
realize that the most information you can get to folks about
what they are bidding on usually helps in the end result. Would
you agree with that assessment?
Mr. Reed. Oh, absolutely. The value will go up if we can do
risk mitigation for those that are bidding on the spectrum.
Mr. Roberson. I definitely agree as well.
Mr. Long. With respect to impairments or exclusion zone, do
you agree that we should base our judgments on real world usage
rather than worst case analysis that might assume more
interference than is really realistic in the real world and
thus reduce the value of the spectrum to potential bidders, Dr.
Reed?
Mr. Reed. That is so true. There has never been a
communication system that has been able to get by without
interference. And sometimes I see in FCC issues claims of
interference, but it has to be significant interference. You
just can't say it is going to interfere. You have to have a
balance of risk with practicality.
Mr. Long. OK.
Mr. Roberson. No, totally agree. Worst case analysis, when
we had an abundance of spectrum, that was a wonderful thing to
do. It protected everyone. We don't have an abundance of
spectrum. So balancing risk is critical now and we have the
tools to be able to do that. Many other agencies do use these
kinds of tools way away from worst case to a practical case
which is what your question was.
Mr. Long. OK. Thank you. And Mr. Berenbroick, what
opportunities are there for federal agencies to share spectrum
with other agencies?
Mr. Berenbroick. Well, I think there are numerous
opportunities. I don't have examples at my fingertips for you.
But as the other panelists have mentioned, there are
opportunities for spectrum to gain more spectrum efficiency and
for spectrum sharing. Technologies that we have access to and
are yet to be developed will allow for that.
So there will be robust opportunities for agencies to share
spectrum with one another, to share spectrum with unlicensed
users and potentially to share spectrum with commercial users.
That is why I think the discussion draft bill before the
subcommittee is so important. It asked the FCC to ask and
answer these questions.
Mr. Long. Thank you. I am past my time and I yield back.
Mr. Walden. The gentleman yields back. The chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from California, Ms. Matsui.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Congressman Guthrie
and I have been working in a bipartisan manner on spectrum in
close cooperation with the federal agencies. We co-chair a
spectrum working group and we are tasked to find solutions to
meet our nation's growing commercial spectrum needs. I believe
our collaborative oversight, and I do say collaborative, was
critical to the success of the AWS-3 Auction which raised, as
you know, more than $45 billion. And we worked to provide a
reasonable path and that was really very important for the
Department of Defense to relocate the 1755 to 1780 band in a
responsible manner. And the AWS-3 was a huge win for consumers,
innovation, and FirstNet, the public safety network that the
auction will help pay for.
Dr. Reed, what lessons do you think we learned in the AWS-3
process?
Mr. Reed. I think the lessons are yet to be learned. We are
still in the process of doing this transition and there is
still a number of unknowns. For instance, what will the
interference be with a large number of consumer handsets? How
will they impact military systems? How will the commercial
systems respond to the interference that might be caused by DOD
systems? How do we go about authorizing zones in which the
commercial users can operate when and where? Those are details
that have yet to be worked out. So far, so good. But I wish
these details had been worked out earlier.
Ms. Matsui. Right. I think we were making reasonable
progress as we were trying to do and with our conversations
with DOD trying to get to a point where we could have our
discussion and move forward, knowing that there are details
that we had to work on later.
Mr. Reed. Yes, I would say don't slow it down.
Ms. Matsui. No.
Mr. Reed. I don't want to sound like we should slow this
down and work out the issues.
Ms. Matsui. I understand that.
Mr. Reed. We just need to do more of the upfront R&D, have
more people working on it beforehand.
Ms. Matsui. Now Dr. Reed and Mr. Roberson, I know that you
both serve on PCAST and that 2012 report from that group stated
that federal agencies may have no incentive or authority to
enhance their use of spectrum if the cost to police the budget
available for the core mission.
My legislation with Representative Guthrie seeks to provide
that incentive, encouraging federal agencies to be more
efficient by allowing them to share in auction proceeds.
Mr. Berenbroick, do you agree that these financial
incentives can be a game changer for federal agencies?
Mr. Berenbroick. Yes. We do think they can be and we hope
they are. Providing financial incentives for federal agencies
to relocate and use spectrum more efficiently could be a useful
tool in freeing up more spectrum to be repurposed for
commercial and unlicensed uses. But we should also remember
that those incentives might not be a silver bullet. That is why
we also support sharing a federal spectrum.
And I also just want to point out if we are able to
reallocate spectrum for commercial and licensed uses, we should
think about competition as we reallocate that spectrum. And for
these reasons this is why we are supportive of the legislation
that you and Congressman Guthrie sponsored, H.R. 1641.
Ms. Matsui. As we are talking about reallocation of
spectrum rights and reallocation of government users,
typically, you have the priority when developing spectrum
policy. The spectrum sharing also is an option as noted in Dr.
Reed's testimony.
Dr. Reed, are there some services that are better suited to
using shared spectrum than others?
Mr. Reed. That is a good question. Certainly with shared
spectrum, if you are a secondary user, your access may not be
as reliable as with licensed spectrum, but there are certain
types of traffic, for instance, video. And video is the big
growth area in wireless communications right now. It is
dominating the internet and is going to dominate wireless
transmission. Those sort of applications are not real time
sensitive because you can store it up during the times in which
you don't have the link. You just deplete from your memory. So
there are better applications. Some applications are better
than others.
Ms. Matsui. Well, can you think of scenarios in which
spectrum clearing through reallocation may be preferred?
Mr. Reed. Yes, I believe that there should be licensed
spectrum. There should be unlicensed spectrum and there should
be shared spectrum. Now where the boundaries lie, of course,
that is going to be controversial. Licensed spectrum does have
its benefits in terms of being able to guarantee the quality of
service. But on the other hand, shared spectrum also has a
role.
One of the use areas for shared spectrum is kind of like
the overflow spectrum. If an operator's network is being
impacted, they could always go to their shared spectrum reserve
to help fill those needs.
Ms. Matsui. That is the combination you are talking about?
Mr. Reed. Yes, it is like with energy as well, where the
power company can turn off your----
Ms. Matsui. Right. I understand that my time is up. So
thank you very much.
Mr. Latta. The gentlelady's time has expired and the chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, the Chairman Emeritus
of the full committee, Mr. Barton, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. Thank you. A lot of times at these kind of
hearings we have to ask political questions and sometimes we
have to ask ``got you'' questions. But sometimes we can
actually ask fact-based questions and admit, at least in my
case, I don't know anything. So I am going to ask some fact-
based questions because I don't understand spectrum.
I made Ds in electrical engineering. I am an engineer. But
I made Ds in electrical engineering. I made Cs and Bs in
physics. I am old enough to remember the old radio dials. You
had 600 on the low end or 500 and 1600 on the high end. I never
understood the difference between AM and FM. But I am trying to
get a handle on this spectrum and I understand we have two
engineers here that know all there is to know about it.
So in this room, how much spectrum is there right now? Is
there an infinite amount of spectrum? Or is there a finite
amount of spectrum?
Mr. Roberson. I will grab that. There is definitely a
finite amount of spectrum.
Mr. Barton. Finite.
Mr. Roberson. Which is the challenge. It is divided up into
frequencies, but it is very finite. It is temporal in that it
is reusable, the spectrum that we have now, we have again now.
So it is reusable.
Mr. Barton. That confuses me.
Mr. Roberson. The spectrum is the thing. But its use is
temporal. So if you are using it at one moment, it can be used
again a few moments later.
Mr. Barton. If we didn't have the FCC, would it make any
difference how much spectrum was used in this room? I mean----
Mr. Roberson. It depends on its use. Yes, it would
definitely make a difference in how much is used because of the
spectrum being allocated for purposes like the AM radio that
you were describing, that is a band of spectrum, a set of
frequencies that are allocated for a specific purpose. There is
another band allocated for--or several--for television, for FM,
for cellular it has several bands. But this is the allocation--
--
Mr. Barton. What I am trying to get at is why we need to
worry about this? Is there at any given moment in time can only
one broadcaster or user be using a specific, to use your term,
band of spectrum?
Mr. Roberson. Yes, only one at any given time.
Mr. Barton. OK. If I am on the 600 band spectrum in this
room, can somebody in the next room also be on the 600 band of
spectrum and in the next room?
Mr. Roberson. Yes. Under the right circumstances so that
you don't have power that leaks across room boundaries.
Mr. Barton. See, I don't understand that. What does that
mean, ``don't have power''?
Mr. Roberson. You do actually understand it.
Mr. Barton. I am glad you think that.
Mr. Roberson. No, no, no. I will explain it very quickly as
I do to my classes. If you throw a rock at a pond, it creates--
--
Mr. Barton. I am not a college level student. I am a first
grade level student.
Mr. Roberson. That is why I threw rocks in ponds.
Mr. Barton. OK. I have thrown rocks in ponds.
Mr. Roberson. Yes. And when you throw a rock in the pond
there was a big wave close to the rock, right?
Mr. Barton. Yes, sir.
Mr. Roberson. And as you got out to the edge of the lake,
there was almost no wave motion at all.
Mr. Barton. I never saw that far, but I will take your word
for it.
Mr. Roberson. The notion is there is a finite amount of
energy that is inserted at a point.
Mr. Barton. OK.
Mr. Roberson. As you expand, the incremental amount of
energy seen at any point on the circumstance of that is
diminished.
Mr. Barton. OK.
Mr. Roberson. So in this room, you can have a finite amount
of----
Mr. Barton. So a one watt radio station wouldn't go very
far. But a 100,000 watt radio station----
Mr. Roberson. I told you you knew a lot about it.
Mr. Barton. Well, I do remember what a watt is. That is a
measurement of power. So I got that. Some of my colleagues,
they won't admit that they don't know either. They are nodding
their heads.
Mr. Roberson. No, but you have hit a very important point.
You really have hit an extremely important point. If you use
low power, you can reuse that spectrum over and over again.
Mr. Barton. Lots of people can do low power.
Mr. Roberson. Lots and lots of people as long as they are
geographically separated.
Mr. Barton. OK, now last question because my time is about
to--is any of this spectrum better? I keep saying the premium
spectrum. What makes spectrum better than other spectrum?
Mr. Roberson. This is the point that Dr. Reed made around
propagation. Different spectrum at different points propagates
better through the wall, for instance. Some spectrum will go
right through the wall and not even see it. Other spectrum will
be absolutely blocked by that wall.
Mr. Barton. So best spectrum is more propagated, if that is
a word?
Mr. Roberson. Depending on its purpose. It has to be fit
for purpose.
Mr. Barton. OK.
Mr. Roberson. For television, it propagates through walls.
Mr. Barton. That is a good thing.
Mr. Roberson. Or if you want to keep the information
enclosed in this room, you want to use a very high spectrum,
high band of spectrum that doesn't propagate through the walls
because you wish to contain the spectrum and you wish to reuse
it. That is where the millimeter waves come in because they
don't propagate well at all because water and oxygen absorb
that energy.
Mr. Barton. OK. I learned a little bit. Thank you for
humoring me, but I really don't understand it and the only way
to learn is to ask questions.
Ms. Eshoo. I give you enormous credit because around here
people don't want to acknowledge that they don't know and there
is nothing wrong with that.
Mr. Barton. Well, if this were oil and gas, I wouldn't
admit that.
Ms. Eshoo. I got you. I think it is very important what you
said.
Mr. Latta. We appreciate the gentleman's line of questions
and his time has expired. The chair now recognizes the
gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Johnson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to our
panelists for joining us today.
You know, in August, the Office of Management and Budget
made a variety of suggestions about the spectrum relocation
including the idea that the FCC should be permitted to ``charge
modest licensing device or database administration fees'' in
order to ``facilitate greater unlicensed access.''
Now I support efforts to open additional and appropriate
bands for unlicensed use, but I am firmly opposed to proposals
to impose a tax on devices that use unlicensed spectrum. As the
internet of things grows and more and more devices are
connected, that could expand the tax man's reach to not just my
phone, but my car, my refrigerator, my thermostat, and all
sorts of other devices around the home that utilize spectrum. I
think that is a terrible idea.
So for the panel, what are your views on the
administration's proposal to tax devices that use unlicensed
spectrum? And we can just go down the row there.
Mr. Berenbroick. Thank you for the question. So Public
Knowledge has not taken a position on that question
specifically, but I might be speaking out of turn here. I would
imagine that when we do take the position that we will not
support taxes on devices, on unlicensed devices.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. Dr. Roberson?
Mr. Roberson. I am not actually familiar with the proposal,
but it doesn't sound like a very good idea to me in that you
wish to keep the airways as open as you can and this would seem
highly restrictive, especially with the billions of devices
that are likely to be out there in the internet of things
world. I don't even know how you would administer it.
Mr. Reed. First of all, let me say why funds are needed. In
the spectrum sharing regiment, it is like going to a library.
You check out a library book and it can be recalled and it is a
way to deconflicting and managing the spectrum. So there are
costs.
Now that said, I really don't have an opinion on whether it
should be a tax or not. There may be other ways to do that. But
definitely there are expenses involved.
Mr. Johnson. I understand there are expenses. I certainly
agree with that. But what I don't agree with, is that spectrum
users in rural areas across the country that are increasingly
dependent upon access through devices for connection to the
internet, to the cloud, to services, are going to pay the
lion's share of these kinds of costs.
Dr. Reed and Professor Roberson, in its progress reports,
NTIA has identified 245 megahertz of spectrum they have
repurposed in the last five years. However, when we examine
that a little more closely, much of this spectrum was made
available through changes in service rules or mandated by
legislation. So do you believe that NTIA is making sufficient
progress in independently identifying and repurposing bands of
spectrum? And how can we help improve that process?
Mr. Roberson, do you want to go first?
Mr. Roberson. Sure. This is an enormously challenging area
identifying the spectrum. I provided in my testimony some of
the areas that can be pursued. I think this is something NTIA
must provide leadership on and must put out effectively a
funnel, as you would think of a sales funnel of much more
spectrum that can be pursued and then per the conversation that
we have been having, much more research is needed to choose the
best of those spectrum options and then to rigorously pursue
how to make those available.
Mr. Reed. Actually, I visited NTIA as part of National
Academy's evaluation of their lab facilities there, the folks
who go out and make those measurements. They are good
technically, but the leadership until recently that is, they
have new leadership now. The leadership wasn't all that great.
And they were under funded and somewhat bureaucratic. So they
have had their challenges.
That said, given the tools that they had, they did well.
They just should have had more. They should have had more time
and resources to do some of the upfront measurements at 3.5
gigahertz. In fact, I even asked them that question. Why didn't
you guys do this? And they said we just didn't have the budget.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Latta. The gentleman's time has expired and he yields
back. The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from North
Carolina for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to our
panelists for being here today on this issue.
Mr. Berenbroick, did I----
Mr. Berenbroick. That is perfect.
Mrs. Ellmers. OK, perfect. Thank you. Because it sounds
just like it looks, so good. You mentioned in your testimony
the importance of unlicensed spectrum. And in particular, the
unlicensed underlay. Can you elaborate on this concept and why
it would be a potential solution as a reform to spectrum
policy?
Mr. Berenbroick. Sure. And I have been saying that all my
life that it looks like it sounds, so I am glad to be validated
on the record.
So the idea of the unlicensed underlay, basically there is
consensus that there is a need for more unlicensed spectrum
with the internet of things coming with the amount of traffic
that is being offloaded on to unlicensed networks. A federal
underlay would allow for unlicensed use in bands where federal
users reside. The idea would also be to make sure that critical
federal functions, for instance, things like national security
functions are protected, to take all interference mitigation
steps that are necessary and also to ask the FCC to figure out
how would this work? Is this workable? Is this possible? Which
bands are right for spectrum sharing?
And doing that would potentially open up, Chairman Walden
mentioned this at the start of the hearing, 18 percent of the
best spectrum is allocated for federal use. It would allow for
unlicensed use of that spectrum which, as the other panelists
have mentioned, a lot of that spectrum sometimes is--I am not
going to say it is unused, but it is used intermittently. And
so it would put that spectrum to use more efficiently.
Mrs. Ellmers. I have another question as we are moving
towards the 5G and basically the interest from the American
leadership on that, the question I have is, won't this require
a great deal of the greenfield spectrum, otherwise bands that
are not being used for 4G. And won't the spectrum need to be a
mix of low, middle, and high frequencies? And what has been
identified so far if there has been?
Mr. Berenbroick. I can take the part of the question
regarding the need for low, middle, high frequencies. I think
these gentlemen might have more concrete thoughts on the
specific bands that should be allocated. In the FCC's mobile
competition report which came out in the summer, spring or
summer of 2014, they identified that for licensed networks to
operate, the networks need a mix of low band and high band
spectrum.
As Mr. Roberson mentioned earlier in his discussion about
spectrum propagation characteristics, low band spectrum goes
further distances. It goes through walls. With high band
spectrum, it can carry more capacity. So for networks that
operate in both rural and urban areas, for networks that have
intensive uses for mobile broadband coverage, a mix of that
spectrum is necessary.
Mrs. Ellmers. Mr. Roberson and Dr. Reed, would you like to
comment as well?
Mr. Roberson. Absolutely. And I would agree that you have
to have the mix of spectrum. In my earlier testimony, I talked
about milliliter wave which is brand new spectrum. It's high
band spectrum, but it has tremendous limitations. So it has to
be a mix of the two capacity of the higher bands, the coverage
in the lower bands, and we will need to identify new spectrum
in both those bands to achieve our goals for the fifth
generation. And that is critical so that we maintain our U.S.
position in that space.
Historically, as generations move first, second, third, the
leadership has shifted from U.S. to Europe to Asia back to the
U.S. now. It needs to stay in the U.S.
Mrs. Ellmers. Dr. Reed.
Mr. Reed. Yes, I think that we are not unique here in the
U.S. in terms of facing this spectrum crunch. However, we have
been a bit more innovative in the way that we approach this
problem. So I don't think we are going to find much greenfield
spectrum below 3 gigahertz. It is probably going to be shared
mostly.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you and I yield back the remainder of
my time.
Mr. Latta. The gentlelady yields back and the chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Guthrie, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I know that my
friend from Missouri got to go earlier because he is here at
the gavel, but I want to point--he took out Mr. Lance with a
jug of water, so he should have been penalized for his order of
the way to go.
Mr. Long. I would have done that earlier if I had known I
would get rid of him that easy.
Mr. Guthrie. I am working with Ms. Matsui, the sponsor of
the bill, and I didn't know a lot about spectrum, still don't
know a lot about spectrum, no more than I did. And the only way
I knew the difference in AM and FM, my dad had a Pinto that
only had AM radio. So that means if I was riding with him, we
had to listen to country music. So it was just the way things
were.
And Mr. Berenbroick, thanks for coming. I know you grew up
in Radcliff which is the home of Fort Knox, so we always
appreciate that. When people come to Kentucky they want to
drive by and see the gold vault. What you can see from the
scene from Goldfinger, you can see from the road. So it is an
interesting place.
We started talking about--I know nobody talked about
incentives. That is kind of where I wanted to go with it. But
when we started on doing the bill, the question was we can pass
a bill and say mandate that you release spectrum. You really
have to have a willing--actually, we worked well with the
Executive Branch on this with Secretary Strickland. But you
really have to--either somebody is going to be there managing
the reports or you can incentivize. So we came up with the idea
of incentivizing. In the bill is one percent.
Do you think that is adequate? Should incentives be based
on the type of spectrum they move forward? Is one percent
sufficient from what you would see? I mean how would you use
the financial incentives?
Another thing, agencies came before us and said well, if it
is just going to replace money we already have, we lose the
incentive. So then we talked about does it go above-- does it
help them relieve some sequester issues by generating more
money for the Treasury by relieving spectrum? So just kind of
your thoughts on spectrum. And then I have one other question
that I want to ask Mr. Berenbroick on how we incentivize these
agencies to actually do it through financial incentives.
Mr. Berenbroick. Sure. As I answered earlier, I do think
the financial incentives can be a way to get those agencies to
either relinquish spectrum in some cases or to figure out how
to relocate and use other bands.
Mr. Guthrie. There is a lot of work to do. I just thought
you just turned a dial. But it is not.
Mr. Berenbroick. It is not.
Mr. Guthrie. I have learned that.
Mr. Berenbroick. And so going to your question of how much
incentive is enough, I think that question is going to be fact
specific to each individual agency. I think different--some
agencies might simply decide look, whatever the amount is, we
are not going to move. Other agencies might decide for a
specific amount, we would be interested in moving. So I think
it is going to be agency specific and mission specific, because
remember, we want to make sure that the agencies can continue
to do their mission, but we also want to make sure that we are
freeing up spectrum and using it in the most efficient way
possible.
Mr. Guthrie. So I guess my question is so setting it at one
percent, your suggesting it would have to be flexible because
in order to get what we want out of the legislation, one
percent may not incentivize someone, but it may incentivize
someone else. Who do you think should do that, NTIA, OMB?
Because unless we have to change the law every time we come up
with this issue. That is how we----
Mr. Berenbroick. I think NTIA and OMB are the agencies that
come to mind, but there could be somebody else. I mean I would
imagine the FCC would also want to think about what the best
way to relocate those users is and what the use of that
spectrum would be after relocation. I imagine it would be a
conversation between the appropriate committees and those
agencies.
Mr. Guthrie. I am going to go to my second question. So I
had a semester of electrical engineering before I realized that
wasn't for me. So I never could understand it. The right hand
rules was about all I got out of it, but there is a big debate
about sharing. So like you have emergency sharing, so to make
an example simple, I said well, it is like this. We don't build
highways for ambulances. We build highways that people use and
when ambulances use them, we get out of the way.
I was just in New York City and sometimes it gets crowded
and I had to get out of the way and I almost got up on the
sidewalk so an ambulance could get by. So I mean it is easier
on I-65, we pull over and the ambulance goes by. Sometimes it
gets crowded. Will sharing really work? That is the physics
question or the electrical engineering question. And can people
just get out of the way when emergencies need to use it or
would it be too disruptive to share?
Mr. Reed. Actually, I like to think of it in terms of E-Z
Pass as well. Sometimes you really need to get to that location
and you need to get there quickly and you are willing to pay
that $5, who knows how much, just to get there. And the way
that we have set up sharing is a prioritized basis and those
who at least in the 3F gigahertz band who go to the auction and
get primary access, they will have that freedom.
I think it is possible for us to manage spectrum and to be
able to deconflict legacy users to get out of the way, for
instance, of a military radar system or a satellite uplink when
the time is needed.
Mr. Guthrie. Would you see a constant disruption like I am
watching--well, everybody is OK if we have a battle or
something is going on, but is it just little things will always
be disrupting or something can be managed?
Mr. Reed. It just depends upon the situation. I think at
3.5 gigahertz, I think there is going to be very little
disruption. There are not that many federal systems out there.
There are not that many ships that have that high-powered radar
system, the SPY-1 or the SPIN-43 radar systems.
Mr. Guthrie. So even if like a hurricane is coming and
emergency needs it, sometimes you need to just watch the
broadcast because of the hurricane, watching the weather and
the news on your device. So it kind of plays in it. I know I
went over my time.
Mr. Roberson. If I could just very quickly, I think
technology does solve this problem. The sophistication of the
prioritization that exists today absolutely allows this sharing
to take place and to take place very efficiently.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Latta. The chairman yields back and the chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Olson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the chair and welcome to all three
witnesses. My first question is for Dr. Reed and Professor
Roberson. What steps are federal agencies taking to improve
spectrum efficiency particularly in the bands traditionally
viewed as most viable for commercial use? Big question. Your
thoughts, Dr. Reed?
Mr. Reed. Well, in the case of the AWS-3 transition, they
are moving some of those systems out and they are consolidating
these federal systems together in a different band. So they
will be more efficient users of the spectrum that they have.
There will, however, still need to be some legacy systems that
operate there because of the amount of time and money it takes
to move those systems out. And there are some technologies that
can help with this. Frankly, I don't think we know how well
they will help at this point. Again, it gets back to the R&D
issue. But I think that we will be able to leverage some of the
great properties of long-term evolution, LTE 4th Generation
cellular. It is actually quite robust interference. So I am
optimistic we will get good spectrum efficiencies.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. Professor Roberson. Your thoughts,
sir.
Mr. Roberson. Sure. There are a number of initiatives that
are in the works, but these need to be expedited, so I will
give you a balanced view. There are many things going on. Dr.
Reed spoke to some number of them. But there is so much more
that could be done. The way in which spectrum is managed within
an organization like the Department of Defense is still very
inefficient at this point. They know how to move from the
inefficient approach, very human-centric approach to an
approach that is much more richly supported by technology and
by data. But they have not been able to move that. They have
vast systems and they have increasing needs as well. But the
opportunity is there. It just needs to happen and happen more
quickly. And this would apply to many others than the
Department of Defense.
Mr. Olson. And to follow up on Mr. Guthrie's line of
questioning for you, Dr. Reed, when evaluating potential bands
to be repurposed whether through auction or sharing, what are
the most important considerations for us to keep in mind? How
can we help and how can we hurt?
Mr. Reed. Good one. Certainly policy is going to make a
huge impact. Being able to move quickly, but policy needs to be
grounded in good engineering. And if we don't do our upfront
engineering, then we could end up in a mess, granted.
The committee and the regulatory agencies have been moving
remarkably fast compared to the historic performance and I
applaud them for that and I think that that should continue. I
think making sure that there is a lot of transparency in the
overall process, that it is not DOD versus AT&T. We don't want
to go there. They need to work as a team. So those are my
thoughts.
Mr. Roberson. I think the biggest thing is the application
of data, the application of technology. There is so much
inertia in the rules and regulatory processes that we have
today that overcome that and to move into the world that, where
for instance, the spectrum observatory that we have put up at
Illinois Tech. You can see the use of the spectrum. You have
that data logged for years of time. Being able to apply data,
real data, not theory, not worst case analysis, but real data
to the problems and move things forward is really critical. And
I think your part of this is to insist that conjecture not be
the way in which decisions are made. It is rather based on
absolutely solid research data that is available that
concretely describes the situation and the opportunities that
are in front of us.
Mr. Olson. Thanks. I will have a question for the record,
but one final informal poll. Houston Astros or Kansas City
Royals. Any thoughts about that, guys?
Mr. Berenbroick. St. Louis Cardinals.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Latta. The gentleman's time has expired. Really
expired. And he yields back. And on behalf of Chairman Walden
and also for the gentlelady, the ranking member from California
and myself, we thank you very much for your testimony today.
And seeing no further business to come before the committee, we
stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:11 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

There's no question that freeing up additional spectrum for
commercial use is a vital step in ensuring America's continued
leadership in technology and innovation. Congress, the
administration, industry, and public interest groups are all in
agreement that there is a need for a great deal more spectrum
to meet demand for important services and technologies.
Our federal agencies are the biggest single user of
spectrum, much of which is devoted to important work and
operations. But surely there are ways to invest in our agencies
and improve systems to ensure that they are using spectrum in
the most efficient way and with the best equipment. Getting
agencies to make these changes can be difficult. It requires
federal users to take on additional work without compromising
their core missions--a difficult sell. One way to encourage
agencies to make this kind of investment of time and resources
is to provide them with a financial incentive for relinquishing
unused or unneeded spectrum. Reimbursement for the spectrum
they give up can help to further their mission in other ways.
The bill put forward by Representatives Guthrie and Matsui will
be an important step in this process.
The committee is also considering a discussion draft of a
bill to identify additional bands of spectrum that could be
made available for consumer use. Spectrum has helped transform
the daily lives of folks in Michigan and across the country--
giving us the ability to stay connected with personal devices
today that were once unimaginable just a decade ago. While we
have done a great deal through hearings, whitepapers, and
legislation to promote the availability of spectrum, there must
be a consistent and predictable supply to fuel competition and
innovation to pave the way for continued advancement. NTIA and
the FCC have done a great deal of work to identify potential
sources for spectrum to be reassigned. I am optimistic that we
can do our part in crafting legislation to provide additional
structure to this process and give these agencies the tools
needed to succeed.
----------

[all]
