- H.R._,THE TSCA MODERNIZATION ACT OF 2015

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. ___, THE TSCA MODERNIZATION ACT OF 2015

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND THE ECONOMY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 14, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-30

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov
________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
95-937 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2015
_________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
_____

Subcommittee on Environment and the Economy

JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
Chairman
GREGG HARPER, Vice Chairman          PAUL TONKO, New York
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                LOIS CAPPS, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JERRY McNERNEY, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TONY CARDENAS, California
BILL FLORES, Texas                   FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina           officio)
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. John Shimkus, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Illinois, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Paul Tonko, a Representative in Congress from the State of
New York, opening statement....................................     3
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................    19
Prepared statement...........................................    20
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................    20
Prepared statement...........................................    22

Witnesses

Hon. James Jones, Assistant Administrator, Office of Chemical
Safety and Pollution Prevention, Environmental Protection
Agency.........................................................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Michael P. Walls, Vice President, Regulatory and Technical
Affairs, American Chemistry Council............................    41
Prepared statement...........................................    44
Beth D. Bosley, President, Boron Specialties, LLC, on Behalf of
the Society of Chemical Manufacturers and Affiliates...........    48
Prepared statement...........................................    50
Jennifer Thomas, Senior Director, Federal Government Affairs,
Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers...........................    56
Prepared statement...........................................    58
Andy Igrejas, Director, Safer Chemicals, Healthy Families........    66
Prepared statement...........................................    68

Submitted Material

Discussion draft, H.R. ___, the TSCA Modernization Act of 2015,
submitted by Mr. Shimkus.......................................    81
Letter of April 14, 2015, from Ernest S. Rosenberg, President and
Chief Executive Officer, American Cleaning Institute, to Mr.
Shimkus and Mr. Tonko, submitted by Mr. Shimkus................   111
Letter of April 14, 2015, from Scott Faber, Vice President of
Government Affairs, Environmental Working Group, to Mr. Shimkus
and Mr. Tonko, submitted by Mr. Shimkus........................   113
Letter of April 14, 2015, from Jason Grumet, President,
Bipartisan Policy Center, to Mr. Upton, et al., submitted by
Mr. Shimkus....................................................   115
Letter of April 13, 2015, from Norbert E. Kaminski, President,
Society of Toxicology, to Mr. Shimkus and Mr. Tonko, submitted
by Mr. Shimkus.................................................   116
Letter of April 14, 2015, from Linda A. Lipsen, Chief Executive
Officer, American Association for Justice, to Mr. Shimkus and
Mr. Tonko, submitted by Mr. Shimkus............................   119
Testimony of Dr. Paul A. Locke, Associate Professor, Johns
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, April 14, 2015,
submitted by Mr. Shimkus.......................................   121
Letter of April 14, 2015, from Andrew N. Liveris, Chairman and
Chief Executive Officer, Dow Chemical Company, to Mr. Upton,
submitted by Mr. Shimkus.......................................   123

H.R. ___, THE TSCA MODERNIZATION ACT OF 2015

----------

TUESDAY, APRIL 14, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment and the Economy,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:15 a.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John
Shimkus (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Shimkus, Harper, Latta,
McKinley, Johnson, Bucshon, Flores, Hudson, Cramer, Upton (ex
officio), Tonko, Schrader, Green, DeGette, Capps, McNerney,
Cardenas, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Charlotte Baker, Deputy Communications
Director; Leighton Brown, Press Assistant; Noelle Clemente,
Press Secretary; Jerry Couri, Senior Environmental Policy
Advisor; David McCarthy, Chief Counsel, Environment and the
Economy; Tim Pataki, Professional Staff Member; Tina Richards,
Counsel, Environment and the Economy; Chris Sarley, Policy
Coordinator, Environment and the Economy; Jessica Wilkerson,
Legislative Clerk; Jacqueline Cohen, Democratic Senior Counsel;
Rick Kessler, Democratic Senior Advisor and Staff Director,
Energy and the Environment; and Ryan Schmidt, Democratic EPA
Detailee.
Mr. Shimkus. The committee will come to order.
Before I start with my opening statement, I want to
recognize my classmate and my friend, Lois Capps, who has
announced her retirement, although I imagine she will be a pain
in our side for about a year and a half yet, so a very nice
thing. So I will recognize myself for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN SHIMKUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Today marks an important milestone in our effort to
modernize TSCA. The more we work together, Member to Member, on
a bipartisan basis, the more we understand each other and how
much we hope to accomplish. Our subcommittee has put in a lot
of hours on TSCA over the past couple years, and actually I
would say the past couple weeks, and that effort, we believe,
is about to pay off. It is gratifying to work directly with
Members on both sides of the aisle who bring so much dedication
to the task.
A week ago we unveiled the bill before us today. Besides
the bill language itself, that announcement carried a couple
other important messages. First, Members have been working
together directly, challenging each other to find common
ground, and discovering that we share many policy objectives.
Let's talk about some of those policy objectives.
First, I think we all want EPA to do objective, science-
based examinations on some of the chemicals that are already on
the market. EPA already has some of these in mind to evaluate
because EPA thinks they have potential for unreasonable risk of
injury to human health and the environment. Meanwhile, if
manufacturers want to take a proactive approach and ask the
Agency to perform a risk evaluation, we are OK with that as
long as it meets the same rigorous science requirements as the
ones EPA itself initiates, and the manufacturer is willing to
pay the EPA administrative costs of performing the work.
We also want to continue protecting confidential business
information, but for CBI claims made after our bill becomes
law, we would like manufacturers to reestablish those claims at
least once every 10 years. We think EPA should be allowed to
mandate testing on a chemical in order to complete a risk
evaluation, since the risk evaluation step is new to TSCA.
These are just a few of the provisions that appear in the
discussion draft. I think we also agree that the process is,
and should be, moving forward. Leading Members on both sides
are committed to that momentum. We will listen carefully to
stakeholders on what they like in the draft, and we welcome
suggestions they have for improvement. We will collect those
comments and then we will sit down as a subcommittee and make
decisions. Members should plan on a subcommittee markup about a
month from now on May 14th.
To facilitate our work, we will publish a revised bill text
reflecting consensus revisions in time to use as the
subcommittee markup vehicle, and I will be asking Chairman
Upton to schedule it for full committee consideration as soon
as practicable after the subcommittee has done its work.
I thank all of the witnesses today for their willingness to
participate. Assistant Administrator Jim Jones, you are no
stranger to this committee. Your agency has already offered
some informal technical assistance for which we are grateful,
and we expect to continue working with you on it until the
final version passes both bodies of Congress and is signed by
the President.
We also welcome our second panel of witnesses. You are all
also friends to this committee, and we have been grateful for
your perspectives in the past. We look forward to hearing from
you on this fresh new approach.
Finally, I thank Chairman Upton for his full support on
this bill, and my friends, Paul Tonko and Frank Pallone, and
the subcommittee members and I would say the subcommittee staff
on both sides for all their active participation and
partnership in this project. Let's all keep working together to
get this vitally important legislation enacted.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shimkus follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. John Shimkus

The subcommittee will come to order. Today marks an
important milestone in our effort to modernize TSCA. The more
we work together, Member to Member, on a bipartisan basis, the
more we understand each other and how much we can accomplish.
Our subcommittee has put in a lot of hours on TSCA over the
past couple years, and that effort is about to pay off. It's
gratifying to work directly with Members on both sides of the
aisle who bring so much dedication to the task.
A week ago we unveiled the bill before us today. Besides
the bill language itself, that announcement carried a couple
other important messages. First, Members have been working
together directly, challenging each other to find common
ground, and discovering that we share many policy objectives.
Let's talk about some of those policy objectives. First, I
think we all want EPA to do objective, science-based
examinations of some of the chemicals that are already on the
market. EPA already has some of these in mind to evaluate
because EPA thinks they have potential for unreasonable risk of
injury to human health or the environment.
Meanwhile, if manufacturers want to take a pro-active
approach and ask the Agency to perform a risk evaluation, we
are OK with that as long as:

It meets the same rigorous science requirements as
the ones EPA itself initiates; and

The manufacturer is willing to pay the EPA
administrative cost of performing the work.
We also want to continue protecting confidential business
information but for CBI claims made after our bill becomes law,
we'd like manufacturers to reestablish those claims at least
once every 10 years.
We think EPA should be allowed to mandate testing on a
chemical in order to complete a risk evaluation, since the risk
evaluation step is new to TSCA.
These are just a few of the provisions that appear in the
discussion draft.
I think we also agree that the process is, and should be,
moving forward.
Leading Members on both sides are committed to that
momentum.
We'll listen carefully to stakeholders on what they like in
the draft and we welcome suggestions they have for improvement.
We'll collect those comments and then we'll sit down as a
subcommittee and make decisions.
Members should plan on a subcommittee mark up about a month
from now on May 14th. To facilitate our work, we'll publish a
revised bill text reflecting consensus revisions in time to use
as the subcommittee mark-up vehicle. And I'll be asking
Chairman Upton to schedule it for full committee consideration
as soon as practicable after the subcommittee has done its
work.
I thank all of the witnesses today for their willingness to
participate. Assistant Administrator Jim Jones, you are no
stranger to this committee. Your agency has already offered
some informal technical assistance for which we are grateful.
And we expect to continue working with you on it until the
final version passes both bodies of Congress and is signed by
the President.
We also welcome our second panel of witnesses. You are all
also friends to this committee, and we've been grateful for
your perspectives in the past. We look forward to hearing from
you on this fresh new approach.
Finally, I thank Chairman Upton for his full support on
this bill, and my friends, Paul Tonko and Frank Pallone, and
subcommittee members on both sides for their active partnership
in this project.
Let's all keep working together to get this vitally
important legislation enacted.

[Discussion draft H.R. ___ appears at the conclusion of the
hearing.]
Mr. Shimkus. And with that, I yield back my time and yield
5 minutes to the gentleman from New York, Mr. Tonko.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TONKO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I certainly appreciate
the tone. I value the friendship and partnership we have in
serving this committee.
Good morning to each and every one of our witnesses and to
my fellow panelists here. Thank you, Chair Shimkus, for calling
this important hearing, this very important hearing.
Our subcommittee spent a good deal of time on the Toxic
Substances Control Act in the last Congress. We had a number of
very good hearings covering many of the provisions of the
current law, and although we did not get to an agreement, the
exercise provided the members of this subcommittee with a much
better understanding of the current law and its associated
shortcomings. It is a new Congress. We have another opportunity
to develop a bill to address the key problems with current law.
For much of the past 37 years, TSCA served the industry
well, but I would caution that TSCA needs to be balanced. It
needs to serve all perspectives well. Existing chemicals remain
on the market, and new chemicals entered commerce through a
limited review process that does not require licensing or
compel the production of minimal data sets. Information
provided by chemical manufacturers could be labeled as
confidential business information with less review of whether
the CBI claims were justified or not. Even in the face of
strong evidence that a chemical substance indeed presented a
significant risk, the Environmental Protection Agency was
unable to act.
For all practical purposes, TSCA has no enforceable safety
standard. Under the law's standard of unreasonable risk and the
requirement to produce substantial evidence, the burden of
proof of harm as interpreted by the courts is too high to
enable EPA to address even well-characterized risks. In
addition, the Agency has insufficient resources and little
authority to require manufacturers to produce information for
an adequate evaluation of those chemical risks. This is
especially true for thousands of older chemicals that remained
in commerce with no evaluation from the time the law was passed
to the present moment.
The overriding problem with TSCA is that the public has no
confidence in this Federal program. As a result, the public
does not believe that the presence of a chemical in the
marketplace has any relationship to its safety. That is not
good for industry and it is not good for the public. The
Federal program must have credibility.
The discussion draft that is the subject of today's hearing
represents a significant departure from the proposal offered by
Senator Vitter and Senator Udall, and I believe that is an
important step here in this House. It is also different from
the approach taken in the House last year. So I believe that
this draft has a number of benefits relative to these two other
proposals, and that is a very beneficial thing in this process.
I want to commend the Chair for working with us and
demonstrating a desire to discuss and address concerns raised
by Democratic members and by different stakeholders and
interest groups. I appreciate and applaud the Chair's decision
to narrow the scope of this effort and to focus on the key
problems with TSCA.
Again, I appreciate the partnership and the friendship, but
there is much more work to do, and I am prepared to work with
you as are the other members of our subcommittee, Mr. Chair. My
hope is that we can produce a bill that all members of our
subcommittee can support, one that truly can become law. If we
are to do that, the final product must reflect compromise and
gain the support of a broad coalition representing all of the
major stakeholder groups and it must have the support of the
administration. I believe we can get there and that this
discussion draft makes a great start toward the goal of passing
a law but I do not want to mislead anyone. There are still some
tough issues to address. A new TSCA must do more for public
health and the environment than the current law. It must
preserve State authority to act to protect their citizens in
the absence of meaningful Federal action, and changes in policy
alone will not be enough. The Agency must have adequate
resources by which to fulfill its obligation to the public and
to the regulated community. A reformed TSCA should generate
more innovation, not more litigation.
I want to thank all of our witnesses who are participating
in today's very important hearing. Your input on this draft
legislation will be very important to our efforts as we move
forward, and again, I would like to thank you, Mr. Chair, and
commend you for tackling this important and very challenging
issue. It is not easy. I look forward to working with you and
the other members of this subcommittee to complete this very
important task.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time, and you
know, without objection, what I would like to do, Mr. Jones, is
allow you to go for 5 minutes, and then when Chairman Upton and
the ranking member come, after that we will let them give their
opening statements, and with that, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES JONES, ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR, OFFICE
OF CHEMICAL SAFETY AND POLLUTION PREVENTION, ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION AGENCY

Mr. Jones. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Shimkus,
Ranking Member Tonko, and other members of the subcommittee. I
appreciate the opportunity to join you today to discuss the
much-needed reform of chemicals management in the United States
and the opportunity to engage early on the recently released
discussion draft, the TSCA Modernization Act of 2015.
As you know, chemicals are found in almost everything we
buy and use. They contribute to our health, our well-being and
our prosperity. However, we believe it is essential that
chemicals are also safe.
TSCA gives the EPA the jurisdiction over chemicals
produced, used, and imported into the United States. However,
unlike laws applicable to pesticides and drugs, TSCA does not
have a mandatory program that requires EPA to conduct a review
to determine the safety of existing chemicals. In addition,
TSCA places burdensome legal and procedural requirement on the
EPA before the Agency can request a generation and submission
of health and environmental effects data on existing chemicals.
As a result, in the more than 3 \1/2\ decades since the passage
of TSCA, the EPA has only been able to require testing on a
little more than 200 of the original 60,000 chemicals listed on
the TSCA inventory and has regulated or banned only five of
these chemicals under TSCA Section 630, the last of which was
in 1990. In the 25 years since, the EPA has largely relied on
voluntary action to collect data and address risks.
In the absence of additional Federal action, an increasing
number of States are taking actions on chemicals to protect
their residents, and the private sector is making their own
decisions about chemicals to protect their interest and to
respond to consumers, it is clear that even with the best
efforts under current law and resources, we need to update and
strengthen TSCA and provide the EPA with the appropriate tools
to protect the American people from exposure to harmful
chemicals.
The EPA believes that it is critical that any update to
TSCA include certain components. In September 2009, the
administration announced a set of six principles to update and
strengthen TSCA.
While the administration does not have a position on the
discussion draft, there are several important observations that
I would like to offer.
The discussion draft provides the EPA with more effective
authority to compel the generation of health and safety data on
existing chemicals. The discussion draft should give the EPA
authority to set priorities for conducting safety reviews on
existing chemicals based on relevant risk and exposure
considerations. The draft includes two means by which risk
evaluations could be initiated for existing chemicals. The
first is that EPA would be required to conduct a risk
evaluation upon a finding that the combination of hazard from
and exposure to a particular chemical substance has the
potential to create an unreasonable risk of injury to health or
the environment. The second allows for a chemical manufacturer
to request that EPA conduct a risk evaluation for a particular
chemical substance. In practice, this would likely lead to EPA
focusing the majority of its limited risk evaluation resources
on completing evaluations for chemical substances requested by
industry, which, once requested, start the clock ticking on a
number of deadlines. This could result in evaluations for the
chemicals with the most potential for risk being put off
indefinitely while EPA works on the evaluations requested by
industry. Additionally, the requirement that EPA make an
affirmative finding of the potential for unreasonable risk,
prior to initiating a risk evaluation, creates a possible
analytical catch-22 in which EPA must make a finding regarding
the potential for risk prior to beginning the risk evaluation
process. I note that once the EPA is able to conduct an
evaluation that finds risk, the discussion draft appears to
impose rigorous deadlines for taking regulatory action to
reduce those risks. However, in many cases the deadlines in the
draft are unreasonably short.
The use of TSCA section 6 to limit or ban a chemical that
poses a significant risk has been a major challenge. The
discussion draft clearly removes TSCA's requirement that the
EPA demonstrate it is using the least burdensome requirements
needed to provide adequate protection. The draft appears
consistent with Principle 1 in that it specifies that risk
assessments should include consideration of information on
potentially exposed populations but not information on cost and
other factors not directly related to health or the
environment. The discussion draft, however, is ambiguous on how
EPA is to incorporate cost and other factors into a risk-
management rule under section 6(a).
In the current discussion draft, the cap on fees is
eliminated; however, there are not provisions that ensure EPA
will be given a sustained source of funding for implementation,
as articulated in Principle 6. The discussion draft is
consistent with the administration principles in the area of
transparency and availability of information on chemicals,
including giving the EPA the ability to share chemical data
with State, local, and tribal governments.
Mr. Chairman, thank you again for your leadership on TSCA
reform. I will be happy to answer any questions you or other
members have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Jones follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much for your opening
statement, and I appreciate the comments. I would like to turn
to Chairman Upton and thank him for his friendship and support
as we move forward, and you're recognized for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is today an important milestone as we work to bring our
chemical safety laws into the 21st century, and I thank
Chairman Shimkus for his bipartisan member-to-member work
bringing this legislation before the subcommittee. I also
commend the ranking member of the full committee, Mr. Pallone,
for collaborating across the aisle to develop a proposal that
in fact we can all embrace.
We have heard from a diverse cross-section of stakeholders
that TSCA needs modernizing. When first enacted nearly four
decades ago, the structure was a bit of an experiment. When our
predecessors on this committee designed TSCA, they were clearly
attempting to reconcile diverse points of view within Congress
and with the American public. But our challenge today is the
same, but now we have the benefit of experience. Our witnesses
include the administration's main point person on chemical
regulation, industry experts with global regulatory experience,
and a person who manages a chemical business on a day-to-day
basis. As someone responsible for meeting the payroll, she may
have the most valuable experience of all. We look forward to
all of your testimony today as we collectively work together in
the days ahead to get the project done.
Last year we spent lots of hours, countless hours, trying
to develop bipartisan legislation only to find that we put more
issues on the table than we could resolve. Drawing on that
lesson, this year's bill is a little bit more focused.
First, it kicks the starting process of selecting chemicals
already in commerce for risk evaluation and, if necessary,
rulemaking to mitigate that risk. From among chemicals already
on the market, EPA selects ones that it sees as potentially
posing an unreasonable risk. Second, the bill also lets the
market select chemicals for risk evaluation by allowing a
manufacturer to ask for and pay for an evaluation. In either
case, the risk evaluation must stand up to rigorous scientific
standards set out in the legislation. If EPA does identify an
unreasonable risk, it must turn immediately to drafting a rule
tailored to mitigate that risk. These rules will focus on the
danger at hand. Once written, those rules will be shared by all
Americans. Rooted in science, the EPA decisions will obviate
State-by-State attempts to regulate interstate markets, and
everyone from moms in Michigan to consumers around the world
will have the confidence that a chemical cleared by EPA won't
harm them or their families. So let's continue the bipartisan
momentum and get this legislation through the committee and the
full House. This is the year for meaningful reform.
I again want to particularly thank Mr. Shimkus for his
strong work to get a bill to the plate where we can finally get
some runs scored. Yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Today is an important milestone as we work to bring our
chemical safety laws into the 21st century. I thank Mr. Shimkus
for his bipartisan member-to-member work bringing this
legislation before the subcommittee. I also commend the Ranking
Member of the full committee Frank Pallone for collaborating
across the aisle to develop a proposal we can all embrace.
We've heard from a diverse cross-section of stakeholders
that TSCA needs modernizing. When first enacted nearly four
decades ago, the structure was a bit of an experiment. When our
predecessors on this committee designed TSCA, they were clearly
attempting to reconcile diverse points of view within Congress
and in the American public.
Our challenge today is the same, but now we have the
benefit of experience. Our witnesses include the
administration's main point person on chemical regulation,
industry experts with global regulatory experience, and a
person who manages a chemical business on a day-to-day basis.
As someone responsible for meeting the payroll, she may have
the most valuable experience of all. We look forward to all of
your testimony today and to working collaboratively in the days
to come in getting this project done.
Last year we spent countless hours trying to develop
bipartisan legislation only to find that we put more issues on
the table than we could resolve. Drawing on that lesson, this
year's bill is more focused.
First, it kick starts the process of selecting chemicals
already in commerce for risk evaluation and, if necessary,
rulemaking to mitigate that risk. From among chemicals already
on the market, EPA selects ones it sees as potentially posing
an unreasonable risk. Second, the bill also lets the market
select chemicals for risk evaluation by allowing a manufacturer
to ask for (and pay for) an evaluation.
In either case, the risk evaluation must stand up to
rigorous scientific standards set out in the legislation. If
EPA does identify an unreasonable risk, it must turn
immediately to drafting a rule tailored to mitigate that risk.
These rules will focus on the danger at hand.
Once written, those rules will be shared by all Americans.
Rooted in science, the EPA decisions will obviate State-by-
State attempts to regulate interstate markets. And everyone
from moms in Michigan to consumers around the world will have
the confidence that a chemical cleared by EPA won't harm them
or their families.
Let's continue the bipartisan momentum and get this
legislation through the committee and the full House. This is
the year for meaningful reform.

Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The Chair
now recognizes the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Pallone, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am pleased to be here today to continue this
subcommittee's important work to reform the Toxic Substances
Control Act. Chairman Shimkus' new discussion draft, the TSCA
Modernization Act of 2015, is a thoughtful and innovative
approach that has the potential to move chemical regulation
forward. The chairman and the majority staff have worked
closely with Democratic members, including our ranking member,
Mr. Tonko, to improve this draft, and I am happy to say that
our work is ongoing. I look forward to hearing from EPA,
affected industries, and environmental stakeholders this
morning to plot a course forward and begin to strengthen this
draft.
Improving the Federal Government's ability to identify and
manage risks from the chemicals that are manufactured and
processed in this country is critical. For 6 years now, there
has been widespread agreement among industry, labor, and
nongovernmental organizations that TSCA needs to be reformed.
In 2009, the EPA Administrator said that TSCA had proven to
be ``an inadequate tool for providing the protection against
chemical risks that the public rightfully expects.'' The
American Chemical--or I should say, the American Chemistry
Council said it wanted to work with stakeholders, Congress, and
the administration to make reform a reality. And a coalition of
public interest groups said that by updating TSCA, Congress can
create the foundation for a sound and comprehensive chemicals
policy that protects public health and the environment while
restoring the luster of safety to U.S. goods in the world
market.
At that time, stakeholders and policymakers pursued a
vision of a fully reformed TSCA, ensuring that no chemical
would go on the market without being found to be safe. All
chemicals in commerce would be subject to minimum testing, and
aggressive regulation would ensure to the American public a
reasonable certainty of no harm from the chemicals they are
unwittingly exposed to every day. Six years later, that vision
is still my goal but the risks from toxic chemicals in our
environment and the products we use every day are serious and
pressing, and progress toward that vision has been elusive.
This new discussion draft does not attempt to realize the
goal of a fully reformed TSCA with assurances that all
chemicals in commerce are safe but it will give EPA tools to
reduce risk now, in a package that I think has the potential to
become law, and it will give consumers the ability to choose
chemicals and products that have been reviewed for safety
against a purely risk-based standard.
Under this draft, EPA would have the ability to require
testing through orders, rather than just rulemaking. That is an
important step forward, although it won't fix all of the
problems in Section 4 of the existing law. The draft would also
ensure that EPA's determinations of unreasonable risk under
section 6 of current law will be made without consideration of
costs and with explicit protections for vulnerable populations.
EPA would then be able to move forward with risk management
without the paralyzing requirement to select the least
burdensome option. These too are essential steps forward,
although issues in section 6 still remain.
Additionally, the draft would remove outdated limits on
user fees to provide more resources for EPA's activities under
TSCA, although it could do more to ensure that EPA actually
receives those funds. The draft also would direct EPA to update
the TSCA inventory, providing better information to consumers
and policymakers on the universe of chemicals in commerce in
the United States, and the draft would require substantiation
of CBI claims in the future, preventing abuse of CBI claims and
ensuring greater transparency. These are all positive changes
that would empower EPA to offer greater protections for human
health and the environment. Importantly, the draft also avoids
some of the significant concerns that have been raised about
past proposals, such as limits on the ability of EPA to
regulate articles and limits on the ability of States to be
partners in enforcement.
This bill reflects robust bipartisan outreach, which I hope
to continue in the coming weeks. Mr. Chairman, you deserve
credit for a strong process so far, and a strong product. Some
important issues remain to be worked out, such as setting
yearly targets for EPA initiated risk evaluations, ensuring
that private rights of action are protected, and targeting
risks from the worst of the worst chemicals, PBTs. So I hope we
can come together to strengthen this proposal and produce a
law.
I welcome the testimony from today's witnesses, which will
point the way for further work on a bipartisan basis. We have
all, Mr. Shimkus, myself, Mr. Tonko and of course Mr. Upton, we
really consider this a goal that can be accomplished on a
bipartisan basis, and I just want to thank everyone for all
their hard work, particularly over the last 2 weeks. You know,
we had a recess for 2 weeks but the staff were certainly not in
recess. They were working very hard on this bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

I am pleased to be here today to continue this
subcommittee's important work to reform the Toxic Substances
Control Act. Chairman Shimkus' new discussion draft, the TSCA
Modernization Act of 2015, is a thoughtful and innovative
approach that has the potential to move chemical regulation
forward. The chairman and the majority staff have worked
closely with Democratic members and staff to improve this
draft, and I am happy to say that our work is ongoing.
I look forward to hearing from EPA, affected industries,
and environmental stakeholders this morning to plot a course
forward and begin to strengthen this draft.
Improving the Federal Government's ability to identify and
manage risks from the chemicals manufactured and processed in
this country is critical. For 6 years now, there has been
widespread agreement among industry, labor, and nongovernmental
organizations that TSCA needs to be reformed.
In 2009, the EPA Administrator said that TSCA had proven to
be ``an inadequate tool for providing the protection against
chemical risks that the public rightfully expects.''
The American Chemistry Council said it wanted to work with
``stakeholders, Congress, and the administration to make reform
a reality.''
And a coalition of public interest groups said that ``By
updating TSCA, Congress can create the foundation for a sound
and comprehensive chemicals policy that protects public health
and the environment, while restoring the luster of safety to
U.S. goods in the world market.''
At that time, stakeholders and policymakers pursued a
vision of a fully reformed TSCA, ensuring that no chemical
would go on the market without being found to be safe. All
chemicals in commerce would be subject to minimum testing, and
aggressive regulation would ensure to the American public a
reasonable certainty of no harm from the chemicals they are
unwittingly exposed to every day.
Six years later, that vision is still my goal. But the
risks from toxic chemicals in our environment and the products
we use every day are serious and pressing, and progress toward
that vision has been elusive.
This new discussion draft does not attempt to realize the
goal of a fully reformed TSCA with assurances that all
chemicals in commerce are safe. But it will give EPA tools to
reduce risk now, in a package that I think has the potential to
become law. And it will give consumers the ability to choose
chemicals and products that have been reviewed for safety
against a purely risk-based standard.
Under this draft, EPA would have the ability to require
testing through orders, rather than just rulemaking. That is an
important step forward, although it won't fix all of the
problems in Section 4 of the existing law.
The draft would also ensure that EPA's determinations of
unreasonable risk under Section 6 of current law will be made
without consideration of costs and with explicit protections
for vulnerable populations. EPA would then be able to move
forward with risk management without the paralyzing requirement
to select the least burdensome option. These too are essential
steps forward, although issues in Section 6 still remain.
Additionally, the draft would remove outdated limits on
user fees to provide more resources for EPA's activities under
TSCA, although it could do more to ensure that EPA actually
receives those funds.
The draft also would direct EPA to update the TSCA
inventory, providing better information to consumers and policy
makers on the universe of chemicals in commerce in the United
States.
And the draft would require substantiation of CBI claims in
the future, preventing abuse of CBI claims and ensuring greater
transparency.
These are all positive changes that would empower EPA to
offer greater protections for human health and the environment.
Importantly, the draft also avoids some of the significant
concerns that have been raised about past proposals, such as
limits on the ability of EPA to regulate articles and limits on
the ability of States to be partners in enforcement.
This bill reflects robust bipartisan outreach, which I hope
to continue in the coming weeks. Mr. Chairman, you deserve
credit for a strong process so far, and a strong product.
Some important issues remain to be worked out, such as
setting yearly targets for EPA initiated risk evaluations,
ensuring that private rights of action are protected, and
targeting risks from the worst of the worst chemicals, PBTs.
I hope we can come together to strengthen this proposal and
produce a law. I welcome the testimony from today's witnesses,
which will point the way for further work.
Thank you.

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. I also want to thank you for your
personal involvement, and we were working. There was a
conference call for about an hour, and I think you were on the
road somewhere and I was on the road somewhere, and staff was
here, and it was a good start, so people were working hard, and
I appreciate it.
Now I would like to recognize 5 minutes to start the
questions, and Mr. Jones, how many chemicals already on the
market is EPA currently assessing on a yearly basis? And I
think check the microphone.
Mr. Jones. I am sorry.
Mr. Shimkus. That is all right.
Mr. Jones. Thank you. We identified about 80 chemicals
several years ago for assessment. We have assessed final
assessments for five of them, and we have about 20 under
evaluation right now, so it is hard, since we are so early in
the early days of attempting to evaluate existing chemicals, it
is hard to right now estimate exactly how many per year we are
doing. Somewhere in the range between three and eight I would
say would be an accurate number.
Mr. Shimkus. To evaluate, let's say, 20 chemicals per year,
how much many and staff would you need? Do you have----
Mr. Jones. I would think we would need at least twice the
existing chemical resources we have right now to do 20 a year.
Mr. Shimkus. Would the discussion draft, particularly the
section--you kind of highlighted part of this in your
testimony--requiring manufacturers to pay all costs related to
the requested reviews all you, the EPA, to have more chemicals
evaluated?
Mr. Jones. Yes. One of the tricks that we have observed in
the way the bill is drafted is that those resources actually
don't come to EPA, and so they go to the Treasury, and so we
are limited by the appropriated resources that we have, so it
doesn't really expand our capacity.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes. Is there--and that is why we have the
hearing and stuff because--I am being whispered in my ear that
you are right, so we obviously--the intent is for--if there are
user fees, the whole intent is for you to be able to get access
to it so you can have the ability. And so if there are ways
that you get your smart people involved and we get our smart
people involved, maybe there is--I don't know what we can do
but we need to make sure that that happens. I think that is the
intent--what is that, Mr. Chairman? I know I am not the smart
guy.
Does the discussion draft improve the agency's ability to
require the submission of hazard and exposure data by
authorizing the EPA to obtain it by rule, consent agreement, or
by issuing an order?
Mr. Jones. Yes, it does.
Mr. Shimkus. Does the discussion draft allow EPA to select
and do risk evaluations on chemicals whose exposures and
hazards have the potential to be high enough to create an
unreasonable risk?
Mr. Jones. Well, it is interesting because the language
creates an additional step that we don't have today and that we
have to--that is why I refer to it as the potential catch-22.
We actually have to make a finding before we can initiate a
review, and that finding is somewhat related to risk, even
though the whole point of a risk evaluation is to determine the
risk. So it creates somewhat of a barrier actually to
initiating a risk evaluation.
Mr. Shimkus. And obviously the intent of the legislation is
to be, as was stated in some of the opening statements, a more
slimmed-down, more efficient, more simplistic process of
getting from A to B to C to judgment ruling, so we want to make
sure we have that, and any help you can provide in addressing
that, we would be--because look at schematics of current law,
and you look at schematics of other possible laws, they are
much more complex, and we would like to--our intent is not to
be--our intent is just to get the job done.
Mr. Jones. I think that could be achieved.
Mr. Shimkus. The discussion draft excludes cost
considerations when EPA performs risk evaluations, saving that
issue for when and if a risk-management rule is written. Do you
agree that the risk evaluation should focus on hazard and
exposure?
Mr. Jones. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. You testified that the discussion draft is
ambiguous on how EPA is to incorporate cost and other factors
into a risk-management rule under section 6A. Can you explain
why you said that?
Mr. Jones. Thank you. That is probably one of the most
important observations that we have around the discussion
draft. So the existing standard of unreasonable risk has been
interpreted by courts to be a risk-benefit balancing where the
Agency has actually got to demonstrate that the health benefits
of the rule literally outweigh the costs imposed by the rule.
It is not clear whether or not that interpretation that exists
right now would be changed at all. There are some parts of the
draft that make it appear that actually cost shouldn't come
into consideration in determining the level of protection
achieved, but that would conflict with the cost-benefit
balancing that previous courts have determined, and then there
is the cost-effectiveness language, and so our observation is,
it is not clear if this discussion draft is maintaining the
existing cost-benefit balancing, if it is attempting to exclude
costs completely from the risk management, or if it wants costs
considered but in some general way without being explicit. So
it is a clarity issue from our perspective.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, and my time is expired, but I think
you have raised an issue that what is the--you have courts--
decisions courts have rendered and then simplistically changing
a law, so my guess is, the courts would then have to render
judgment under new statutes versus old statutes.
So having said that, I will recognize the ranking member,
Mr. Tonko, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and again, much exchange
here has cited the hard work done over the last couple of
weeks, so allow me to further compliment and thank the staff
for their devotion to this effort along with my colleagues.
We need TSCA reform certainly because under current law,
the American public is exposed to industrial chemicals without
that sufficient bit of safeguard to protect public health. So
tens of thousands of chemicals in commerce have never been
tested for safety, and EPA does not currently have the
necessary authority or resources to tackle this backlog.
So Mr. Jones, what is EPA currently doing to address the
highest-priority chemicals under TSCA?
Mr. Jones. Thank you, Congressman Tonko. So we identified--
we evaluated the 1,200 or so chemicals with known hazard, and
we compared them against criteria that were related to severity
of hazard as well as the potential for exposure, and from that
priority-setting process, we have identified a little over 80
chemicals that we think are the most important to assess first,
and we have now begun to assess those chemicals.
Mr. Tonko. And then would this draft as it currently stands
enable that work plan?
Mr. Jones. It sets a little bit of a higher bar than the
priority process that we did in making a judgment that there is
actually the potential for the exposure to exceed the hazard,
which we did not do in our priority----
Mr. Tonko. Any clarification that we need to have in the
language that we are proposing?
Mr. Jones. I think we don't want to create a potential
unmanageable bar, I think if that might be useful.
Mr. Tonko. OK. The last thing we should do in TSCA
legislation is make it harder for EPA to act against the worst
chemicals. What changes could we make to ensure that the
chemicals EPA thinks are the highest priority get reviewed and
addressed?
Mr. Jones. Well, as I mentioned, having a requirement that
we make a finding that the exposure may exceed the risk before
we have actually done the risk assessment is I think an
unnecessary requirement up front. And then as I mentioned
earlier, I think it is important that we all have a clear
understanding of what the actual risk-management standard is,
and I don't think it is clear right now what that standard is,
which opens the potential for there to be a lot of litigation
after decisions are made.
Mr. Tonko. And adding a minimum number for EPA is a
beneficial thing when it comes to initiating reviews?
Mr. Jones. If the Congress wants a certain pace to be
achieved, and my experience is that being clear about what your
expectations are about how quickly the Agency acts is pretty
important.
Mr. Tonko. Let me focus on the role of cost considerations
that the Chair was quizzing you about, and using those costs in
the effort to assess and manage risks.
This bill includes, as he indicated, explicit language to
indicate EPA's risk evaluation cannot take cost into
consideration. The language is intended to ensure that EPA's
determination of whether or not a chemical presents an
unreasonable risk does not include cost considerations but cost
analyses are never part of that risk. They are, however, or
should be included in an analysis of the options available to
reduce identified risks for risk management. So are there--and
again, I heard the give and take, the bantering that you and
the Chair had, but are there suggested changes that you can
share that would make that effort more clear?
Mr. Jones. Yes, and this goes back to the risk-management
standard Congress is trying to put into place, and the
administration believes the costs are an important
consideration in risk management, which is different from
saying that the risk-management standard should be a risk-
benefit balancing, as I have testified before. In the chemicals
arena, that is a very challenging thing to do because the risks
that we are looking at are often not quantifiable but the costs
almost always are, and what we got out of the Corrosion Proof
case was a finding that the Agency had to numerically determine
that those benefits literally numerically were larger than the
costs, which creates--you end up with a cost-biased standard,
which has been one of the problems that we have had. So being
clear about whether the Congress is looking for a cost-benefit
balancing or you want a standard that requires the
consideration of costs, which may not sound like it is a lot
different but actually in reality it is quite different, would
be very useful.
Mr. Tonko. Well, I think any kind of, you know, suggested
changes would be very helpful for the subcommittee as we move
forward, and I appreciate your input here today. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The Chair
now recognizes the vice chair, Mr. Harper, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Jones, thank you
for being here today and shedding some light on a very
important subject for us, and we look forward to working
together on both sides of the aisle and with you on coming up
with a solution that works, and I appreciate your input on the
discussion draft today.
You testified that priority chemicals should be assessed
and acted upon in a timely manner if the chemical poses a risk.
For your work plan chemicals, have you determined that some
show an unreasonable risk?
Mr. Jones. So we have demonstrated with the five
assessments we have completed that three of them demonstrate
risk. Two of them we said were not significant risks. But
unreasonable risk under current TSCA has been interpreted by
courts to mean that the health benefits outweigh the costs, and
so what we are doing right now for the three chemicals where we
have demonstrated significant risks were evaluating the health
benefits that we have identified and comparing them to the cost
of potential regulation and ultimately we need to come up with
a risk management that balances the health benefits with the
costs. So that is the part of the process that we are in right
now.
Mr. Harper. So the three of the five that you are moving
forward on, you haven't completed that process, correct?
Mr. Jones. That is correct. We are in that process.
Mr. Harper. So what is the status of the risk-management
rules on those particular three chemicals?
Mr. Jones. So we are right now--we have articulated the
health benefits, the risk, and we are right now evaluating the
cost of potential regulation, which also involves looking at
evaluating the risks and the benefits of the alternatives and
determining whether or not we have figured out the least
burdensome way to adequately protect against the risk.
Mr. Harper. You know, when you have those five that you
were looking at, ruling two of those, did you start the process
on all five at the same time?
Mr. Jones. Yes, we did.
Mr. Harper. And are they supposed to proceed at the same
pace, or I assume each one can be at a different level, but are
you proceeding--are the three that you are looking at, are they
at the same spot in the process?
Mr. Jones. They are actually, although that is a little bit
by happenstance because sometimes you run into a difficult
issue and it may take a little longer to resolve, but the three
that we are looking at, whether or not there is unreasonable
risk, they are moving at pretty much the same pace.
Mr. Harper. Now, you said there are 80 that have been
identified.
Mr. Jones. That is correct.
Mr. Harper. And how many--who determines which ones are
looked at next and assessed?
Mr. Jones. That would be me.
Mr. Harper. OK.
Mr. Jones. We actually had a public process where we
identified factors that we wanted to look at. They were factors
like carcinogenicity, reproductive toxicity, persistence
bioaccumulation, and we also wanted to make sure there was
exposure so that we weren't looking at potentially hazardous
chemicals for which nobody was being exposed. We had public
participation around that at some workshops, and then we
finalized the criteria, and then we evaluated about 1,200
chemicals against the criteria that we developed, and these are
the ones that came out on top.
Mr. Harper. So how many assessments do you believe will be
completed this calendar year?
Mr. Jones. That is a tricky one because we are taking on
some--there are at least three that will be above the five that
we have done that is very clear will be completed. We are also
looking at some of the most challenging compounds, which are
flame retardants, and we are looking at several dozen of those,
and they are quite complicated, so it is hard for me at this
point to predict how many of the flame-retardant assessments we
will complete.
Mr. Harper. Yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The Chair
now recognizes the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Pallone, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The testimony we hear today will be essential as we work to
move this draft forward, and I know we have heard already today
and we will continue to hear from the second panel that there
are a number of changes needed to the draft, and I appreciate
my colleague, Mr. Tonko, for highlighting some of those
changes. I would like to focus briefly on some of the things I
think this draft gets right, and if you can to just answer yes
or no, but I am not going to restrict you completely. I just
want to get through it.
First, I would like to highlight some of the problems in
current law that I think this draft addresses. So Mr. Jones,
does this draft remove the least-burdensome language that has
been an obstacle to EPA action under section 6?
Mr. Jones. Yes.
Mr. Pallone. Does the draft remove the statutory cap on
user fees in existing law?
Mr. Jones. Yes.
Mr. Pallone. Is it your view that the draft needs to do
more to ensure that EPA actually receives adequate resources to
carry out this program?
Mr. Jones. Yes, and I would just say it is because the
draft as written right now does not allow the fees to come to
EPA.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Would you have any recommendation in that
regard?
Mr. Jones. We could work with the committee to figure out
how to write that. We have done this before.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Well, I just hope that we can make changes
to ensure that EPA has the resources as we move forward.
Otherwise, you know, what goes is it?
Turning back to the draft, does this draft require
justification of future CBI claims, unlike current law?
Mr. Jones. Yes.
Mr. Pallone. And does this draft provide explicit
protections to vulnerable populations and therefore improve
current law?
Mr. Jones. It is a little ambiguous. It precludes EPA from
determining a chemical meets the safety standard unless we have
evaluated vulnerable populations but doesn't speak to scenarios
where we find that the safety standard is not met.
Mr. Pallone. OK. I think these are all very important
points, and I recognize that the draft is not as comprehensive
as some past proposals, but I think it would move the ball
forward on chemical regulation and improve current law.
I also wanted to recognize again the subcommittee chairman,
Mr. Shimkus, because he has tried to avoid some of the major
issues that have stalled proposals in the Senate. So let me ask
you about some of that.
Mr. Jones, I know that you raised concerns about article
provisions in the Senate bill. Are those concerns addressed
here?
Mr. Jones. Yes, they are.
Mr. Pallone. OK. And you also raised some concerns about
the ability of States to co-enforce requirements of EPA TSCA
rules and to regulate chemicals while EPA is evaluating them.
Are those concerns addressed here?
Mr. Jones. Yes.
Mr. Pallone. OK. I think this draft is a good starting
point. Obviously we still have a lot of work to do, but we have
had a very good process so far, and I look forward to
continuing to work with the chairman and Mr. Tonko. And so at
this point, I can't believe I am actually yielding back, but I
accomplished everything I wanted to accomplish.
Mr. Jones. It was my short answers.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time, and I hope
those answers are helpful to you and I hope they are not
harmful to me.
So with that, I would like to yield 5 minutes to the
gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Latta, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
thanks very much for holding this very important hearing today,
and Administrator, thanks for being with us today.
Last year when you testified before the subcommittee, in
April, in fact, just about a year ago, I discussed with you the
TSCA inventory. You stated how the actual number of chemicals
on the TSCA inventory somewhere between 7,000 and 84,000, the
7,000 number being the rough number of chemicals produced in
large quantities and overall the 84,000 representing those
chemicals that have been on the inventory and how it could be
potentially misleading. Let me ask, do you believe that the
discussion draft before us would give a more accurate picture
of the chemicals actually in commerce on any given date?
Mr. Jones. It would, yes.
Mr. Latta. OK. And also, how effective do you believe the
least-burdensome provision has been under the current law?
Mr. Jones. I think it has created a barrier under the
current law.
Mr. Latta. OK. Could you explain that, how it has created a
barrier?
Mr. Jones. So for example, right now there are three
chemicals that we have identified as posing significant risk,
and before we can move forward regulating them, we have to
evaluate about eight different risk-management scenarios that
are identified in the statute and show how for each one of them
we are selecting the one that poses the least burden on society
at large, so we have to analyze each of these potential risk-
management options and then just pick the least burdensome one,
which as a general matter I don't have a problem with but it is
not always necessary to evaluate everything to know which one
is going to be the least burdensome ultimately and we are
required to do that under the statute.
Mr. Latta. Let me ask, how much time does that add to the
process?
Mr. Jones. Well, you know, we are doing it right now for
the first time in 30 years, and so I will have a clearer answer
when we have actually finished that analysis, and whether or
not a court ultimately upholds did we do enough analysis for
each of the risk-management options that are in the statute.
Mr. Latta. Let me ask about under the proposed draft bill
before us is on the deadlines, and you know, the deadlines we
are looking at that the administration will conduct and publish
risk evaluation under the subsection for chemical substance not
later than 3 years after the date on the Administrator makes a
finding, 180 days after the date on which the manufacturer
requests the risk evaluation, and it also goes on to state that
if the Administrator determines that additional information is
necessary to make a risk evaluation, a determination under the
subsection, there is--it can be extended a date of 90 days
after receipt of additional information or 2 years after the
original deadline, and with that, you know, where do you see
that--do you see that would be a good time frame?
Mr. Jones. You know, I think deadlines are really important
for the Government to have, but they are pretty short, and the
only one that I think that the Agency has some potential for
meeting is the initial assessment if EPA initiates the review,
3 years--our experience so far is that between 2 and 3 years,
so having the deadline be the latter end of it seems
appropriate.
Us turning an assessment around in 6 months from an
industry submission I think is unrealistically optimistic. I
would love to be able to do proposed rules within 6 months of a
safety evaluation. My experience is that that is also just
unrealistic from past experience.
Mr. Latta. Well, you know, with the 3 years, you know, how
long on general--you are saying 2 to 3 but how many different
chemicals are out there that have taken more than 3 years for
you to do an evaluation on?
Mr. Jones. So it is possible that something that is hugely
challenging from an exposure potential or hugely challenging
from understanding the hazard that it would take longer than 3
years, I would expect that as a general matter, 3 years is a
deadline that could be achieved for the vast majority of the
chemicals we would evaluate.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much, and----
Mr. Shimkus. Will the gentleman yield the last 44 seconds?
Mr. Latta. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. Under the industry applied evaluation, you
will have more data in that process than when you just pick a
chemical out of the air and say we have to do this one as our
requirement under current law. Is that correct?
Mr. Jones. It is not clear that that would be the case. I
assume that that was some of the assumptions that were built
into that 6-month deadline. It is not obvious the way it is
drafted that we would have more. The other----
Mr. Shimkus. Well, if the industry is willing to have you
expedite this, my guess is that there would be, you know, a
working relationship that--but we will work to clear that up.
My assumption would be, they are going to give you what they
have to try to get an expedited--I mean, that is the whole
benefit of going through this process is coming to a decision.
Mr. Jones. Yes. The draft is written that all they have to
do is request it, so they don't have to actually give us
anything.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. Thank you. I thank my colleague. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Oregon, Mr. Schrader, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
How does the Agency currently and then under your
interpretation of the new discussion draft balance individual
risk and responsibility versus, you know, absolute risk, if you
will, posed by certain chemicals?
Mr. Jones. That is a good question, Congressman. Right now
we are looking at a compound that is used as a paint stripper,
and it has actually resulted in deaths across the country over
the last 15 years, and so arguably--and it results in deaths
because people sometimes use it in an enclosed space, and so if
you--it is theoretically possible that we could mitigate that
risk by a labeling restriction, although when you look there
actually is a labeling restriction right now although the fine
print is quite fine, and so you try to struggle with the
effectiveness of giving people information to protect
themselves versus what may be the reality is to whether or not
people avail themselves of that, and so it is something that we
right now are struggling with, with a chemical that we have
made a priority compound because, you know, individuals do have
some responsibility with respect to protecting themselves, but
at the same time, if past is prologue and giving information
may not be effective, we think we have the ability to protect
people from themselves.
Mr. Schrader. I think one of the struggles this committee
is going to have and the Congress writ large is balancing that
personal responsibility. If people are allergic to certain
things and most people are not allergic to, does that make that
a toxic substance generally speaking. So I think we are going
to have a lot of work to do to find out what that appropriate
balance is. This is still the United States of America and
people do bear personal responsibility for their own health and
well-being, and labeling, albeit small or large, hopefully
adequately, demonstrating what potential harm it may cause to
certain subpopulation is important but the real world is
anything in excess is probably toxic, in popular terms,
carcinogenic. Everything is carcinogenic these days. I think we
have to be thoughtful and I would hop the EPA would balance
their rulemaking with whatever legislation we have going
forward.
I am interested in the cost-effectiveness discussion. You
are interested in apparently more leeway than is now granted
under this legislation. I would probably be against that. My
concern is that costs should be taken into account. We have a
Superfund site in my State where EPA's interpretation has
gotten to where if one individual sort of maybe could have
ingested a certain amount of fish on a daily basis, way in
excess of what any person would do, even tribal members, that
at a level that is way below the current toxicity standards,
that that would pose a significant risk and needs to be
mitigated by extremely expensive alternatives, and the judgment
I have seen so far from EPA is that they want to have a very
expensive alternative to what could be a simpler solution to I
think a very exaggerated risk. So I would hope that you would
take this into account. I hope that the legislation does not
reduce the cost. In fact, to me it seems pretty clear. You
know, when you are determining the risk, OK, cost should not
perhaps be part of the discussion, but certainly, certainly,
absolutely, 100 percent cost-effectiveness should be part of, a
major part of, the solution, and I would fight against any
language that said cost should be just a consideration. That,
to your point, is a loophole you could drive a truck through at
the end of the day. So I hope you would be at least open to the
current legislation as currently written.
Mr. Jones. We think it is very important for cost to be
considered in the risk management. It is about how it should be
considered, and as I was saying, right now it is not clear if
it needs to be considered in a literal balancing of cost and
benefits, and that we have stated numerous times how
challenging that is for chemicals where it is always possible
to estimate cost. It is often not possible to give a numeric
monetization to the benefit.
Mr. Schrader. Well, if you can't monetize it that what
can't be measured should probably be done. I mean, at the end
of the day, there has to be--everyone is susceptible. There are
going to be some persons, some individuals, some child, some
remote genetic configuration of any given individual that is
going to be at risk with any given chemical or food substance,
whether it is deemed safe or not, and I think it is extremely
important not to get wrapped around the axle on having
completely irrelevant, with all due respect, solutions that are
not actually benefit to the population writ large.
As a veterinarian, it is all about epidemiology. You are
not going to save everybody at the end of the day, and we have
to understand that, and I think America in this 21st century
has to become sophisticated enough to understand where is the
maximum risk exposure.
With that, I would like to yield the balance of my time to
the chairman of the committee--or ranking member. Excuse me.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, you don't want to give it to me--no, you
might want to give it to me.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. I thank the gentleman for yielding.
I would like to turn briefly to a concern I have that the
draft is too specific about how the Agency should conduct
science. Agency decisions must be transparent including those
about science, but in my opinion, these are decisions best left
to technical experts. This draft includes requirements that EPA
act based on a specific definition of the weight of the
scientific evidence and requires EPA to consider a lengthy list
of factors including sponsor organizations, uncertainty and
more.
So Mr. Jones, when these scientific requirements are
included in the statute, does that open EPA's use of science up
to litigation?
Mr. Jones. So any requirement that you have to do, you then
either--if you don't do it, you are open to litigation. I think
that the science requirement that most troubles us is the
consideration of a threshold effect, which is something that we
do right now, but it is certainly possible that in 10, 15, or
20 years, it is not even part of the scientific, you know,
lexicon. And so boxing us into things that may become obsolete
in the future scientifically are the kinds of things we would
like to generally avoid.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, and I share those concerns, and I
yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Johnson, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Administrator Jones, about a year ago, you testified before
this committee on TSCA reform. You may remember at that
meeting, I expressed my concern to you that TSCA reporting
requirements seemed to incentivize manufacturers, for example,
in the electronics industry, to landfill byproducts instead of
recycling them, even when those byproducts are rich in
recyclable metals and other valuable materials--copper, for
example. In other words, we are making it more cost-effective
for manufacturers to put that stuff in the dirt than to recycle
it, save money, create jobs, and be more environmentally
conscious.
You may also remember that last October I sent
Administrator McCarthy a letter asking the EPA to complete its
analysis of data collected during the 2012 chemical data
reporting, or the CDR cycle, with the idea that such an
analysis would help EPA reassess the need for CDR information
in future reporting cycles. In December I received a response
from Administrator McCarthy that the analysis would be
completed by early 2015. It is now April, and no analysis has
been finalized, and while the EPA has had talks with my staff,
and I know that there has been some exchange of information
with industry, it has not provided the electronics industry nor
the public with any new information for some time now. So
because it appears that this analysis is ongoing, I remain
hopeful that the EPA still has the opportunity to safely
incentivize the recycling of byproducts and render any other
options to solve this problem unnecessary.
But the first step must be the release of the analysis of
2012 CDR byproducts. Can you tell me when that data will be
released?
Mr. Jones. Thanks, Congressman, and thank you for raising
this issue to our attention. We have spent a fair amount of
time evaluating the issue that you brought to our attention. We
have begun to communicate with your staff as well as the
electronics industry the results of our analysis. I would be
reluctant to give a date on the release of the analysis before
checking with my staff, but we are very close to being able to
give an answer to the question that you raised.
Mr. Schrader. OK. Administrator McCarthy said early 2015.
Is that still a projection? Are looking at the first half of
this year or----
Mr. Jones. It is the first half of this year.
Mr. Schrader. OK. All right. Well, I look forward to
getting that. I appreciate that.
What is the EPA's cost for doing the analysis that they do?
Is it pretty consistent, or does the cost vary from chemical to
chemical?
Mr. Jones. It is going to vary pretty significantly from
chemical to chemical.
Mr. Schrader. OK. Can you give us an example?
Mr. Jones. Yes. So the first five chemicals that we looked
at, we project that the regulation for those that we think bear
consideration of regulation will cost about a million and a
half dollars, and the analysis will have been a million
dollars. That applies to three of them, and so the chemicals
that demonstrated some risk are significantly more expensive to
do than the two chemicals which did not demonstrate any risk.
So when you find no risk, it is relatively cheap. There we
estimated about a million dollars, so actually much of the cost
is associated with the regulatory requirements of the analysis
necessary to support a regulation.
Mr. Schrader. You just said something that maybe I
misunderstood you. Why would you be considering regulating a
chemical that provides no risk anyway?
Mr. Jones. I am sorry. I must have stated it backwards.
The chemicals that demonstrated risk are the ones that we
are doing regulatory analysis for to support a potential
regulation.
Mr. Schrader. OK. All right.
The discussion draft gives the EPA to select a chemical
substance for risk evaluation under TSCA section 6. Would the
EPA rely on information that is currently available to the
Agency to make those selections?
Mr. Jones. That is now we would intend to----
Mr. Schrader. That is how you put those in the risk
category?
Mr. Jones. Yes.
Mr. Schrader. OK. I think I have only got 34 seconds left,
and I can't get this last one in. Mr. Chairman, I will yield
back some of my time.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Green. I am sitting in as the ranking member. Mr. Tonko
had to go, although Paul from New York doesn't really want me
from Texas doing it.
Mr. Shimkus. You better take down that placard because you
might hurt him.
Mr. Green. Yes, I don't want to get him in trouble.
Thank you for being here. I particularly want to thank
Chairman Shimkus and Ranking Member Tonko and our ranking
member and Chair of the full committee for working on this
issue. It has been frustrated because it has been a law since
1976, and I know for the last two terms this subcommittee has
tried to see how we could deal with it, but it sounds like, you
know, we will go small and see what we can do and do just
problem-solving, which I think is a great way to go.
If enacted, would the TSCA Modernization Act improve EPA's
ability to make a risk determination and a risk-management plan
for existing chemicals?
Mr. Jones. That is an interesting question. For the way it
is structured right now, because the only things--because the
way the fees don't come to the Agency for industry-submitted
requests, it would absolutely make it clearer what we had to do
and how many. We have to do whatever they submitted to us. But
because we are not getting the fees, I think it would crowd out
our ability to initiate any on our own. Now, if there is a
solution that allows the fees to come to EPA, then I think it
would clearly allow us to have more pace to existing chemicals
program.
Mr. Green. OK. Would the discussion draft retain the
current TSCA timing of preemption of State and local action?
Mr. Jones. Basically, yes, it would retain the--it would
eliminate the--it would basically be similar to what is
currently required in TSCA, marginally different.
Mr. Green. Under the discussion draft, would risk
determination be based solely on health and safety factors
without consideration of cost?
Mr. Jones. The risk evaluation would, yes.
Mr. Green. Currently, the EPA is allowed to disclose
confidential business information to State and local government
officials. Is that part of this package?
Mr. Jones. Currently it is quite difficult to do that but
under this provision, the provision in the discussion draft, it
would make it quite straightforward to do that.
Mr. Green. OK. Will the discussion draft allow EPA to
disclose the confidential business information to the--well,
strike that. Under current TSCA, is EPA allowed to disclose CBI
to a treating doctor or a healthcare professional?
Mr. Jones. It is quite--that is what I was saying. It is
quite burdensome for us to do that right now, which is
something that----
Mr. Green. Would this discussion draft help with that?
Mr. Jones. Yes.
Mr. Green. Would the discussion draft authorize the EPA to
disclose--well, I take that back again. Under current law, is
there any limit to the length of time for confidential business
information claim?
Mr. Jones. No.
Mr. Green. Under the discussion draft, would there be any
time limits?
Mr. Jones. Yes, 10 years.
Mr. Green. OK. The discussion draft creates a new term,
``potentially exposed subpopulations.'' Under the definition
provided in the discussion draft, would the thousands of
chemical plants that I have and the people that work there and
the people that live around it in our district be covered under
the definition of potentially exposed subpopulations?
Mr. Jones. It is certainly possible that they would be,
yes.
Mr. Green. Now, obviously you want those jobs there but we
also want to make sure that the products they are producing
that our country needs are safe as possible. In your testimony,
you note the discussion draft lacks a sustained source of
funding for the chemical safety management, which goes back to
the funding. Would you recommend to our subcommittee the best
way to address that concern?
Mr. Jones. I think it is a relatively straightforward fix
that has the funding that is designated here going to the EPA,
which right now it would not go to the EPA.
Mr. Green. And I think that is something we will consider.
Are there current statutes that provide a sustained source of
funding that could be used as a model for TSCA reform?
Mr. Jones. Yes, both the drug law--PDUFA is the acronym--or
the pesticide law, the Pesticide Registration Improvement Act,
both have funding mechanisms.
Mr. Green. You state in your testimony that EPA strongly
feels that any update to TSCA must provide the agency with the
ability to make timely decisions and the ability to take action
to address that risk. Do you believe that the discussion draft
provides the agency with the needed authority to make those
timely decisions?
Mr. Jones. The timeliness is clear. As I said earlier, I
think that the ambition is quite impressive and perhaps not
manageable. I think the part that I am struggling is looking
for more clarity as to exactly what the risk-management
standard is so we are not fighting in litigation forever about
what it actually means.
Mr. Green. And I agree. I would hope when we finish it, we
give the clarity that you need so there is no question at all.
In fact, EPA is downstairs in the Energy and Power Subcommittee
so you all are regular guests here in our committee.
Mr. Jones. We carpooled over.
Mr. Green. But any suggestions I know we would all
appreciate that. And do you believe the discussion draft gives
the EPA to authority to address the identified risk? If not,
what changes would we need to ensure the Agency has that
authority?
Mr. Jones. Again, that goes back to clarity of what the
risk-management standard is is important.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I know I am over time.
I appreciate it.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The Chair
will now look to my colleague from Indiana, Mr. Bucshon. Do you
waive?
Mr. Bucshon. I waive.
Mr. Shimkus. The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from
Colorado, Ms. DeGette. It is good to have her back. She was
very active last Congress, and we are glad to see her here with
us.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I really
appreciate you having this hearing, but even more so, I
appreciate the amount you have worked with Mr. Green, myself,
Mr. Tonko and others on really trying to make progress on this
path to TSCA reform. It is not easy as we all had been saying.
If it was easy, it wouldn't have taken us 30 years to fix it.
And thank you, Assistant Administrator Jones, for coming
over to give us some thoughts this morning. I want to start by
looking at EPA's ability to require testing of chemicals under
the draft. This discussion draft includes an important change
to EPA's authority under section 4 of TSCA by empowering the
EPA to require testing through order rather than rulemaking.
So if you can talk to us about how order authority will
improve your ability to require testing under section 4, that
would be great.
Mr. Jones. Sure. Right now we are required to do a rule if
we want to compel the generation of health and safety data for
a chemical, and we are also required to make a finding that we
have some reason to believe there may be an unreasonable
adverse effect for such chemicals, so you get into this kind of
a catch-22. You want the data because you don't know but you
need to know something before you compel it, and then you have
to do a rule, and rulemaking is a very long process and so it
can take many, many years. So an order authority would allow us
to move much more quickly to require generation of health and
safety data.
Ms. DeGette. Do you have any sense about on an average how
much more quickly that would be?
Mr. Jones. Well, in our pesticides program, we have order
authority and have had it for 40 years, and when we find that
there is data that we need to require, we are able to issue
orders in matters of months as opposed to 4 or 5 years.
Ms. DeGette. OK. Now, that change was one that I had sought
in section 4 but this draft doesn't seem to address the catch-
22 that EPA has long faced, and you talk a little about it. It
seems that under this draft, the EPA would still have to find
that a chemical might present an unreasonable risk before they
were required--before they could require testing, and that is
what you were just talking about.
Mr. Jones. So the way we have read the discussion draft,
Congresswoman, is that to issue an order, we don't need to make
that finding, so that seems to be addressed. It is in the
context of to initiate a risk evaluation, we need to have some
reason to believe the exposure exceeds the hazard.
Ms. DeGette. And so how do you think the language, or do
you think the language can be adjusted in this discussion draft
to reflect that issue?
Mr. Jones. I think it would be relatively straightforward
to do that instead of having some reason to believe exposure
exceeds hazard, have some reason to believe there is exposure,
have some reason to believe there is hazard.
Ms. DeGette. OK. So it is the ``exceeds hazard'' that is
the issue?
Mr. Jones. Yes, I think so.
Ms. DeGette. If you could work with us to supplement your
response to give us some technical assistance on that, that
would be really helpful. We would appreciate it.
In addition to granting the EPA order authority to require
testing, the discussion draft also includes a provision to
allow manufacturers to request that EPA evaluate their
chemicals for safety. The discussion draft requires the EPA to
make a finding on any evaluations requested by companies within
6 months. Is that going to be enough time to perform a robust
evaluation of a chemical?
Mr. Jones. I don't think so, no.
Ms. DeGette. How long does the evaluation of a chemical
usually take?
Mr. Jones. It usually takes a couple of years, and this was
the conversation the chairman and I were having that the
discussion draft doesn't require the manufacturers to submit
all the data necessary to do an evaluation. If it did, it would
still require a couple of years. And so they could just say I
want you to evaluate my chemical. The other thing is that when
there is a controversy around the chemical, it is often the
case that EPA's interpretation of the data doesn't agree with
the manufacturer's.
Ms. DeGette. So do you think there is some language we
could put together to tighten that up a little bit?
Mr. Jones. It would seem like it is more about how much
time the Agency should have to do----
Ms. DeGette. So maybe, Mr. Chairman, that is something we
can talk about as we go forward.
Mr. Shimkus. Would the gentlelady yield?
Ms. DeGette. I would be happy to.
Mr. Shimkus. I still think there is this debate about what
is industry going to provide, and that was the whole part.
Ms. DeGette. Right.
Mr. Shimkus. If they are providing a lot of data, then the
timelines may be legit, so we will visit that.
Ms. DeGette. OK. Good. All right.
The last thing is that the discussion draft proposes
amending section 9 of TSCA to allow the EPA to set fees to help
defray the costs of additional chemical testing but it doesn't
flag funds to be used specifically for that purpose. So my
question is, does the Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution
Prevention have sufficient funds appropriated to undertake
additional testing of new chemicals under TSCA?
Mr. Jones. Not as written in the discussion draft.
Ms. DeGette. So if we had some kind of a dedicated fund
rather than just solely relying on appropriations, would that
be of assistance?
Mr. Jones. Yes, it would.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentlelady's time is expired. The Chair
now turns to Mr. Cramer from North Dakota for 5 minutes. Do you
waive?
Mr. Cramer. I would yield to Mr. Hudson.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman has yielded to Mr. Hudson, who
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hudson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for being here today. I appreciate your
testimony. It has been very informative.
My first question: TSCA as amended by the discussion draft
requires that the agency have a need for testing and exposure
information before it imposes a requirement on manufacturers
and processors to develop that information. Is that a good
requirement?
Mr. Jones. I believe so, yes.
Mr. Hudson. All right. Last year you asked that each
chemical evaluation have a deadline for completion. Are the
deadlines in our bill about right for that?
Mr. Jones. I rarely say this: They are a little too short.
Mr. Hudson. Really? Well, what do you think they ought to
be?
Mr. Jones. Well, I think that we can complete assessments
within 3 years. I don't think we can even with industry-
submitted data complete an industry-submitted assessment in 6
months. As much as I would love to do a rulemaking in 6 months,
I think we probably need upwards of 2 years to do a rulemaking.
Mr. Hudson. EPA has authorized some 90 chemicals as TSCA
work plan chemicals. Does the discussion draft require a change
to that program?
Mr. Jones. It requires us to make a finding that is above
and beyond what we did in the identification of the priority
chemicals.
Mr. Hudson. Well, would work plan chemicals likely be
selected for risk evaluations under the House discussion draft?
Mr. Jones. They would likely be but, again, we would have
to do one additional step that we have not done heretofore,
make a determination that we think it is likely or possible
that the exposure exceeds the hazard, which we have not done.
Mr. Hudson. Gotcha. I have got a question as far as fees,
collection of fees currently. How does the Agency currently
collect user fees under TSCA?
Mr. Jones. We only have a few right now for the submission
of a new chemical under the premanufacturer notification
program. Those fees don't come to EPA either, so except for
some small businesses, manufacturers when they submit a new
chemical to EPA for review submits a fee with that.
Mr. Hudson. And those go back to the Treasury?
Mr. Jones. They go back to the Treasury.
Mr. Hudson. What is your budget breakdown by category for
individual sections of TSCA?
Mr. Jones. I would need to get back to you on that but we
could provide that pretty quickly.
Mr. Hudson. I would appreciate it if you would do that.
What is the EPA budget in both funding and FTEs for chemical
review under section 5 and under section 6 of TSCA?
Mr. Jones. Again, that would be part of what we would get
back to you on, overall budget breakdown between existing
chemicals and new chemicals.
Mr. Hudson. OK. Well, I would appreciate that information,
and I thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Hudson. I yield back to the chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. Just a follow-up. So on new chemicals, you
have 90 days, and then with the possibility of an additional 90
days?
Mr. Jones. Um-hum.
Mr. Shimkus. And so we are saying on existing chemicals, it
will take 3 years? That is just part of the date we are having.
Mr. Jones. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. You will have to explain to me why--not now
but you will have to explain to me why that is, and with that,
I yield back the time and now, she has been very patient, my
colleague from California, Ms. Capps, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, first of all, for
holding the hearing, and our witness for your testimony.
Under current law, TSCA has used an ``unreasonable risk''
standard to evaluate the safety of a chemical. This is
understood to be a cost-benefit standard, which in effect
requires the Agency to balance the economic value of a chemical
against the adverse health effects such as cancer, autism.
Besides posing serious ethical problems, this approach has also
proven to be unworkable.
Mr. Jones, what is the impact of this cost-benefit standard
in the context of TSCA?
Mr. Jones. Well, as I have mentioned, it is often very
difficult for certain health outcomes to the way in which we do
risk assessment to monetize them. Some we are able to. There
are some carcinogens which we are able to monetize. There are
some pollutants like particulate matter where we are able to
monetize. In the case of a chemical that we are looking at
right now where death is the outcome, we can monetize that.
There are some outcomes the way our risk assessment is
designed, we are not able to monetize them, and so our ability
to say that these benefits literally outweigh these costs is
challenging. It is not impossible but it creates a challenge
for us.
Mrs. Capps. So since 2009, there has been widespread
agreement that this cost-benefit standard does need to be
abandoned. This subcommittee has repeatedly received testimony
that TSCA's current safety standard is failing to protect the
general public and particularly vulnerable populations. EPA,
the American Chemistry Council, even oil refineries have all
stated that cost should not be part of safety determinations
under TSCA. I welcome the changes in the discussion draft to
explicitly exclude costs from risk evaluations but I am not
sure they go far enough.
So my question, Mr. Jones, is: do you think changes are
needed in this draft to ensure the safety of chemicals as
evaluated against a purely health standard?
Mr. Jones. Well, what I said so far today is that right now
it is just ambiguous as to what the standard is, and that I
think is critically important so we don't spend, if this were
to become law, the next 30 years litigating what the standard
is. The administration has said that the safety evaluation
should be risk-based. but the administration has also said that
cost should be a consideration in the risk management.
Mrs. Capps. Right. I hope you will work with this committee
because we intend to, I hope, move forward to ensure the
language gives effect to that kind of intent.
Another important component of the safety standard in any
TSCA proposal is protection for vulnerable populations.
Vulnerable populations include infants and children, the
elderly and disabled, workers, and those living near chemical
facilities. In their 2009 report, Science and Decisions, the
National Academy of Science recommended that vulnerable
populations should receive special attention at all stages of
the risk assessment process.
Mr. Jones, do you agree that it is important to address
risks to vulnerable populations when managing chemical risks
under TSCA?
Mr. Jones. Yes.
Mrs. Capps. I am pleased to see this draft includes an
explicit protection for vulnerable populations blocking EPA
from finding that a chemical does not present an unreasonable
risk if the agency finds that the chemical presents an
unreasonable risk for a vulnerable subpopulation. In other
words, if a chemical fails to meet the standard for a
subpopulation, it doesn't meet the standard, period.
Mr. Jones, do you think that requirement is going to
provide the protection that we need for vulnerable populations?
Mr. Jones. It is interesting, Congresswoman Capps. When we
make the determination that a chemical doesn't pose an
unreasonable risk, we have to make the finding you described,
and this just goes back to the earlier comments for when what
the actual safety standard is when we find that there is risk
is not clear, and for that reason it is not clear how
vulnerable populations would be included in that, so when we
find there is a risk.
Mrs. Capps. So we need more clarity?
Mr. Jones. There needs more clarity there.
Mrs. Capps. Yes. And I appreciate the efforts made in this
draft to ensure, and I can see now it is important to emphasize
the word ``draft.'' It probably does need to be changed along
the way. Costs are left out of safety evaluations and that
vulnerable populations are protected. This is sort of we are
this far on it but I hope we can continue to work to improve
this draft. I applaud the efforts that we have made so far but
we have a ways to go to make sure that we move chemical
regulation forward, and I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentlelady yields back her time.
Seeing no other members asking for questions, we do want to
thank you for, it is obviously not long in congressional time
but a legislative hearing, and we want to thank the members for
being very diligent and involved and engaging in your
responses. We look forward to working with you, and with that,
we will dismiss you and ask for the second panel to come
forward.
Mr. Jones. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. We would like to start. We want to thank the
second panel for coming and appreciate you sitting through the
first round. Hopefully a lot of questions will be generated
based upon the comments. The way I would like to do it is, I
will just introduce one at a time when their time comes for the
opening statements, and again, welcome. A lot of them are
familiar faces that we have seen here numerous times, so
friends of the committee, I would say.
First, we would like to welcome Mr. Mike Walls, who is the
Vice President of Regulatory and Technical Affairs with the
American Chemistry Council. Your full statement is in the
record. You have 5 minutes, and you are recognized.

STATEMENTS OF MICHAEL P. WALLS, VICE PRESIDENT, REGULATORY AND
TECHNICAL AFFAIRS, AMERICAN CHEMISTRY COUNCIL; DR. BETH D.
BOSLEY, PRESIDENT, BORON SPECIALTIES, LLC, ON BEHALF OF THE
SOCIETY OF CHEMICAL MANUFACTURERS AND AFFILIATES; JENNIFER
THOMAS, SENIOR DIRECTOR, FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS, ALLIANCE
OF AUTOMOBILE MANUFACTURERS; AND ANDY IGREJAS, DIRECTOR, SAFER
CHEMICALS, HEALTHY FAMILIES

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL P. WALLS

Mr. Walls. Good morning, Mr. Shimkus, Mr. Tonko, and
members of the----
Mr. Shimkus. And just if you could pull that a little bit
closer.
Mr. Walls. How is that? I don't want to break anybody's
eardrums.
Thank you again for the invitation to be here today. I am
very happy to testify today in support of the bipartisan
discussion draft.
ACC strongly supports efforts to reform TSCA. Over the
years, problems with implementation of the current statute have
eroded public confidence in the Federal regulatory system,
contributed to misperceptions about the safety of chemicals,
and created uncertainty throughout interstate commerce.
The discussion draft is a significant milestone in the TSCA
reform debate. For the first time, there is now bipartisan
reform measures before each House of Congress, and while the
debate over TSCA reform certainly doesn't end with this
hearing, there is now a very real opportunity to achieve TSCA
reform this year, and we at ACC are very encouraged by the very
positive comments that members of this subcommittee have made
both on the process and the substance of the draft.
Now, in 2009, ACC published a set of 10 fundamental
principles for TSCA reform. The discussion draft, like S. 697,
which is pending in the Senate, fully addresses all our
principles. The draft addresses key issues and shortcomings in
TSCA, and among the most important elements are that the draft
requires that EPA evaluate risks only on the basis of health
and environmental considerations. That was a key problem that
has hampered implementation of the current Act to date.
Under the draft, cost and benefit considerations are
relevant only in deciding what regulatory option EPA will
impose to control risks. We believe the draft strengthens EPA's
authority to mandate the generation of new information on
chemicals. The draft also protects sensitive commercial
information from disclosure while requiring appropriate upfront
substantiation of those claims.
The draft also balances the interests of the State and
Federal Governments by promoting a robust, uniform national
chemical regulatory system.
As the subcommittee continues its discussion, some elements
of the draft do require some additional clarifications. We
think there is a need for additional detail and direction to
EPA on the manufacturer risk initiated--sorry--the
manufacturer-initiated risk evaluation process. I think you
heard comments to that effect from Mr. Jones. We think it is
particularly important that Congress provide clear direction
and clearly articulate its expectations for that process, and
at a minimum, EPA should be required to promulgate rules or
appropriate guidance so that all stakeholders understand how
that process can produce risk evaluations that are timely, of
high quality and are reliable.
We also think it is necessary to clarify the interplay
between section 6A and 6B and the presence or absence of an
appropriate risk-management rule. This was one of the elements
Mr. Jones mentioned at the conclusion of his testimony.
ACC also believes that EPA must have access to appropriate
resources to implement a reformed TSCA. Under the draft, TSCA
fee revenue is deposed to the general Treasury. We believe
those funds need to be returned to EPA.
The draft also allows State governments to adopt
regulations identical to those promulgated by EPA in certain
cases. It would be helpful if the degree to which States may
depart from the Federal approach in enforcing those
regulations, if at all, should be clarified.
Again, the bipartisan discussion draft is a significant
step toward achieving TSCA reform this year. We look forward to
working with all members of this subcommittee to ensure that
TSCA reform builds confidence in the U.S. chemical regulatory
system, protects health and the enforcement from significant
risks, and meets the commercial and competitive interests of
the U.S. chemical industry and the national economy.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify. I am happy
to respond to questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walls follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
Next I would like to turn to Dr. Beth Bosley, President of
Boron Specialties, on behalf of the Society of Chemical
Manufacturers and Affiliates. She has testified before. Welcome
back, and you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BETH D. BOSLEY

Ms. Bosley. Thanks very much. Good morning, Chairman
Shimkus and Ranking Member Tonko, and everyone on the
subcommittee, and thanks also for having me back to Washington
to discuss TSCA, one of my favorite subjects. It has been
really refreshing to hear so many positive statements being put
forth by both the Democrats and Republicans on this issue, and
we really applaud all the efforts to modernize TSCA. It covers
such a wide variety of chemicals and applications, and it
really impacts a huge swath of our economy, so it is really
important, and given the range of interested parties, it is
remarkable how much alignment has been achieved. It is a very
complicated statute, and you have worked pretty hard not to
make it more complicated, so I applaud that as well.
I would just like to highlight a few things that I think
are important in the discussion draft. The safety standard, as
we have already heard today, corrects the fundamental flaw in
the current TSCA that requires you to take cost into account.
In this case, protection of human health and the environment is
really the only driver for the safety standard, and that is a
great improvement. EPA will make very different decisions under
section 6 now than it has before, and it will allow policy and
emerging science to inform protective determinations regarding
these chemicals.
For new chemicals, I have talked quite a bit I think here
before that I think the new chemicals process works very well,
and I would like it to remain basically as it is. It is one of
the more important parts of the statute. It drives protection
of our environment and our economy. Experience has taught us
that new chemicals can be greener, and of course, we must
continue to innovate because we live in a global economy now.
If we want to promote innovation and develop greener
chemistries, section 5 really must remain efficient,
predictable, and affordable.
We are also interested in timely access to the market, and
the 90-day review window has proven sufficient in most cases.
In some cases, EPA has to suspend or give itself another 90
days, but in fact EPA often completes its review after day 22,
which is really very early. It depends on how much information
they are given, but after day 22 is often. We would certainly
like to be able to go to market after day 22 as well.
One area that TSCA hasn't worked, and we have heard about
this a number of times already this morning, is with existing
chemicals, but I think the discussion draft goes a long way to
really solve the problems with existing chemicals. It can ask
for data under section 4 really whenever it thinks it is
necessary to conduct the risk evaluation. It doesn't have to
make a finding, and that is a really great improvement.
We do support a more comprehensive review of existing
chemicals, and since there is no detailed screening process
outlined in the bill, we are assuming EPA would go forward with
its work plan chemicals as it has to date.
We do also support deadlines for this review. I am not sure
how long it takes, but I would say EPA probably has a good
estimate of how long existing chemicals take to review. We know
that deadlines work well in new chemicals, so they should work
well in existing chemicals, but the deadlines and the workload
really have to be achievable.
Under section 8 for the reporting requirements, one of the
most important factors we see there is an inventory reset. As
we have heard already today, again, there are over 80,000
chemicals on the inventory, but only 7,700 were reported on in
the most recent CDR. That is a big disparity between what is in
commerce and what is not in commerce.
Currently, as a manufacturer, I report on exposures of
chemicals to my employees, but then I also have to estimate
exposures to my customers' employees, and that is pretty hard
for me to do, especially as a small business. So I would think
process of reporting would be very important to add to this--
requiring process of reporting would be very important language
to add.
Confidential business information is really important for
all U.S. manufacturers, but especially small businesses like
mine. CBI allows us to pursue research and market development
without advertising to the world exactly what we are doing.
Even so, we really appreciate that we must proceed with as much
transparency as possible, and I think that resubstantiation
after 10 years is an excellent addition to the current draft.
Resources and fees: As we have all heard, EPA needs more
resources, and getting those fees to EPA instead of the
Treasury is really important. I also appreciate, as you might
imagine, that you have given the provision for small-business
reduced fees, and I wholeheartedly support that.
So in general, just very much supportive of the bill. We
think it fixes a lot of the problems with the current TSCA
statute, and I am sure other issues will be raised, but we look
forward to working through them with you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Bosley follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
Now I would like to recognize Ms. Jennifer Thomas, Director
of Federal Government Affairs with the Alliance of Automobile
Manufacturers, again, another returnee. Welcome, and you have 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF JENNIFER THOMAS

Ms. Thomas. Thank you, Chairman Shimkus, Ranking Member
Tonko. My name is Jennifer Thomas, and I am here on behalf of
the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers, which is a trade
association of 12 automakers, and together they account for
approximately 75 to 80 percent of all new vehicle sales here in
the United States. The last time I was before this committee, I
was beamed in from Europe, so I am very happy to be here in
this person this time, so thank you for giving me the
opportunity to share our views on the draft TSCA Modernization
Act of 2015.
We commend Chairman Shimkus, Chairman Upton, and Ranking
Member Pallone for their bipartisan efforts to reform TSCA for
the first time since it was enacted in 1976.
Automakers work diligently to identify and reduce
substances of concern in automobiles. We have eliminated the
use of mercury switches and lead wheel weights. We continue to
phase out the use of the flame retardant deca, and we are
eliminating copper from brake pads.
Autos are also one of the most recycled consumer products.
Nearly 90 percent of a vehicle's material content is recycled
or reused.
But clearly there is more work to do to protect the public
and environment from harmful chemical substances, and we want
to be part of the solution. We welcome this discussion draft
and believe it will enhance EPA's ability to more effectively
regulate potentially harmful chemicals while providing industry
a clear and consistent regulatory environment.
Let me take a moment to highlight some specific areas of
interest to our industry. First, we support the manner in which
this draft seeks to regulate chemicals and articles. This
approach is consistent with existing EPA policy, which has
traditionally recognized the complexity of regulating chemicals
and articles by exempting them from most TSCA requirements. We
understand the potential need to regulate articles in certain
circumstances but this should be based on risk of exposure to
the chemical in question. For example, there is a clear
difference between the risk of exposure to a chemical substance
in a baby bottle versus an engine component underneath the hood
of a car.
Secondly, we believe that vehicles should be serviced with
parts as produced, meaning those service parts used the
material that were acceptable when the vehicle was designed,
certified and warrantied. Replacement part demand is very
small. It is generally 1 to 5 percent of all vehicle parts, and
it declines over time as a vehicle fleet is retired. Btu since
the average age of a vehicle on the road today is 11 years,
replacement parts must be available for many years so that
those vehicles can be serviced and maintained.
There is often some confusion of how vehicle replacement
parts are produced, so let me briefly explain this model.
Automakers typically put a marginal supply of those parts in
stock while the vehicle is still in production, and to the
extent that customers need replacement parts beyond that
initial stock, there is a production-on-demand market, and
suppliers continue to produce them using the same materials,
the same production process, and the same engineering
specifications as for the original vehicle. So while
replacement parts might theoretically be able to be redesigned
for vehicles no longer in production, there are technical and
logistical barriers that often make such redesign infeasible if
not impossible.
I would also note that similar laws regulating chemical
substances have examined this issue and have opted to exempt
replacement parts.
Finally, we appreciate this draft's simplified approach to
State preemption, which ensures that any EPA final
determination will preempt State chemical regulations. However,
we do recommend that the committee also consider suspending any
new State action while EPA decides a chemical substance is a
candidate for a risk evaluation. We are aware of the concern
expressed about the passage of time while EPA considers
regulatory action and are supportive of expedited time frames
for EPA action.
Thank you again for inviting me to be here and discuss this
important issue with you today. Congress is on the cusp of
reforming TSCA for the first time in nearly 40 years, and we
strongly believe that the final bipartisan product will more
effectively regulate harmful chemicals in a way that protects
the health and safety of all Americans while providing industry
the certainty and the clarity that it needs. We look forward to
working with you as this draft moves through the legislative
process.
I thank you again, and I would be happy to answer any of
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Thomas follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Andy Igrejas, Director of
Safer Chemicals, Healthy Families. Welcome back. You are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ANDY IGREJAS

Mr. Igrejas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and Mr.
Tonko. I am pleased to be here as like the other witnesses are.
Safer Chemicals, Healthy Families is a coalition of 450
organizations and businesses. It ranges from the Learning
Disabilities Association, the Steelworkers Union, large health
providers like Dignity Health, and the major national
environmental organizations.
We all came together to reform TSCA in 2009, and we
definitely want to have it happen sooner than later, and we are
glad to work with the committee toward that end.
I want to highlight what we see as positive in the draft,
what is missing, and some ideas for how to move forward. I want
to also say up front that we think the more targeted approach
you have taken does hold a lot of promise. There is a lot that
it potentially solves and points the way forward, and also to
identify some of the elements that are in there that we
support.
The absence of a complicated prioritization scheme we think
is wise. It avoids the downside of the low-priority loophole
that a lot of us are concerned about. You also heard from EPA
that they already have prioritization criteria they have gone
through that had public input, et cetera.
The approach to preemption by preserving more of TSCA's
existing preemption, you avoid the controversy of the void or
the suspension whereby States are blocked just because EPA is
looking at something, and we appreciate that. The draft also
doesn't roll back EPA's authority on products or imports, so we
think you have threaded the needle on the issue of products and
don't take away authority on some of these other areas. It
doesn't make it easy to require toxicity testing. It does
remove the least-burdensome requirement, which was an issue in
the asbestos decision, and vulnerable populations are addressed
though there is some clarification potentially needed around
the rulemakings.
I want to focus on the issue of cost and see if I can add
some value. It was talked about a lot. We basically agreed with
where EPA came down on this, that we don't see that issue as
solved in this draft, and to try to put it simply, I think in
our vision, you want the risk evaluations to clearly identify
the risk including the vulnerable populations and you want the
rulemaking to have to protect against that risk very clearly.
And then the cost considerations including cost-effectiveness
comes into play with how EPA does that, which can mean longer
time frames for implementing some particularly costly piece of
the risk management. It can include choosing a more cost-
effective way of addressing the risk over another way. But you
don't want it to be a limitation on whether the risk is
addressed at all, and that is the key distinction that we still
see as potentially not solved. So it literally comes down to,
will you have a risk hanging out there that EPA has identified
and at the end we will be able to tell the story that the
public is now protected from that risk and have that be true,
or we potentially have the story that EPA winds up saying we
actually didn't protect against the risk because a court found
that we couldn't prove that the cancer cases and the hospital
visits, the lost work, et cetera, outweighed the costs to the
companies to move to the safer alternative. That is the
difference that this hinges on, and so I am not sure if we have
a difference of intent or of interpretation of the language,
but that is the key thing we would like to see solved is that
the risk management has to protect against the risk.
We also would agree with what has been said about the
imbalance between industry assessments and the assessments that
EPA would undertake under its own power under the draft.
Really, the industry assessments are the only thing driving EPA
activity under this draft. They have to agree to these requests
and they have to undertake them, and on the flip side, they
have to go through some hoops before they can undertake an
assessment, and that creates an imbalance that we think could
lead to them looking more at the chemicals that are already
being managed well or that are already safe that have a lot of
data instead of the ones that are causing problems out in the
real world right now. And so we think if you got rid of those
extra barriers put in place--this issue came up of 20 chemicals
a year, a requirement perhaps to do that. That is a nice round
number. Maybe giving them a deadline to complete work on the
chemicals that have been talked about, the 90 work plan
chemicals, then we are on the way to driving some EPA action on
the chemicals in addition to having this industry-initiated
assessments.
We agree with what has been said about fees. I have
mentioned some other issues in more detail in the written
testimony around the science provisions in the bill. We think
that you could take--if you are going with less is more, you
can go all the way and not direct EPA to take a position on
some of these scientific questions, but if you are going to do
that, there are places in the bill where what you are calling
for is stuff that the National Academy of Sciences has actually
said EPA shouldn't do and there are some things the National
Academies have said EPA should do that aren't in there, and so
I would say pull back or go further with what the National
Academies would like to do.
Persistent bioaccumulative toxins--these are the chemicals
that are like PCBs. One of the only success stories of the
original TSCA, there is a limited number of them, chemicals
that are like that, identifying them early and requiring
action.
So I will stop there but I will just say that we think all
the issues that we have identified are things that could be
solved in the draft. We wouldn't support the draft in its
current form. But with the changes that we have talked about,
it could be getting in shape where you would have a genuine
public health achievement here.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Igrejas follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. I thank you for your opening statement, and I
will turn to myself for the start of the first round of
questions and recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walls, under section 6 of the House discussion draft,
EPA must determine that a substance presents or will present in
the absence of risk-management measures and unreasonable risk
of injury to health or the environment. Do you believe the
discussion draft establishes a workable process for evaluating
risk and identifying necessary risk-management measures?
Mr. Walls. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. Do you believe the discussion draft provides
clear direction to EPA to consider only health and environment
considerations in evaluating the risk of chemical substances?
Mr. Walls. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. And then Dr. Bosley, do you agree with the
bill's provision that breaks out risk evaluation, analysis of
hazard and exposure as a separate question from the details of
how to restrict a chemical by rulemaking?
Ms. Bosley. Yes, I do.
Mr. Shimkus. You have previously testified that Congress
should include deadlines in TSCA. The updated discussion draft
contains enforceable deadlines. Does the way that the
discussion draft handles this matter satisfy you?
Ms. Bosley. It does. I would like to see clearer deadlines
that can be achieved by EPA.
Mr. Shimkus. Are you concerned that deadlines might force
EPA into making decisions to meet a deadline?
Ms. Bosley. I am sorry. What was----
Mr. Shimkus. Do you think--well, the deadline issue, which
is obviously a debatable question, would force them to make a
quicker decision because of the deadline versus the science I
guess is a better way to put it. Do you think the deadlines
will force them to make bad----
Ms. Bosley. A bad call?
Mr. Shimkus. Yes.
Ms. Bosley. I don't think so. The scientists and engineers
at the EPA are very talented, and I think given what we have
seen with new chemicals, they are able to make decisions in a
very timely manner, and I think with the correct resources for
existing chemicals--I think it all hinges on that as to how
quickly they can address, so with correct resources, they
should be able to----
Mr. Shimkus. What about the debate from the business
perspective and the issue of litigation on missing a deadline
or the like?
Ms. Bosley. Yes. So I guess if it were up to me to write
the bill, I would give EPA the ability to say, ``Look, this
happened, and so we need this much more time, we need another 3
months.'' So I would give them that ability. We wouldn't want
that to go on for years and years, but I would give them the
ability to say, ``Well, there is this unforeseen circumstance,
and we need a little more time.''
Mr. Shimkus. The discussion draft permits a manufacturer to
request EPA to conduct a risk evaluation of a chemical
substance. Do you agree that this process can help EPA
accelerate their review of existing chemicals in commerce?
Ms. Bosley. I should think it would, yes.
Mr. Shimkus. In your business, do you conduct a basic risk
evaluation of your chemical products and could that information
inform EPA's review of a substance?
Ms. Bosley. We do. We don't do a reaction in the lab
without performing a risk evaluation beforehand.
Mr. Shimkus. So it kind of addresses some of the questions
we had to Mr. Jones on definitive timelines, and I guess to you
and then I will go to Mr. Walls, talk about what would industry
do if they are going to pay a fee to have a chemical reviewed?
Would you think that there would be then a partnership that the
sectors would be trying to work together or do you think they
would just do that without providing information?
Ms. Bosley. Oh, no, I would think that they would work
together.
Mr. Shimkus. Because that would help you expedite the
system. You could check your----
Ms. Bosley. In my case, for a small business, I would
suspect we would have less to add than maybe a larger business,
because I don't have any toxicologists on staff, for instance.
So I would rely on EPA toxicologists. So it may differ between
the actual business and the actual circumstance how much
information would be given, but we would always try to
participate very heavily with EPA.
Mr. Shimkus. And Mr. Walls?
Mr. Walls. Mr. Shimkus, I think what has been the hallmark
of section 5 right now, the new chemical review provision, has
been that it has promoted a dialog between the industry and
EPA. I would see the same sort of circumstance applying here in
the manufacturer-initiated process.
Mr. Shimkus. And that again back to you, Mr. Walls and Dr.
Bosley, and in this process under new chemicals, are you
confident that confidential business information as you are
going through this process with the EPA is currently being
protected? Obviously that is a concern that we try to address a
little bit.
Mr. Walls. EPA has very rigorous controls to protect
confidential information, yes.
Ms. Bosley. I am confident all of our information is
protected.
Mr. Shimkus. Great. I think that is all I have, so with
that--and Mr. Igrejas, we look forward to continuing to work
with you because obviously we are moving forward. There is some
bipartisan interest, and we want to continue to be open, so
let's keep working together.
With that, I yield back my time and turn to the ranking
member, Mr. Tonko.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you again to all
the members of the panel. Your testimony is obviously very
helpful, and we appreciate your participation.
I would like to follow up on the earlier questions I had of
the first panel member, and under the draft, manufacturers
would have unlimited ability to require EPA to conduct risk
evaluations, and there is no required number of EPA-initiated
risk evaluations.
Mr. Igrejas, do you find that to be a concern?
Mr. Igrejas. We do. I would share the concern that Mr.
Jones raised, that they really don't have the ability to--the
discretion to turn down the request and then they have to
complete it under an expedited time frame. I imagine that those
risk evaluations would be valuable to a number of companies.
There are a number of companies who have developed data and
they would bring that forward. And even if that is all on the
up and up, in other words, even if EPA agrees and we would
agree looking at the data, if that winds up being most of what
they do, you are really not dealing with the chemicals that are
causing a problem for public health and the environment right
now. So even if you take the process at the most positive view
of it--but I think there is another element too which is as far
as I can tell, the burden of proof would still be on EPA, so
they have to undertake this evaluation but then the burden of
proof is still on them if they find an unreasonable risk to
prove with substantial evidence, et cetera, et cetera. So it is
not that--they are not--they would be doing it a little bit
under the gun in that sense. It is not like the drug burden of
proof that we have.
Mr. Tonko. And Mr. Jones spoke about the need for
clarification to ensure that determinations as a risk must be
acted on would not include cost considerations. Do you agree
that EPA's determinations of whether a chemical substance needs
risk management should be made without cost considerations?
Mr. Igrejas. We would agree with what he said, that they
should identify the risk cleanly, health only, is this causing
an unreasonable amount of risk, cancer, learning disabilities,
birth defects, et cetera, and then the rule should be required
to adequately protect against the risk, and then the cost
considerations should be sort of behind that line, how you do
that, how quickly can we phase in alternatives, how quickly can
we impose these restrictions. That is where the role of cost
should come in. And the draft, we would agree with him that it
is a judgment call and we are concerned that a court could find
that the old balancing still applies. As we know from the
asbestos decision, that was where you had risks that were so
severe, you had an unusual level of quantifiableness to the
health cost of asbestosis and mesothelioma, and the court still
find that EPA couldn't prove that those quantifiable costs
outweighed the benefits that asbestos brought to the economy.
So it is a very--it is a big issue that has to be gotten right.
Mr. Tonko. So I am hearing a little clarification needed in
the language of the draft.
What about our other panelists in that regard to the cost
language?
Ms. Bosley. Oh, yes, I think that clarification there to
give EPA guidance would be very helpful. We wouldn't want it to
end up in the courts as well.
Mr. Walls. Mr. Tonko, I think the discussion draft reflects
a desire to ensure that EPA continues to have the discretion, a
considerable amount of discretion in managing the process, et
cetera. I don't think that the language in and of itself
mandates that EPA adopt a process that raises the very same
problems we have under current law. I think the intent is clear
to do something different if it takes an additional
clarification to get there. I hesitate----
Mr. Tonko. If left as is, does it invite additional
litigation?
Mr. Walls. It might, but I think the clear intention here
is that, you know, EPA ought to be taking a very reasonable
approach in looking at what are the costs and efficiencies
related to the regulatory options under discussion.
Mr. Tonko. But I think we can agree that we all want to
avoid any threat of additional litigation.
Ms. Thomas?
Ms. Thomas. I would agree with Mr. Walls, and just add
that, you know, as an end user of chemicals, we strongly
believe that cost should be a factor in the risk-management
process.
Mr. Tonko. And if we could turn to the use of science, Mr.
Igrejas, do you have concerns about the requirements to use the
weight of the scientific evidence as defined in this draft?
Mr. Igrejas. Yes, we do. Even though that phrase sounds
innocuous, the National Academy of Sciences weighed in a report
that Congress requested saying that the phrase was ambiguous
and were concerned that it could cause some needless delays and
potentially litigation hooks over what kind of information was
included and referred to be EPA in an assessment.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. With that, I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time is expired. The Chair now
recognizes the vice chair of the subcommittee, Mr. Harper, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to each of
you for being here.
Ms. Thomas, if I may ask you a few questions, what is the
typical lead time from, say, the design to the time that a new
car is going to show up on the showroom floor?
Ms. Thomas. Thank you for your question, and, you know, it
varies amongst automakers but generally lead time is 5 to 7
years for a new production model. It is obviously longer for
advanced technologies like electric vehicles. But that goes
back to the articles debate and why, if EPA were to take action
on a chemical substance in an article there should be, you
know, lead time should be considered in that process.
Mr. Harper. So when EPA is looking at what they are going
to do in a situation, that is something you believe they should
take into account is that significant lead time on what they
are going to try to do?
Ms. Thomas. Absolutely, because we need that time to
obviously make the necessary changes and suitable alternatives
should also be available.
Mr. Harper. What are some practical examples from your
members that help illustrate why you are seeking these changes
to TSCA?
Ms. Thomas. So, you know, our top priority is one single
national program for chemical management, and that it be
implemented at the Federal level. You know, a patchwork of
inconsistent, conflicting State requirements just imposes a
huge burden on complex durable-goods manufacturers like
automakers. We manufacture vehicles to meet customer needs and
to be sold in all 50 States, and inconsistent requirements,
like, for example, there is--California and Washington State
have brake friction standards to eliminate heavy metals and
asbestos, and as much as they have tried to harmonize those
regulations, there is still inconsistencies that we require a
lot of resources and significant time obviously.
Mr. Harper. So you can't have 50 different cars--the same
car designed 50 different ways to sell in each State?
Ms. Thomas. No, that would be quite challenging.
Mr. Harper. Although sometimes you feel like that is what
you might have to do.
Please explain the technical, economic and logistical
barriers that often make such redesigned replacement parts
infeasible if not perhaps impossible to achieve.
Ms. Thomas. Sure. So like I indicated, there is a lot of
confusion around this area. You know, we are not talking about
all automobile parts, and we certainly don't believe that they
should be exempt from TSCA requirements. We are talking about a
small universe of parts, 1 to 5 percent of vehicle production
parts, and it is critical that those parts are needed to
servicing and maintaining the existing fleet and, you know, the
average age of a car is 11 years old. We are making vehicles
that last longer these days and so we have to be able to repair
them and service them and so that is why that exemption is
necessary.
Mr. Harper. Thank you very much.
Ms. Bosley, you have long been an advocate for maintaining
section 5 and ensuring strong CBI protections. Does this
updated discussion draft appropriately handle those sections to
your satisfaction?
Ms. Bosley. It does. We are very happy with maintaining the
CBI with substantiation, and we are also happy to
resubstantiate or not after a certain amount of years. Section
5 works very well. The deadlines are adequate, and EPA can
always extend if they need it, so we are very happy with
section 5.
Mr. Harper. Do you believe that generic names and unique
chemical qualifiers or identifiers will provide the public
concrete enough information about your chemical without giving
away your intellectual property?
Ms. Bosley. I think so. I think that manufacturers work
with EPA to provide robust generic chemical names that might
identify the portion of the molecule that is causing the
concern or the hazard, and that is where we need to get to.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, and I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The Chair
recognizes the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Pallone, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As I discussed with the first panel, I see some areas for
improvement but I also think there are a lot of strong points
in the chairman's discussion draft, so let me start with Mr.
Igrejas.
I am particularly interested in your analysis that leaving
the unreasonable-risk language in place along with the
heightened standard of judicial review could perpetuate the
problems EPA has faced in regulating dangerous chemicals. So do
you think an important measure of any TSCA reform proposal is
whether it empowers EPA to regulate known dangerous chemicals
like asbestos, for example?
Mr. Igrejas. Certainly. I think that is the main lesson
from the asbestos decision.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Do you think it is important that any TSCA
reform proposal provide for expedited action to manage the
risks from chemicals that are persistent, bioaccumulative and
toxic?
Mr. Igrejas. Absolutely.
Mr. Pallone. And why is this expedited action important for
those chemicals?
Mr. Igrejas. The lesson from TSCA's action on
polychlorinated biphenyls, which is something TSCA originally
did, is that those qualities taken together mean the chemical
is around for a longer time and the risk winds up compounding
because it builds up in the food chain. So the levels go up for
the end user, for people, over time and so you need to identify
them earlier and take more aggressive action to restrict them
earlier even to see the public health improvements 20 years
later, and that is the story of PCBs.
Mr. Pallone. Well, going back to PCBs, do you think that
naming those chemicals in the statute helped move risk
management forward, and would you support something similar for
PBT chemicals?
Mr. Igrejas. Well, we certainly would. We have supported
that in the past. That is the simplest way of having them in
the draft. You could also put in criteria for PBTs and require
EPA to do the identification but naming this is fastest.
Mr. Pallone. And I hope that we can work with the chairman
as we move forward to include authorities for, you know, the
way you suggested. I believe the draft shows the chairman's
intent to ensure that the problems identified in Corrosion
Proof Fittings are addressed, and that is an intent I share.
I just wanted to, if I could, in the time I have left, if I
could just call attention to some of the strengths in this
draft, which reflect points of strong agreement between
stakeholders, and I just wanted to go down the line, you know,
and as much as possible just answer yes or no, and I ask each
of you to answer each of these questions.
Do you support removing the least-burdensome language that
has been an obstacle to EPA action under section 6? Mr. Walls?
Mr. Walls. Yes.
Mr. Bosley. Yes.
Ms. Thomas. Yes.
Mr. Igrejas. Yes.
Mr. Pallone. Is the reporter able to get that? All right.
Do you support giving EPA authority to require testing
through orders, not just rulemaking? Mr. Walls?
Mr. Walls. Yes.
Mr. Bosley. Yes.
Ms. Thomas. Yes.
Mr. Igrejas. Yes.
Mr. Pallone. OK. I don't want to go too fast. Do you all
support upfront substantiation of future CBI claims?
Mr. Walls. Yes.
Mr. Bosley. Yes.
Ms. Thomas. Yes.
Mr. Igrejas. Yes.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Do you all support explicit protections
for vulnerable populations?
Mr. Walls. Yes. I think the discussion draft appropriately
acknowledges the need to address potentially exposed
populations.
Mr. Pallone. Dr. Bosley?
Mr. Bosley. I do as well.
Ms. Thomas. Yes, we do.
Mr. Igrejas. Yes.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Do you all see these changes in the draft
as valuable?
Mr. Walls. Yes, although I wouldn't necessarily agree, Mr.
Pallone, with Mr. Igrejas' comments regarding asbestos and PBTs
because the discussion draft limits in no way EPA's discretion
to identify true priorities. But other than that, yes, we
support changes.
Mr. Pallone. Dr. Bosley?
Mr. Bosley. We support as well.
Mr. Pallone. Ms. Thomas?
Ms. Thomas. We support as well.
Mr. Igrejas. Yes.
Mr. Pallone. OK. And well, again, I got through this fairly
quickly. I guess when you ask yes or no questions, it is easier
to get through everything quickly.
So I just want to again thank the chairman for working with
us as we move forward to get this done. Thanks again. I yield
back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Oregon, Mr. Schrader, 5
minutes.
Mr. Schrader. I pass, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman passes, and the Chair recognizes
the gentleman from California, Mr. McNerney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to
say I appreciate your bipartisan work in getting this draft
ready.
Mr. Shimkus. Don't let that information out.
Mr. McNerney. OK. I will be careful not to.
Mr. Igrejas, I am going to ask about the catch-22 provision
here. I don't think that has been asked yet.
The ``may present unreasonable risk'', could you explain
why that is a catch-22 and what we can do about that in the
draft?
Mr. Igrejas. Sure. I think the lesson of TSCA, and because
of the approach in this draft, I think it got a lot of us
looking back at original TSCA more, and you read it, and there
are a lot of things that sound reasonable, they sound like they
should have worked, and it just turned out that when a court
got into them and EPA anticipating that, they didn't. They
really turned out to be significant barriers to EPA acting, and
I think this would be in this category. On its face, it sounds
like before EPA should get started, shouldn't they decided
well, this might be something that is a problem, but the
history I think of this statute and of EPA interpreting is that
it could trip them up substantially. If they really have to
show that it may before they undertake the evaluation to see if
it does, it seems unnecessary in the spirit of the more
stripped-down approach in expediting them taking action.
Mr. McNerney. OK. Now, the heightened standard of judicial
review, EPA actions taken under TSCA must be supported by
substantial evidence in the rulemaking record, and that is a
substantially higher--well, that is significantly higher than
the ``arbitrary and capricious'' standard that is normally used
for EPA rules. Could you comment on how that could be improved
in the TSCA?
Mr. Igrejas. We think taking it out would be the
improvement in having ``arbitrary and capricious'' apply to
this statute as well. One of the things I think is lost is, it
is not just that the court threw out the EPA rulemaking on
asbestos but that because of substantial evidence, it took EPA
10 years to put together that record. I think it was a 40,000-
page record. And so it has an impact on how much time--how much
EPA feels it has to put under its feet in order to go forth and
make a rulemaking in addition to the risk of something getting
thrown out of court. So I feel it being removed would put it in
line with other environmental laws.
Mr. McNerney. Well, my understanding is, the ``supported by
substantial evidence in the rulemaking record'' is what
prevented the rules on asbestos from being implemented.
Mr. Igrejas. That is right.
Mr. McNerney. And that is clearly, you know, a
disadvantage.
Mr. Igrejas. It was the third leg of the stool, so to
speak, in preventing EPA from taking action on asbestos.
Mr. McNerney. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
Seeing no other members present, I want to thank the panel
for coming. It was a pretty good hearing. I think there are
things that we want to continue to discuss. I did announce a
date for a subcommittee mark, and the only thing I will say too
is, as we move forward, we don't have to get it prefect right
the first bite. We have subcommittee, we have full committee.
Then hopefully the Senate will move something. We go to
conference. There are going to be a lot of opportunities. But I
appreciate the positive comments from all my colleagues. I
understand the issues that they have concerns on. We look
forward to really having an opportunity to get this thing done,
and we look for your input to be able to do that.
So I will dismiss the second panel, and I will ask
unanimous consent that all members of the subcommittee have
five legislative days to submit opening statements for the
record.
I also ask unanimous consent that the following letters to
the subcommittee regarding the discussion draft at our hearing
today be included in the record. The letters are from the
American Cleaning Institute, the Environmental Working Group,
the Bipartisan Policy Center, Society of Toxicologists, the
American Alliance for Justice, and a statement by Dr. Paul
Locke. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Shimkus. And I will adjourn the hearing.
[Whereupon, at 12:15 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
