- ADVANCING PATIENT SOLUTIONS FOR LOWER COSTS AND BETTER CARE

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ADVANCING PATIENT SOLUTIONS FOR LOWER COSTS AND BETTER CARE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 10, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-151

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
21-410 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2017

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                     Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          KATHY CASTOR, Florida
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina         Massachusetts
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TONY CARDENAS, California
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
CHRIS COLLINS, New York                  officio)
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Gene Green, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     3
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................     5
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     6

Witnesses

Grace-Marie Turner, Founder, President and Trustee, Galen
Institute, Inc.................................................     8
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Doug Holtz-Eakin, President, American Action Forum...............    19
Prepared statement...........................................    21
Sara Collins, Vice President of Health Coverage and Access,
Commonwealth Fund..............................................    27
Prepared statement...........................................    29

Submitted Material

Statement of the American Federation of State, County and
Municipal Employees, submitted by Mr. Green....................    87
Statement of the AFL-CIO, submitted by Mr. Green.................    89
Statement of AARP, submitted by Mr. PItts........................    91
Statement of the Association of Mature American Citizens,
submitted by Mr. Pitts.........................................    94
Statement of Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association, submitted by
Mr. Pitts......................................................    98
Statement of various organizations, submitted by Mr. Pitts.......
Article entitled, ``Charging Adults Higher Premiums could cost
taxpayers,'' The Commonwealth Fund, September 15. 2016,
submitted by Ms. Schakowsky....................................    99
Article entitled, ``Why the ACA's Limits on Age Rating Will Not
Cause `Rate Shock' Distributional Implications of Limited Age
Bands in Nongroup Health Insurance,'' The Urban Institute,
March 2013, submitted by Ms. Schakowsky........................   102

ADVANCING PATIENT SOLUTIONS FOR LOWER COSTS AND BETTER CARE

----------

Friday, June 10, 2016

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:16 a.m., in
room 2322, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joseph R. Pitts
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Pitts, Guthrie, Murphy, Burgess,
Blackburn, Lance, Griffith, Bilirakis, Bucshon, Brooks, Green,
Schakowsky, Castor, Sarbanes, Matsui, Schrader, Kennedy,
Cardenas, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff Present: Adam Buckalew, Professional Staff Member;
Paul Eddatel, Chief Counsel, Health; Bob Mabry, Fellow, Health;
Graham Pittman, Legislative Clerk, Health; Jennifer Sherman,
Press Secretary; Heidi Stirrup, Policy Coordinator, Health;
Josh Trent, Deputy Chief Health Counsel; Dylan Vorbach,
Assistant Press Secretary; Jeff Carroll, Minority Staff
Director; Tiffany Guarascio, Minority Deputy Staff Director and
Chief Health Advisor; Samantha Satchell, Minority Policy
Analyst; Andrew Souvall, Minority Director of Communications,
Outreach and Member Services; Arielle Woronoff, Minority Health
Counsel; and C.J. Young, Minority Press Secretary.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Pitts. Good morning. The subcommittee will come to
order. The chair will recognize himself for an opening
statement.
Today's hearing will examine legislation designed to
modernize the current health insurance market by empowering
states to better regulate markets tailored to their unique
conditions. Previously, this committee examined healthcare
solutions that centered on promoting patient choice and
innovation in the design of health coverage. This hearing is a
natural follow-on to that.
Current law is leading to an increase in healthcare
premiums. Double-digit premium increases are hurting, not
helping patients. It is no surprise that a recent Gallup poll
revealed that healthcare costs top American families' financial
concerns. Almost daily, headlines across the country offer
frightening news on healthcare cost. This undoubtedly is
contributing to the fears of the American people.
And here are some of the numbers. In Virginia, nine
insurers are looking to raise premiums at high as 37.1 percent.
Three of the requests in Oregon are over 29.6 percent. One plan
in New York is asking for a shocking 89 percent increase. For
Texas, the biggest plan wants to raise its rate 60 percent. In
Colorado, Golden Rule is seeking a 40.6 percent hike, Rocky
Mountain HMO is seeking a 34.6 percent boost, and Colorado
Choice wants a 36.3 percent increase. Connecticut has three
plans wanting increases from 12 to 27 percent. In my home State
of Pennsylvania, one insurer is seeking a 48 percent increase,
while the insurance department says the average request is 23.6
percent for individual plans.
And this is why we are here today--to offer better care at
a fair price. Our solutions aim to help patients stabilize the
insurance markets, restore flexibility, provide more choices,
and keep costs in check.
Health care is the most personal of any political issue.
When Congress gets involved in health policy, we are changing
people's lives. Decisions we make in Washington can have a
tremendous effect on the well-being of families and their
budgets. States, on the other hand, are great innovators. When
given the flexibility to tailor coverage and conditions,
patients are the winners, with greater choices and more
affordable options.
The five bills before us today offer a variety of options
to begin to reduce cost, including the Flores bill to align
grace periods, the Blackburn bill, which requires eligibility
verification, the Brooks bill, which adjusts age rating ratio
for healthcare pricing, the Griffith-DeGette bill that allows
individuals and families to purchase stand-alone dental plans
either on or off the exchanges, and the Rick Allen bill, which
establishes an audit process for failed state exchanges.
Any unallocated or misspent Federal funds would be returned
to the U.S. Treasury. The first thing health reform should
accomplish is to stabilize or reduce the cost of health care.
The number one complaint people have about health care is the
rising cost.
Yet the current law has done little to decrease healthcare
spending. In fact, many Americans are paying higher premiums
and deductibles for health insurance and care as a result of
the law. We can do better. We must make healthcare costs more
transparent, give people the freedom to choose the insurance
they want, with the benefits they value most, at a price that
is fair.
More government bureaucracy, regulations, and spending
never successfully reduce the price of health care. Yet, that
is exactly the premise of how health insurance is regulated
today, with top-down mandates that empower Washington and
remove control over healthcare decisions from States, small
businesses, families, and individuals. And this has to be
changed if we truly want bottom-up solutions that provide
better care at lower costs for patients. The bills before our
committee today will do just that.
Is there anyone seeking recognition on our side?
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Joseph R. Pitts

The Subcommittee will come to order.
The Chairman will recognize himself for an opening
statement.
Today's hearing will examine legislation designed to
modernize the current health insurance market by empowering
States to better regulate markets tailored to their unique
conditions. Previously, this committee examined health care
solutions that centered on promoting patient choice and
innovation in the design of health coverage. This hearing is a
natural follow-on to that.
Current law is leading to an increase in health care
premiums. Double-digit premiums increases are hurting, not
helping, patients. It's no surprise that a recent Gallup poll
revealed that health care costs top American families'
financial concerns.
Almost daily, headlines across the country offer
frightening news on health care costs. This undoubtedly is
contributing to the fears of the American people.
Here are some of the numbers:

In Virginia, nine insurers are looking to raise
premiums as high as 37.1 percent.

Three of the requests in Oregon are over 29.6
percent.

One plan in New York is asking for a shocking 89
percent increase.

For Texas, the biggest plan wants to raise its
rates 60 percent.

In Colorado, Golden Rule is seeking a 40.6 percent
hike, Rocky Mountain HMO is seeking a 34.6 percent boost and
Colorado Choice wants a 36.3 percent increase.

Connecticut has three plans wanting increases from
12 to 27 percent.

And in my home state of Pennsylvania, one insurer
is seeking a 48 percent increase, while the Insurance
Department says the average request is 23.6 percent for
individual plans.
This is why we are here today: To offer better care at a
fairer price. Our solutions aim to help patients, stabilize the
insurance markets, restore flexibility, provide more choices
and keep costs in check.
Health care is the most personal of any political issue.
When Congress gets involved in health policy, we are changing
peoples' lives. Decisions we make in Washington can have a
tremendous effect on the well-being of families and their
budgets. States, on the other hand, are great innovators and
when given the flexibility to tailor coverage and conditions,
patients are the winners--with greater choices and more
affordable options.
The five bills before us today offer a variety of options
to begin to reduce costs--including the Flores bill to align
grace periods; the Blackburn bill which requires eligibility
verification; the Brooks bill which adjusts age-rating ratio
for health care pricing; the Griffith/DeGette bill that allows
individuals and families to purchase stand-alone dental plans
either on or off the exchanges; and the Rick Allen bill which
establishes an audit process for failed State exchanges. Any
unallocated or misspent Federal funds would be returned to the
U.S. Treasury.
The first thing health reform should accomplish is to
stabilize or reduce the costs of health care. The number one
complaint people have about health care is the rising cost, and
yet the current law has done little to decrease health care
spending. In fact, many Americans are paying higher premiums
and deductibles for health insurance and care as a result of
the law.
We can do better. We must make health care costs more
transparent and give people the freedom to choose the insurance
that they want--with the benefits they value most at a price
that is fair.
More government bureaucracy, regulations, and spending
never successfully reduce the price of health care. Yet that is
exactly the premise of how health insurance is regulated
today--with top down mandates that empower Washington and
remove control over health care decisions from states, small
businesses, families and individuals. This has to be changed if
we truly want bottom up solutions that provide better care at
lower costs for patients.
The bills before our committee today will do just that. I
yield back.

Mr. Pitts. With that, I will yield back and recognize the
ranking member, Mr. Green, 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GENE GREEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I agree that the
increases that are requested, although having served as a State
legislator in Texas in the 1970s and 1980s and the very early
1990s, I think we saw the same requests. Of course the health
insurance market was not regulated in the State of Texas. But
as a small-business manager, we saw 25, 30 percent increases
over the years. So increase in health insurance cost is not new
to the American public.
Prior to the Affordable Care Act, the individual market on
health care was deeply broken. People were sold junk plans at
high cost. Individuals with preexisting conditions were
essentially locked out of the market altogether. Women would be
charged more just because of their gender. And plans could drop
you at the moment you got sick, the time when you need the
coverage the most.
Three years after the Affordable Care Act, major health
expansion went into effect. Approximately 13 million people
have coverage through the marketplace and 15 more through
coverage of Medicaid. Since the law was enacted in 2010, 20
million more Americans are no longer uninsured and the
uninsured rate is at a historic low. Both the newly insured and
previously insured are protected from the worst abuses of
issuers and what plans must cover is significantly more robust
than ever.
Overall, the coverage expansions are improving Americans'
access to health care, the marketplaces are competitive and
creating value for customers, and premium stabilization
programs are working. The evidence is clear that the ACA is a
success. The majority of people enrolled in marketplace plans
or Medicaid report that they would not have been able to access
or afford their care prior to getting their new insurance.
It is important to recognize that marketplaces created
under the Affordable Care Act are in their relative infancy. As
with almost every new market, particularly in the healthcare
space, there will changes and adjustments in early years.
Insurers will both enter and exit as they navigate the
landscape to the millions of new consumers, protections, and
requirements. Medicare, when it was first created, experienced
growing pains, as did Medicaid Advantage and part D plans.
The Affordable Care Act is working. But like any law, it is
not perfect. As I have been known to say, if you want something
done perfectly, don't come to Congress. That is why, after
passing major reforms, Congress revisits legislation coming
together and improve on it.
Of the five proposals we are considering today, aligning
children's dental health coverage stands out as a bipartisan
bill that has improved pediatric dental coverage. I am
supportive of this legislation and appreciate that the
committee is paying attention to this important technical fix
for children. However, I am concerned that this bill was
included in the legislative hearing evaluating several more
controversial and I think irresponsible plans.
The other legislative proposals we are considering today
constitute a step backwards for consumers by forcing people out
of the exchanges, making it more difficult for consumers to
access affordable coverage using premium tax credits. We should
be looking for ways to make the law work better on behalf of
the American people rather than roll back reforms and
protections designed to get more value from hard-earned dollars
spent on coverage and put insurance back in charge at the
expense of the consumers.
Making it easier and more attractive to get coverage,
expanding Medicaid, targeted outreach, these are ways to bring
more stability and affordability to the health insurance
market. Instead, most of the bills we are considering today
will make it harder for people to get coverage, more expensive
for people who need insurance, or only serve to help insurance
companies rather than people.
Health insurance is a product that Americans want and need
and the Affordable Care Act is creating a system that lends
truth to the principle that health care is not a privilege for
the few but a right for all Americans. And while I welcome
productive conversation on how to improve and make the ACA even
better, we must not do anything that would undermine the
progress that this important law has already made.
And I look forward to hearing from our witnesses, Mr.
Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
Now filling in for the chairman of the full committee, Dr.
Burgess, 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This is a very good hearing for us to be having right now
and I am very grateful that you have called it. I am very
grateful for the members that have participated and provided us
bills for consideration today. We have got an excellent panel
of witnesses in front of us this morning, with whom I have
either agreed or disagreed over the years, but I know them to
all be the best of the very best in healthcare policy, and I am
looking forward to their testimony this morning.
Regardless of how you feel about the Affordable Care Act, I
don't think there is any question that the fractures are
becoming apparent and they are growing. And somewhat
ironically, at the very last weeks of the Obama administration,
these fractures are likely to become fractures and real people
are going to be affected by those fractures.
It is important that we be talking and we be talking now
about what we can do to help people when those inevitable
failures do occur. The bills in front of us today make
significant moves towards fixing some of those problems, but I
am also anxious to hear from our witnesses what they see when
they look over the horizon, not just for next year, but the
year after, the year after. If something does not change, the
likelihood is that we will have some very profound and real
difficulties within the insurance market, within the provider
space, and of course for patients themselves in this country.
So, Mr. Chairman, I think you are to be commended for
holding the hearing today. Certainly you have put a great panel
of witnesses in front of us. And I will now yield to one of the
authors of the bill, Mr. Griffith from Virginia, for his
comments.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Burgess. I appreciate that very much.
I just want to let folks know that my little bill along
with Diana DeGette, 3463, will in fact level the playing field
by applying the same rules to coverage options for dental care
offered on the exchange and off the exchange. Currently,
unfortunately, the way the language has been interpreted, you
can buy a stand-alone dental plan if you are in the exchange,
but if you are out of the exchange it has to be wrapped into
your health insurance.
Oftentimes parents want to buy a better pediatric dental
care plan for their kids than what is offered in a basic health
plan. And so this bill would allow them that option and allow
them to go out and buy a stand-alone dental along with a health
insurance plan that otherwise qualifies except for the dental
portions so that they are not just having their children's
dental care taken care of after deductibles are met or taking
care of for cleanings but not for filling cavities, et cetera.
I think it is a good bill. And I appreciate Mr. Green
saying that they recognize that it is an attempt to fix a
little glitch and is a bipartisan bill.
And with thatI would be happy to yield to anyone else that
wishes time.
Mr. Pitts. Anyone?
Mr. Griffith. I yield back to Dr. Burgess.
Mr. Burgess. I yield back to the chair.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
I now recognize the ranking member of the full committee,
Mr. Pallone, 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Congress passed the Affordable Care Act to ensure that all
Americans had access to affordable quality health insurance and
the goal was to achieve universal health coverage. Six years
later, our uninsured rate is at an all-time low and our
uninsured rate among young adults has dropped by 47 percent.
Twenty million more people now have health insurance, and a new
University of Michigan study shows that the ACA has reduced
racial and ethnic disparities in coverage.
And this is all good news. But we have a lot more to do. I
believe there are ways we can strengthen and improve the law.
However, I am concerned that this hearing is taking a cynical
approach to doing so. Rather than have a legislative hearing on
bills that would help get more people health coverage, three of
the bills being discussed today are designed to make it more
difficult for people to get healthcare coverage.
One of the bills we are reviewing today would allow
insurance companies to charge premiums that are five times as
much for older Americans. Even more troubling, under this bill,
a State could establish an age ratio even higher than 5:1. Many
older Americans can't afford to pay five times as much as
people who are younger than they, and we purposely included in
the ACA ways to ensure that younger people have access to
health insurance, such as staying on their parents' plan until
the age of 26. So I am concerned this will force older
Americans to go without coverage at a time when they need it
the most.
There are also potential unintended consequences. Studies
have shown the 5:1 age rating band charges overcharges older
consumers and undercharges younger consumers. Meanwhile, the
increased tax credits to accommodate these higher rates for
older Americans could cost billions of dollars.
Another bill we are reviewing today would make it more
difficult for people to enroll in coverage during a special
enrollment period, known as an SEP. SEPs are necessary for
people to enroll in coverage when something changes in their
lives outside of the open enrollment period.
It is important for SEPs to maintain some flexibility so
that individuals can get coverage in a reasonable amount of
time as they transition through important life events, such as
the birth of a child, a marriage, or a permanent move. We have
heard from insurers that SEPs aren't strict enough and are
subject to gaming, and that is why the administration has taken
major steps to prevent this. They have eliminated seven SEP
categories and now require documentation to prove SEP
eligibility for the five most common life events.
In addition, starting June 17, CMS will require individuals
asking to enroll in coverage through an SEP to provide
documentation by a specific deadline. The individual will lose
their coverage if the appropriate documentation is not received
in time or is incorrect, and these are reasonable guardrails.
Yet, although CMS is implementing stricter verification
requirements, this bill goes a step further and requires
someone to prove their eligibility for an SEP prior to gaining
coverage, and I am concerned that collecting and submitting
this documentation may prove difficult and could lead to gaps
in health coverage. Cancer patients can't wait a month to get
their health treatments.
In addition, the Urban Institute estimates that fewer than
15 percent of people eligible for SEPs use them to enroll in
marketplace coverage and the rest are likely to remain
uninsured. So I worry that stricter documentation requirements
could deter all but the sickest individuals, since they are the
most motivated to get coverage, while healthy individuals may
choose to remain uninsured, and creating more barriers to
access is only going to serve to keep more people out of the
insurance market.
I am also concerned by the bill that would shorten the
grace period for those lower-income Americans who qualify for
tax credits. Grace periods were put in because many of the
people who were signing up are doing so for the first time.
That population that is eligible for tax credits is also lower
income and has more fluctuation in income, which is why we
wanted to give them a chance to keep their insurance as part of
the ACA. And under the bill before us today, just one missed or
partial premium payment would result in someone losing their
coverage until the next year, and this isn't good for
consumers.
I think I will yield. I have less than a minute left, and I
would like to yield that to Ms. Matsui.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you, Mr. Pallone.
Because of the passage of the ACA, millions of American
families have access to affordable quality health care and our
country's overall uninsured rate has fallen to a historic low.
We have come a long way from the days when patients were denied
care because of preexisting conditions and young people were
left without coverage as they searched for employment.
There is much we can and should be doing to build on the
success of the ACA and keep moving our health system forward
and ensuring that patients get the right care at the right time
in an efficient way. We can continue looking at models of care
that reimburse value over volume. We can infuse technology into
medical practice and more.
Some bills we are considering today would, unfortunately,
reverse some of the important progress we have made. I oppose
any legislation that disrupts the continuity of care for
patients. As families seek health insurance, we cannot make the
process more burdensome for them by asking them to jump through
unnecessary hoops. I hope that instead we can continue to build
on the progress of the ACA in a way that benefits American
families.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady.
As usual, all the members' written opening statements will
be made a part of the record.
I have a UC request. I would like to submit the following
documents for the record: statements from AARP, the Association
of Mature American Citizens, a group of seven organizations on
H.R. 3463, and the Blue Cross/Blue Shield Association.
Mr. Green. No objection.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Green. Mr. Chairman, we also have some to submit for
the record. Letters from the American Federation of State,
County, and Municipal Employees, the AFL-CIO--and I think AARP
sent us both the same letter--and the Alliance on Retired
Americans, I would like to ask unanimous consent to place in
the record.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Pitts. At this time, I will introduce our panel of
experts. We have three witnesses. I will introduce them in the
order of their testimony. And your written statements will be
made a part of the report. You will be each given 5 minutes to
summarize your testimony.
On our panel today we have, first, Ms. Grace-Marie Turner,
founder, president, and trustee of the Galen Institute;
secondly, Mr. Douglas Holtz-Eakin, president of the American
Action Forum; and finally Ms. Sara Collins, vice president of
health coverage and access, Commonwealth Fund.
Thank you very much for coming today.
And at this point, Ms. Turner, you are recognized for 5
minutes for your summary.

STATEMENTS OF GRACE-MARIE TURNER, FOUNDER, PRESIDENT AND
TRUSTEE, GALEN INSTITUTE, INC.; DOUG HOLTZ-EAKIN, PRESIDENT,
AMERICAN ACTION FORUM; AND SARA COLLINS, VICE PRESIDENT OF
HEALTH COVERAGE AND ACCESS, COMMONWEALTH FUND

STATEMENT OF GRACE-MARIE TURNER

Ms. Turner. Thank you, Chairman Pitts, thank you, Ranking
Member Green and members of the committee, for the opportunity
to testify today on legislation that I believe would advance
patient solutions for lower costs and better care.
The ACA was designed to provide people with choices of
private insurance, with States in the forefront of organizing a
new system of coverage. States had had decades of experience in
regulating health insurance, but a battery of ACA rules really
overrides these State laws that have been forged by decades of
experience and I believe really threaten the future of the ACA
and its stability.
For health insurance to attract customers, policies must be
affordable, and everyone in the pool must pay their premiums
over time so that their insurance coverage is there to pay
their bills. If people only purchase health insurance when they
need expensive care, the pools break down. It would be like
allowing a family to purchase health insurance only when their
house is on fire. If too few younger people purchase health
insurance, costs will soar and many of the young people will
continue to drop out, increasing coverage for everyone, and
that is one of the problems, I believe, with the age rating
provisions in the ACA.
Under these rules, insurers can charge their oldest
policyholders no more than three times their youngest
customers. However, the average 64-year-old consumes six times
more, in dollar value and health costs, than the average 21-
year-old.
One of the top experts on the workings of the ACA is
Timothy Jost. He noted early on that age rating compression is
going to force younger people to pay more in the individual
market as older individuals pay less, making insurance too
expensive for younger people. And we need people, not just the
26-year-olds, but people that are up to 35, 40 years old in
these pools. They drop out and it means that health insurance
actually costs more for older people as we wind up seeing a
spiral.
Likewise, the special enrollment verification are designed
to help people, as you said, Mr. Green, to obtain health
insurance coverage through major life events, but we are
finding that more and more people are purchasing health
insurance when they need medical care and then dropping it
after they receive the medical services they need. This really
undermines the concept of insurance.
The claim costs, according to the actuarial firm Oliver
Wyman, found that in the first 3 months in 2014, for people
enrolling in the special enrollment periods, their claims costs
times were 24 percent higher than those who had enrolled during
the regular enrollment period. In 2015, the difference
increased to 41 percent. And these people are more than twice
as likely to drop their policies after a short period of time.
The administration has indeed taken preliminary steps to
verify eligibility, but more needs to be done. I commend
Congresswoman Marsha Blackburn for taking the lead on
legislation to verify eligibility before allowing an individual
to enroll in an exchange via the special enrollment period.
Robert Pear has a piece in today's New York Times talking
about the expected significant increases in many places in 2017
for premium increases, and talking with experts and actuaries
from Geisinger, for example, about why this is happening, and
they are finding that people are gaming the system also through
these grace periods. The law allows people to stop paying their
premiums and still obtain coverage for another 90 days.
Unfortunately, the incentives are basically designed to
undermine the concept of real insurance. McKinsey & Company
found that nearly a quarter of consumers stopped payment on
their premiums in 2015, yet most repurchased a plan in the
exchange the next year, many of them the same plans, without
the need to pay their back premiums. Insurers must build the
cost of this nonpayment of premiums into their costs for the
following year, and this raises premium costs for everyone.
Additionally, doctors and hospitals are on the hook to
continue to provide coverage even for those patients who are no
longer insured. Representative Flores' legislation would end
this abuse by aligning the grace period for nonpayment of
premiums before coverage ends with grace periods under State
law. A 30-day rule would provide greater incentive for people
to keep and maintain coverage, basically the standard in State
law before the ACA overruled this legislation.
Also, the failed State health exchanges, I think, is really
an important issue to address. I know that your committee has
issued a report, ``Misleading Congress,'' on this particular
issue, focusing on the testimony by Acting CMS Administrator
Andy Slavitt. States have decided that they can sue their IT
managers who set up their Web sites when their Web sites have
failed, and then they want to keep that money. That is really
an abuse of taxpayer dollars.
The Federal Government spent $5.5 billion in helping these
States to set up their own exchanges. Oregon received
approximately $305 million to establish an exchange. If it wins
this lawsuit, it wants to keep the money. That is really not
something that serves taxpayers well.
And then finally, I also commend Representative Griffith
and also Representative DeGette for your legislation,
bipartisan legislation, to address the issue of really
streamlining and unifying the dental plans for pediatric dental
care.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Turner follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady.
And I now recognize Mr. Holtz-Eakin 5 minutes for his
summary.

STATEMENT OF DOUG HOLTZ-EAKIN

Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Thank you, Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member
Green, and members of the committee for the privilege of being
here to discuss these five proposals to make changes to the
Affordable Care Act in the interest of having State insurance
markets work more efficiently and protecting taxpayer dollars.
I think these are important issues.
Let me begin with the issue of restrictions in the age
variation of premiums. The ACA does restrict the variation to a
ratio of 3:1, of the oldest versus the youngest, and the
proposal is to allow this to go to 5:1 or a number that the
State would pick. This matches some things that we know about
the operation of insurance markets. It matches the ratio of
average spending of 64-year-olds to 21-year-olds in a recent
CBO study, in February 2016.
We know from work we have done at the American Action Forum
that this would lower premiums for younger purchasers of
insurance by something like 6 to 8 percent for single
individuals, by 7 to 10 percent for families. That would bring
millions of additional young and healthy people into these
exchange pools.
That is something that the ACA needs. Right now, only about
28 percent of the pool is 18- to 34-year-olds versus 36 percent
of the eligible population. The absence of those low-risk
purchasers is one of the problems in the ACA. And older
purchasers of insurance would benefit over the long term from
this change because, without those balanced pools, we are going
to see increasingly higher premiums that older and sicker
individuals will have to face for their insurance. So this is
something that would stabilize those risk pools, bring people
in that the ACA exchanges need, and benefit everyone in the
long run.
The special enrollment periods. It is a sensible request
that we require verification prior to having the insurance. The
purpose of a special enrollment period is to allow coverage for
those people who are eligible for coverage, and it is a
sensible thing to verify eligibility.
It also turns out to be quantitatively important. About a
fifth of the people in the exchanges got there through a
special enrollment period, through a SEP, and these turn out to
be more expensive risks in the pool. They are anywhere from 10
to 55 percent more expensive depending on which source you go
to. They appear to be becoming increasingly more expensive over
time, and thus their impact as an issue of shifting cost to
others and pushing premiums up, is becoming more important, and
understanding their eligibility is important.
And they are much more likely to lapse in their premium
payments. And so this is a population that is, in its practice
of purchasing insurance and letting it lapse, shifting their
costs to others, undermining the functioning of an insurance
market. And I think it is a good idea for the committee to look
closely at this.
Finally, the grace periods and their impact I think are
important as well. The proposal to change from 90 days to 30 or
31 to match State law does provide some basic equity between
those who buy their individual market policy on the exchange
versus those who buy it off the exchange. And getting the same
treatment, I think, is an important matter of fairness.
These generous grace periods do invite abuse. We know that
in 2015 about a fifth of individuals stopped paying for their
policies, and then half of them turned right around and bought
exactly the same policy. This is cost shifting in the most
fundamental form. Those costs don't go away. They show up as
higher premiums. The higher premiums have proven to be
undermining the ability of the ACA to provide broad, well-
balanced pools. And that is a concern that I think the
committee should address.
And then lastly, on failed exchanges and dental coverage,
these strike me as things that the committee should simply just
move ahead with. It is always in the interests of the committee
to protect taxpayers against the abuse of their dollars. To
audit and rescind the unobligated balances is, I think, a very
sensible and straightforward thing to do, a matter of program
integrity that everyone should endorse. And a technical
correction on a bipartisan basis to pediatric dental coverage
is something that no one should object to, and I applaud the
committee for doing that.
I appreciate the chance to be here, and I look forward to
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Holtz-Eakin follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
And I now recognize Ms. Collins 5 minutes for your summary.

STATEMENT OF SARA COLLINS

Ms. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, for this invitation to testify today on advancing
patient solutions of lower costs and better care.
Three years after the Affordable Care Act's major health
insurance expansions went effect, nearly 28 million people are
estimated to have coverage either through the marketplaces or
Medicaid. There are 20 million fewer people uninsured since the
law went into effect in 2010.
There is considerable evidence that marketplace and
Medicaid coverage is improving people's access to health care.
The Commonwealth Fund's ACA tracking survey of 2016 finds that
majorities of enrollees who have used their health plans,
either marketplace or Medicaid, report that they would not have
been able to access or afford this care prior to getting their
new insurance. Majorities of marketplace or Medicaid enrollees
are satisfied with their insurance. Federal data are indicating
nationwide declines in consumer out-of-pocket spending growth,
cost-related problems getting needed health care, and medical
bill problems.
Challenges remain. While the uninsured rate has fallen
significantly among working-age adults, differences persist
between lower- and higher-income adults. This is driven in part
by the fact that 19 States have yet to expand their Medicaid
programs, as well as dwindling resources for outreach and
enrollment. News reports about high premium requests by several
insurers and United Health Group's decision to pull out of
several State marketplaces next year have raised concerns about
the stability of the marketplaces.
There are several reasons why these developments don't
portend disaster: Most marketplace enrollees won't pay double-
digit increases in 2017, insurers premium requests are subject
to State review, and 83 percent of marketplace enrollees
receive tax credits to help them pay their premiums. Most of
the increases will be absorbed by those credits.
Research is finding that the marketplaces are competitive
and creating value for consumers. Most participating insurers
remain committed to the marketplaces in 2017. While risk pools
remain in flux, the premium stabilization programs are working
for the most part. However, the phase-out of the reinsurance
program this year will likely lead carriers to adjust their
rates upwards to accommodate the loss.
Three bills under discussion today are aimed at addressing
concerns about the marketplace. One bill would increase the
amount that carriers could charge older adults from three to
five times that of younger people. Research by Rand finds that
this change would only modestly increase insurance coverage
among young adults but would come with the hefty price tag of
$9.3 billion in Federal spending and a loss of coverage for
400,000 older people. Premiums would increase much more for
older people than they would decline for younger people.
Another bill would require verification of eligibility for
special enrollment periods. The Urban Institute finds that 33.5
million people are actually eligible for the special enrollment
periods, the vast majority because of job loss, but only 15
percent actually are using them.
CMS has made adjustment to the special enrollment periods,
including a new confirmation process that requires
documentation to verify eligibility. People can still enroll
while the verification process is underway. The proposed bill
goes a step further by not allowing people to enroll until they
have submitted this documentation. These tighter standards
could lead to even lower enrollment through the special
enrollment periods. Only the most motivated people might
enroll, those who are most in need of health care, leading to
less healthy risk pools.
The third bill would decrease the grace period for
nonpayment of premiums from 3 months to 30 days. While some
have suggested that people use these periods to game the
system, the rules governing them are restrictive and aimed at
discouraging this behavior. This policy change could mean a
loss of enrollment in the marketplaces among enrollees of very
modest means and an increase in the number of people who are
uninsured or have gaps in their coverage. The policy change
would also seem to favor those who are the most motivated to
retain their coverage, those in poorer health.
It is encouraging that the committee is considering ways to
improve the marketplaces. In considering these policy
adjustments, it is important to remember that the fundamental
purpose of the marketplaces is to provide coverage to those who
currently lack health insurance and thus cannot get needed care
and are currently suffering unnecessarily as a result.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Collins follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady.
That concludes the opening statements of the witnesses. We
will now begin questioning, and I will recognize myself 5
minutes for that purpose.
Ms. Turner, in my opening statement I spoke about the
tremendous premium increases that are dominating headlines
across the country, and we are looking for some solutions to
this. In your testimony, you said that the President's
healthcare law was designed to provide people with choice.
Would you expound on that, explain that? Under current law, do
you think patients have choice? Please elaborate.
Ms. Turner. Increasingly, unfortunately, Mr. Chairman, they
don't, because many of the plans are dropping out in areas
where they find that they are losing too much money to stay in
the exchange market even though they made a commitment earlier
on to try to participate in this marketplace. And one of the
reasons is particularly because of the gaming of the system
that that these bills are designed to address.
I think it is very important, if we want to have a stable
market of more affordable coverage, that these bills help
stabilize the market. I know that there was a consumer advocate
quoted in that New York Times article today from Pennsylvania
who said that over time these markets will stabilize, that this
is just a spike, because people are getting care that
previously did not have health insurance. But it is not going
to stabilize if people only pay their premiums when they need
coverage and if they have paid their premiums for only 9 months
and try to get 12 months of coverage.
So I am concerned this is going to actually exacerbate
problems going forward if these bills aren't allowed to address
the problems.
Mr. Pitts. And in addition to the premium increases, what
about the deductibles? Can you speak to that?
Ms. Turner. The deductibles are much higher. Many people
are faced with a $6,000 deductible. They are paying $500 a
month in premiums. And $12,000 out of pocket is often more than
their mortgage payments. And so increasingly we have got to
address this to give people more choices rather than the
cookie-cutter kinds of plans that the ACA requires.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin, you remarked that the President's law was
signed with the goal of providing accessible, affordable health
insurance. And I mentioned my home state, the percent increase
in premiums for individual plans. And the numbers provide
factual evidence that plans have little room to innovate and
adapt in today's government-controlled exchange market. Might
the bills in front of this committee today lead to lower
patient cost as a result of giving states flexibility and plans
the fairness to innovate? Would you elaborate on that?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. I think that is right. Our estimate, for
example, of the benefits of allowing wider age rating bands is
that something like three million younger Americans might be
able to move into the exchanges. That would be an incredibly
valuable addition of low-cost purchasers into these exchange
pools.
One of the deep concerns that I have is that we are seeing
these exchange pools become progressively more expensive, that
we are not in a dramatic death spiral yet, but we are moving in
that direction. That serves no one well. Those who remain in
the pools pay higher premiums. Others are excluded from health
insurance coverage that was the basic goal of the law.
Finding ways to innovate and allow low-cost insurance
options instead of four colors that are getting increasingly
expensive I think would be a very valuable thing, and the
approaches that the committee has in front of it are a start on
that course.
Mr. Pitts. Ms. Turner, you mentioned that everyone must
play by the rules. Can you talk a little bit about how people
are gaming the system that hurts working families who are
playing by the rules?
Ms. Turner. I think that is really the important point, is
that those people who figured out that they can get 90 days of
coverage after they stop paying premiums, that really hurts the
people who are playing by the rules and paying a full year's of
premiums to get their coverage.
So increasingly people will figure out: Oh, well, I can
stop paying my premiums on October 1 and I can still get
coverage until the end of the year and I can then go back and
enroll in the same plan without having to pay the back
premiums. That means that the insurance company has to build
that nonpayment of premiums into the premium costs for next
year, which gets to the problem that you asked Dr. Holtz-Eakin
about, is that fewer and fewer people buy the coverage, making
it more expensive for everyone.
Mr. Pitts. And real quickly, so it is your view that giving
states flexibility on grace periods and age bands, while
tightening the special enrollment periods, could lead to lower
costs for families?
Ms. Turner. Absolutely. And states have much more
experience, decades of experience, in learning that those kinds
of regulations really do help to stabilize the market so it can
become more affordable.
Mr. Pitts. My time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the ranking member, Mr. Green, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank our panel for being here.
Prior to the ACA, the individual market was deeply broken.
And, again, having worked in health insurance, which wasn't
regulated in Texas, we did regulate some policies, but the ACA
has made great strides and to make coverage more meaningful and
affordable and expand access and stabilize the individual
insurance market. Many of the challenges in the individual
market are intrinsic to the market and have been around long
before the ACA. One example is this churn. It is a term
describing people moving in and out of coverage every year.
Dr. Collins, can you talk about the churn and how the
individual market was previously broken and why changes like
churn are not unique and will continue to happen?
Ms. Collins. That is absolutely correct. The individual
market has long been characterized by high rates of turnover.
But prior to the Affordable Care Act it was extremely difficult
for people to get policies when they tried to buy them. They
were very expensive. People were priced out of coverage if they
had a preexisting condition, or even turned down. We estimate,
the Commonwealth Fund Biennial Health Insurance estimates that
about nine million people who tried to buy a plan in 2010 were
turned down or charged a higher price or had a preexisting
excluded because of their health and didn't end up buying a
plan.
So the market was broken prior to the Affordable Care Act.
The provisions that have been put in place under the law have
made it vastly more accessible for people with health problems
and people who have low incomes and couldn't afford to pay a
premium.
Mr. Green. OK. Of the legislative type proposals we are
considering, I am particularly concerned about the bill that
would change the current 90-day grace period to 30 days. It is
worth mentioning that Medicaid Advantage has 60-days grace
period, Medicaid has a 60-day grace period. After reading the
bill, I am worried my colleagues have become focused on that
fraction of the people who try to game the system that
historically have always tried to game the system, and that
they have forgotten the realities of everyday life.
Under this bill, a person who is eligible for an advanced
premium tax credit misses a single premium payment, they would
lose their insurance after 30 days and not be able to get
coverage until the next enrollment period. I understand the
need for oversight, but especially for this population we
should be looking for ways to keep people insured and not the
opposite.
Dr. Collins, can you talk a bit about the population that
is eligible for this advanced premium tax credit?
Ms. Collins. Right. So people who are eligible for the tax
credits have incomes under 400 percent of poverty, low and
moderate incomes. The vast of people who are currently
receiving tax credits have incomes even lower than that, more
in the 250 percent of poverty and below.
I would also like to correct some statements that have been
made about how the grace period works. Carriers are only on the
hook for the first month of nonpaid premiums and they get a tax
credit to cover those expenses, this claims cost in the first
month. They are not on the hook for the second and third months
of that grace period. They receive a tax credit, but they do
not have to pay claims costs. Those tax credits have to go back
at the end of the year.
Also, individuals who don't pay their premiums for the full
time of the grace period have to pay their tax credits back for
that first month and also continue to owe the premium paid in
that first month. So it is not true that carriers are on the
hook for those claims costs in the second and third months when
they are not receiving reimbursement.
Mr. Green. OK. What impact do you think this policy would
have on consumers in the risk pool?
Ms. Collins. One of the biggest issues with enrollment
right now is that we need to encourage people to come in rather
than discourage them to come in. What a more restrictive grace
period would do would make it more likely that healthy people
would drop out because of failure to pay a premium in the first
month. People who are highly motivated to stay in, the less
healthy people, would likely try to make that premium payment
in that first month and stay in. So it would skew the risk pool
away from healthy people and more towards sicker people.
Mr. Green. Well, one of the concerns I have on this
legislation, some of it may be adjusted, but the biggest
concern I have is in our district in Houston, Texas, I have
50,000 people who would be covered if the State of Texas
expanded Medicaid. I think that is something we ought to be
concerned about instead of that.
But also what happened because of the Supreme Court
decision, we have people who are not poor enough to get
Medicaid, but they also don't earn enough money to get the
subsidies. So they are caught in the middle, and that is
something maybe we ought to look at and see how we can fix that
for these people who are not the poorest of the poor but very
close to it, because in Texas you have to be pretty destitutely
poor to get Medicaid.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the time.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlemen.
And I now recognize the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Dr.
Murphy, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank the panel too for being here to give us some
important insights.
One of the subcommittees of this overall committee, the
Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee, which I chair, has
been conducting some pretty robust oversight over the state
exchanges for more than a year. And specifically the
subcommittee has been and continues to examine the expenditure
of Federal funds on state-based exchanges' activities and long-
term sustainability challenges that these State exchanges face.
And another significant component of this work is examining
CMS' oversight over these.
Ms. Turner, in its oversight of the state exchanges, the
subcommittee has held hearings and requested CMS on the state-
based exchanges produce documents and information to our
subcommittee and to the full committee. But most recently the
subcommittee released a report detailing Acting Administrator
Slavitt's misleading testimony before the O&I Subcommittee on
December 8, 2015, about $200 million supposedly being returned
from state-based exchanges.
Based on its ongoing oversight, our committee remains very
concerned about the long-term sustainability challenges the
state-based exchanges face and CMS' lack of oversight over
them. So given all this, I want to ask you, do you believe that
CMS is performing adequate oversight over these state-based
exchanges.
Ms. Turner. I don't believe that there is significant
evidence that they are. I believe that they have their hands
full with many of the other provisions of trying to run this
law and I think oversight of the states has really been lax. In
particular with the failed state exchanges, they should have
probably been more alert in the beginning to begin to see that
States like Oregon and Maryland and Massachusetts were failing.
And I commend you for the report, because when Acting
Administrator Slavitt said that about $200 million had been
returned and your committee found that his own data showed that
only a little bit more than $21 million had been returned, I do
think that they need to square what one CMS agency is saying
with what the Administrator is telling Congress and really get
to the bottom of that. The taxpayers require that.
Mr. Murphy. Yes. And it is very important to us. Look, we
want to make sure people have adequate health care, but between
that unaccountability and other errors and fraud, we have heard
from CMS that billions of dollars are unaccounted for. It is a
problem for us. So what steps would you recommend that Congress
take to make sure we have adequate oversight of these?
Ms. Turner. Well, I think what you are doing with the
hearings and with the oversight, and if it requires subpoenas
to get the information about why there is this disconnect
between what he is telling you in your hearings and what the
reports are showing, I think that the taxpayers need to have
that information. Continued oversight, I think, is tremendously
important. Thank you for that.
Mr. Murphy. So given that, are there any indications that
CMS is actively trying to recoup taxpayer dollars that were
provided to states for the purpose of providing these state
exchanges? Do you see any evidence? We would like to know if
there is anything positive.
Ms. Turner. Well, I understand that they have provided some
very limited and highly redacted memos to your committee. It
does not appear that they are being as responsive as they need
to be in order, once again, to make sure that taxpayers are
being well served and their money is being spent on the intent
of this law, as you point out, to provide affordable coverage
to millions of people.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin, good to see you again. I have a question
for you on this issue about the most expensive plan can only
cost three times more than the least expensive plan when it
comes to the patients' ages, and this 3:1 band has led to some
problems.
I received a letter from an association last evening that
said modifying age variation in premiums would help balance
risk pools and stabilize markets, and that is one of the bills
this committee is reviewing. Is it fair to say that working
families and sick patients would benefit from other balanced
risk pools and stabilize the marketplace overall? Do you think
so?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. I believe so. I am concerned that we will
see these exchange pools become increasingly unbalanced and
thus expensive for those who remain in them and crowding some
people out----
Mr. Murphy. Particularly the younger?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin [continuing]. And working families unable
to purchase insurance. That is at odds with the intent of the
law. And I think stabilizing the pools is a priority.
Mr. Murphy. So one of the things we keep coming up with in
reality, as was described among the panel here too, is that
people may sign up for something and then drop it. It is sort
of like people will buy car insurance when they need to get
their car, and then they drop it immediately afterwards. I
experienced that once being hit by a driver who dropped their
car insurance. Didn't help me at all.
But the issues here, do you think that lowering that price
and balancing those risk pools will be an enticement to have
people stay in with insurance?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. I do. I know there is an immediate concern
about the older consumer under this proposal, and I understand
that. But those consumers of exchange insurance are going to be
increasingly harmed by unbalanced risk pools. It is in their
long-term interest to get the young and healthier into the
pools. This is one way to do that.
And in the end, if you look at all of the things that are
being considered in this front, costs don't go away. If they
are not paid by an insurance company, they are going to be put
into providers' rates and they are going to show up in
insurance premiums regardless. And so having people pay for the
medical costs they incur through the insurance that they have
bought is the primary objective and anything that aligns those
incentives you should pursue.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
Now I recognize the ranking member of the full committee,
Mr. Pallone, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
The Affordable Care Act has made great strides in expanding
health coverage to an additional 20 million Americans, but
there are still Americans who we have not reached.
Unfortunately, 2.9 million Americans lack coverage because
their states have not expanded Medicaid. But in the private
insurance market there are still more than 10 million Americans
who are uninsured and eligible for marketplace coverage, and 7
million of them are eligible for tax credits to help them pay
their premiums.
Before we consider revising or even backtracking on the
progress we have made, one important thing we can do to
stabilize the individual insurance market is to grow it, and we
need to reach these people so that they know they are eligible.
And the more people enrolled, the greater the risk pool, and
the more stability we will see.
So my questions are of Dr. Collins. What can we do to reach
the uninsured? Can you describe the importance of outreach
efforts and navigators and the role that you might see
navigators occupying as we move forward?
Ms. Collins. A lot of research has shown that outreach is
critical to both letting people know about what their options
are and helping them enroll. We see greater enrollment among
people who get assistance in the enrollment process.
I also think on the issue of young adults, this is
particularly important. Most young adults who are eligible for
coverage under the law have incomes that make them eligible for
the tax credits, incomes that make them eligible for Medicaid.
But disproportionate numbers of people enrolled in Medicaid are
actually young people.
So the change in the rate banding really won't have much of
an effect on enrollment of young people. It is really getting
young people to enroll in the marketplaces and find out that
they are eligible for subsidies, find out that they are
eligible for Medicaid. States expanding their Medicaid programs
would also significantly increase enrollment of young adults in
the pools.
The other important point about young adults is that they
actually are a relatively large percentage of people enrolled
in the marketplace. It is about 30 percent of people currently
enrolled in marketplace plans are between the ages of 19 and
34. Forty-six percent of those enrolled in Medicaid among the
adult population are young people.
So it is not really true that we don't have any young
adults in the marketplace. This is actually a pretty sizeable
number of people who are enrolled who are in that age group.
Mr. Pallone. Now, what about navigators, do you want to
talk about that and what role they could play as we move
forward?
Ms. Collins. So navigators continue to be very important.
We do see that people are much more likely to understand the
options they have available to them when they are choosing
marketplace plans if they have some assistance. People are much
more likely to complete the enrollment process if they have
navigation.
Mr. Pallone. Now, I use that term ``navigators.'' How would
you define ``navigators,'' basically?
Ms. Collins. Basically someone who helps people through the
enrollment process. Brokers can also help people through the
enrollment process and they have also been critical to getting
people enrolled.
Mr. Pallone. Just talk about insurance brokers. I think a
lot of people don't even realize they can still use an
insurance broker. Is that an area where maybe we need to do
more, to have actual insurance brokers play a bigger role?
Ms. Collins. So brokers can absolutely help people enroll
in plans. They have been critical. They have also been very
important for small businesses getting coverage under the----
Mr. Pallone. But even for an individual, can use a broker,
right?
Ms. Collins. Even individuals can use a broker.
Mr. Pallone. But not that many do, it seems. I am just
doing anecdotally. I don't have any statistics. But it seems to
me that people in the individual market rarely go to brokers.
Ms. Collins. Right. So part of the outreach efforts could
be to inform people that they can get help if they aren't able
to do it on their own.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Then the last question, would the
bills before us today help to enroll the uninsured in any way?
Ms. Collins. The bills today would likely have a depressing
effect on enrollment, particularly the change in the special
enrollment periods, making people provide documentation. We
know that very few people are actually using special enrollment
periods. They were designed expressly for people who lose
coverage between open enrollment periods and most of those are
as a result of a job loss. And so we should be trying to make
this process easier, make people aware of it.
The reduction in the amount of time for the grace period
would also likely lead to a loss of enrollment in the
marketplaces and probably among less healthy people. The rate
banding change would mostly affect older adults. Many of them
would see their costs go up exponentially. They actually will
pay much more in premiums than their average expenses.
And there would be only a marginal effect on enrollment of
young adults. And most of the change in the enrollment of young
adults that Rand is showing comes from a shift out of employer
coverage and into the marketplaces.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes Dr. Burgess, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, first off, let me just address the special enrollment
period. I can remember some hearings we had in the past and
maybe even some forums we did in the Health Caucus where we
talked about community rating and guaranteed issue and the
experiments that were tried in some states in the 1990s and the
predictable effect of escalating premiums and then, subsequent,
people dropping out of coverage.
It did come up in my district. We had a constituent case
earlier this year. Right after the closure of the open
enrollment period, a fellow who actually has a medical
background in my district--he is a pharmacist, and he called,
and he said, ``One of my employees is really, really sick. I am
afraid she might have cancer. She has no insurance. Do you have
any advice for me?'' And I said, well, the open enrollment
period had just closed. Why didn't you encourage her to buy
insurance then? He said, ``Well, she wasn't sick then.''
And, that just kind of underscores--here is, again, someone
with some medical knowledge. It just underscores the difficulty
of what the special enrollment period can engender. Now, this
individual, it turns out, our office helped, and she did have a
legitimate claim to a special enrollment period and did receive
the retroactive coverage.
I have an e-mail that I received from healthcare.gov, and I
don't know if you can read that well enough, but I actually had
an unsubsidized individual market policy in the Federal
fallback exchange in Texas. And I had that for a couple of
years until it got too expensive and I had to find something
else. But it was hard to get into ObamaCare, and then it was
hard to get out of. And I do want to stipulate, this was
unsubsidized. These were my own dollars that I was paying for
this coverage.
Three months, 4 months after I have left ObamaCare, I am
getting these e-mails. ``The open enrollment period is closed,
you missed your chance, but, doggone it, you can still get
in.'' And there is a big, yellow button there that you can
click on, and we can perhaps help you find a backdoor back into
ObamaCare if you would like.
Now, the good news for people who are worried about us
spending too much money, the yellow button didn't work, and so
there wasn't really a way back in.
But it just underscores the problem that we have with the
special enrollment period. It really does lead to, again, what
was found to be a very difficult time in an experiment with
guaranteed issue/community rating in some States that tried
that back in the 1990s.
I just wondered, Ms. Turner or Dr. Holtz-Eakin, if you had
any thoughts on that.
Ms. Turner. This really gets to what you said earlier, Dr.
Burgess, about where is this going. And I think that you have
to look at the incentives that these provisions allow. They
allow people to wait until they are sick to get coverage. They
allow people to really game the system in a number of different
ways.
And if people figure out they can do that, then you are
going to wind up with unstable pools, you are going to wind up
with higher and higher costs, and someone has to pay those
costs. Maybe most of the people in the exchanges are
subsidized, but the taxpayers are paying those costs. So, one
way or the other, we are going to be paying for laws that
encourage people basically to do the wrong thing.
The individual mandate was designed to try to keep people--
have insurance and can keep it, but these provisions really
undermine that goal and, I think, undermine, therefore, the
goal of the law.
Mr. Burgess. Well, and I of course opposed the individual
mandate and continue to oppose it, but I guess it begs the
question, is the individual mandate just not harsh enough? Are
we not penalizing people enough to force them into these
insurance policies?
Ms. Turner. Doug Holtz-Eakin mentions that in his
testimony.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. We testified last year on alternatives to
the individual mandate, because it is clear it is not doing
what it was intended to do in principle. And so some other
approaches might be necessary.
I mean, I think the history of those states that had
guaranteed issue/community rating speaks for itself. I lived in
New York State, and that was an insurance market that had self-
destructed, and there is not a happy history on that.
I think it is ironic that we are having this discussion
today about shifting costs and there are some who would defend
the cost shift, because the entire Affordable Care Act was
premised on the notion that it was inappropriate to have these
cost shifts and we had to get everybody in the pool. That same
principle should apply in the discussion today.
And it is also important to recognize, as a matter of
arithmetic, you can't count on the tax credits to cover all
ills. ACA spending is projected to grow at a rate of 7.7
percent per year over the next decade--much faster than our
economy, much faster than revenue, which is going to be 4
percent, and the most rapidly growing Federal health program.
There are not infinite dollars to solve all problems.
Mr. Burgess. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I hope we will have time
for a second round. I will yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Castor, 5 minutes
for questions.
Ms. Castor. Thank you very much.
Thank the witnesses for being here.
And I want to yield just a few seconds to Gene Green,
because he wanted to follow up on a point.
Mr. Green. After this exchange, I have been around a while.
It seems like in the 1990s the Heritage Institute is the one
who recommended the individual mandate because people ought to
be self-reliant. Is that correct? Do you all remember that
statement?
Ms. Turner. The Heritage Foundation did. And they----
Mr. Green. Seems like in 1993 and 1994----
Ms. Turner [continuing]. Have since rescinded that.
Mr. Green [continuing]. When we had the Clinton plan that
that was one of the recommendations for that, so--but anyway.
Thank you, and thank my colleague for yielding.
Ms. Castor. Thank you.
Well, thanks again.
It is very important for us to continue to focus on
improving the Affordable Care Act, but you can't deny the
success on behalf of the families we represent back home. I
mean, we are at the lowest uninsured rate in the history of the
country, at about 9 percent. That is pretty remarkable, and
that has been a godsend to so many families. The ability to end
discrimination in health insurance so that our neighbors and
family members with a cancer diagnosis or some serious
preexisting condition, they now can access affordable health
insurance.
The policy that you buy is so much more meaningful than
what it used to be in kind of this scattershot pre-ACA market.
Plus, the policies usually promote better health because we
focus on wellness and there are certain incentives for
preventative care, like no co-pays for certain things.
And then all of my neighbors that rely on Medicare,
Medicare is stronger now after the Affordable Care Act. And one
of the stats that I love for the State of Florida is how much
money the ACA has helped put back into the pockets of my older
neighbors--it is about $980 million--just because of the
closing of the doughnut hole and their savings on prescription
drugs.
Also, in Florida, we were the leader in the Federal
exchange. We had a very high uninsured rate, a completely
unbalanced market. So 1.7 million Floridians now have been able
to access affordable coverage. And it is important to focus on
the cost. In Florida, 72 percent of the Florida marketplace
enrollees obtained coverage for $100 or less. That is after the
tax credits.
And the competition is key. And in some states that don't
have these robust marketplaces, one of the things we need to
focus on is how we incentivize greater competition. In Florida,
consumers could choose from an average of 42 health plans for
2015, and we think this coming year it will be about that, if
not a larger number of issuers and plans.
And Ms. Collins is right that, prior to the ACA or as we
were working through the early years, people were very
concerned that younger folks would not enroll, but it is not
true now. We have been pleasantly surprised that it is pretty
balanced, and in Florida about 525 consumers under the age of
35 are signed up for marketplace coverage. That is 33 percent.
So that is pretty good.
So, as a reminder, open enrollment begins November 1. Go to
healthcare.gov to check out your options.
Americans are doing what they do best: they are going
shopping. It is another surprise that they are actually looking
at these plans and switching. We thought that many people would
just stick with that one issuer, but they are pretty discerning
if they have the information they need. So that is another area
where we could work together to improve, to ensure people know
the providers and the doctors that are being offered.
But I would like to focus on premiums, because I think we
all agree it is incredibly important that premium prices on the
exchanges remain affordable. But I worry that the bills that
are under discussion today will actually increase costs and
also harm access to insurance.
And I am afraid that some of the headlines in the press
sensationalize the premium rates and confuse consumers. For
example, despite headline predictions in 2015 that, based on
preliminary rate filings, there would be double-digit rate
hikes in the marketplaces in 2016, the average cost of
marketplace coverage for people getting tax credits went from
$102 last year to $106, a 4-percent change, just $4 per month.
And, in Florida, the premiums rose only 2 percent, the average
monthly cost of $84 in Florida with the tax credits.
So, Dr. Collins, why did the preliminary rate filings
differ from the actual rates? Maybe you can help clear this up
a little bit.
Ms. Collins. So there are a few different reasons for that.
The high prices that were seen by some requests--requests by
some insurers are preliminary. They are subject to rate review.
And in many states----
Ms. Castor. At the state level. I mean----
Ms. Collins. At the state level. At the state level. Many
states will just adjust those down.
The other major factor is that people will shop around. So
just because carriers are charging high prices in some markets
doesn't mean people are actually going to buy those plans. As
you mentioned, 43 percent of people that shopped for plans
changed plans last year. And we see the effect in the increases
in premiums that people actually paid as opposed to those that
we are hearing about now.
So it is the rate review, it is people shopping, choosing
the highest value plan for them, and it is the tax credits that
protect them from these----
Ms. Castor. And active state regulators that will push back
on some of the insurers' requested rate increases.
Ms. Collins. That is right.
Ms. Castor. Great. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady and now
recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Lance, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And good morning to the panel.
I would like to concentrate on cost-shifting.
Dr. Holtz-Eakin, you say that the ACA is likely to increase
7.7 percent--was that the figure you gave?--over the next
several years, regarding the costs?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. In the most recent CBO baseline, the
average annual increase in ACA spending is 7.7 percent per year
over the next 10 years.
Mr. Lance. And this is clearly higher than anticipated
growth in the economy. Is that accurate?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Yes. The economy will grow at 4.1 percent,
nominal, over the 10 years in their projection.
Mr. Lance. And, therefore, in your professional judgment,
how will the difference be made up?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. It will come arithmetically by either
cutting spending in other programs, raising taxes, or borrowing
even more.
Mr. Lance. And I would certainly like the expert view of
the other members of the panel--Dr. Collins--regarding that
issue. And do you agree with the figures that have just been
presented?
Ms. Collins. Well, 7.7 percent is actually--what we are
seeing in the marketplaces, in terms of rate increases, are
very similar to what we are seeing in employer-based plans.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. It is not a premium. It is a Federal
spending number.
Ms. Collins. Right.
But, also, the other important thing to keep in mind is
that costs have been much lower than were originally projected
by the Congressional Budget Office.
Mr. Lance. I am speaking about where we are now, not where
we may have been in the past. Are you in agreement that this is
likely to be 7.7 percent each year, compounded I assume, over
the next decade?
Ms. Collins. I think that we can expect some growth in
costs over the next year. We have seen a reduction in the rate
of growth in healthcare costs----
Mr. Lance. A reduction in the rate of growth. That is
different from an increase.
Do you agree or disagree--that is why we have experts on
this panel who are not necessarily in agreement. Do you agree
that it is likely over the next decade, a 7.7-percent increase
in each of the next 10 years? And perhaps Dr. Holtz-Eakin is
wrong. I am asking your professional opinion.
Ms. Collins. That is a relatively moderate rate of growth
in healthcare costs, relative to the past, over the next few
years.
Mr. Lance. I am sorry. I didn't understand that response.
Is it likely to be 7 percent? Is it likely to be 2 percent? Or
perhaps Commonwealth Fund doesn't know.
Ms. Collins. I think that you have to look at estimates in
the context of where we have been in the past, what was
projected. And these are likely in line, maybe slightly higher.
But they will vary over time. Estimates are estimates, and we
will have to see how that plays out.
Mr. Lance. Ms. Turner, your comments on what I am
suggesting? I am persuaded that it is likely to be roughly 7 or
8 percent, and, of course, only time will tell. And, from my
perspective, the economy is not going to grow at that rate. I
wish it were, but I don't think it is. And, therefore, I am
asking where the difference has to be made up. And perhaps you
disagree with me, but I would like your comments.
Ms. Turner. Well, certainly, if it is 7.7 percent, as CBO
says--and Dr. Holtz-Eakin, as former Director of the CBO, I
think is our most expert witness on this panel----
Mr. Lance. Yes.
Ms. Turner [continuing]. Would suggest that it is growing
much faster than economic growth.
Mr. Lance. Yes.
Ms. Turner. And if, in fact, these provisions, which could
help stabilize pools and, therefore, premium rates, do not go
into effect----
Mr. Lance. Yes.
Ms. Turner [continuing]. Then you are going to wind up with
higher and higher costs of premiums. And even if the individual
policyholder isn't paying that, the taxpayer is. And that is
really what this number is about, is overall taxpayer spending,
the rate of growth of spending on health care.
Mr. Lance. Right. From my perspective, taxes could be
increased. Those who were formerly insured and remain insured
will have their premiums increase. Or, alternatively, as is
always an option, there will be further deficit-spending in
this country. I have seen estimates that the deficit annually
is likely to increase at the end of this decade. We have done a
better job since Republican control of the House of
Representatives: $1.4 trillion, $1.3 trillion in the first 2
years of the Obama presidency, now roughly $450 million. In my
judgment, it is going to go up again unless we get a handle on
this. And these are the issues that concern me greatly.
Thank you. I yield back 18 seconds.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman, now recognizes
Mr. Schrader, Dr. Schrader, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Schrader. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I
appreciate the hearing. It is fun to actually be talking about
ways to improve the delivery of health care, so I appreciate
the opportunity to embark on that.
I notice that the title of the hearing is ``Patient
Solutions for Lower Costs and Better Care'' and point out for
my colleagues here that myself and Congressman Bilirakis have
introduced a bill that talks about lowering drug costs through
competition. I would like to maybe get a hearing on that at
some point in time. As you know, some of these folks come in
with their hedge-fund money and buy up these drug companies and
then charge exorbitant prices that no one can afford. And so
this is a nice market-based solution for that.
Just a little perspective--and maybe I am wrong. We have
experts that can correct me. But the individual market that we
are worried about really constitutes only about 5 or 6 percent
of the total insurance market out there. We have Medicare, we
have employer plans and everything else. So while we are
working very hard to fix the individual market in particular,
keep it in perspective. It is a small portion of our healthcare
market.
That doesn't mean we shouldn't work on it. It doesn't mean
that some of what happens there will influence certain
healthcare costs in other arenas also. So I think this is
worthwhile.
I would also point out that the instability in the market
is I don't think unexpected. I did not expect, with the advent
of the ACA, everything was going to be great. No one had any
idea of what the uninsured population out there would really
bring. The rate at which young people would sign up was always
in question. And maybe some of these ideas will hopefully
address that.
Some competing information that I am going to be looking at
from Commonwealth versus some of the other studies, the
McKinley study for instance, it would be very interesting to
get to some of these things. And I, for one, would be
interested in working on it.
Let's talk about the age bands a little bit. My biggest
concern isn't to the consumer; it is to the government. If we
go to that 5:1 age band--I think, Ms. Collins, Dr. Collins, you
alluded to it--the costs to the government could be
significant. My understanding is the subsidies will go up to
match the increased premiums for a lot of these people.
So the out-of-pocket expense to the senior, who is going to
be paying a higher rate, may not be that much more, but the
cost to the government could be in the billions of dollars.
Could you comment on that, Doctor?
Ms. Collins. That is right. So this is from research that
RAND has done. And what happens is that people--the higher rate
bands means that premiums go up for older adults significantly,
and because many of them are eligible for tax credits, it means
the costs of those plans will go up----
Mr. Schrader. Yes.
Ms. Collins [continuing]. On the order of $9.3 billion. So
that is the big source of----
Mr. Schrader. So I think, as we discuss this, we want to
make sure we know how we are going to pay for that. Is the
taxpayer on the hook?
Mr. Eakin, do you have a----
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. If I could, that is one piece of the
story, but, remember, there would be a reduction in premiums
for younger Americans, and many of them will be having
subsidized insurance coverage as well.
As the Congresswoman from Florida pointed out, preventive
care is an important part of the design of the ACA. Presumably,
getting those young people in and undertaking preventive care
will make them less expensive risks when they age, so they
simply won't show up and be expensive, which is a cost the
government would ultimately have to pick up. And an unbalanced
pool is the greatest threat to the budget and to the premium
costs.
Mr. Schrader. Agreed.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. I think you have to look at all those
factors, not just the rifle shot to older purchasers, in the
moment when you make the change.
Mr. Schrader. Well, we have to because CBO will score this,
and we have to find a way under the current rubric to find a
way to pay for it.
And I agree with you that, over the long term, the ACA will
be a huge plus because of the preventative care. And we are in
the worst possible situation right now. We have to pay for the
expensive population that hasn't had good health care and, at
the same time, spend money to do the preventable healthcare
work so that it won't cost us too much later.
On the grace period, I think, clearly, 3 months is too
long. It is interesting to hear about the gaming of the system.
I think 1 month is way too short. And I think there is,
listening to some of the testimony, maybe we keep it consistent
with Medicare and some of the other insurance plans we have.
Two months--pick a number--I think that would be something that
could be a little more reasonable opportunity for folks.
And I guess I will stop there, Mr. Chairman. I will stop
there. And I yield back.
Ms. Collins. May I just make one quick point on the tax
credits?
There actually aren't any savings for young adults that
enroll, on the tax subsidies, on the tax subsidy side, because
they are already receiving subsidies. So when the premium goes
down for them, the premiums only go down very marginally, and
there is really no offsetting savings for the young. There is
very little offsetting savings from the lower premiums for
young adults.
Mr. Pitts. Did you want to continue, Mr. Holtz-Eakin?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. I will just agree to disagree and would be
happy to provide our analysis.
Mr. Pitts. All right. Thank you.
The chair thanks the gentleman and now recognizes Mr.
Griffith, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Griffith. As I hear the various folks talking today and
I hear both sides talking about costs increasing and costs not
increasing as much, I am reminded that when the American public
was sold this plan that the President said repeatedly it was
going to save the average or typical family $2,500 in their
insurance premium a year.
Nobody is arguing that we are anywhere close to that. The
question is are the costs going up more than they would have
otherwise? This is a failed promise that was made by this
administration, and there is no way around that.
Now, where are we at? We have some bills in front of us. I
have heard a lot of discussion about some of the bills, and I
am glad that folks realize that I am just trying to fix
something with my little bill that ought to be fixed.
But I also know that my colleague Mr. Allen has a bill that
basically says that if a state exchange fails and says, ``We
are done,'' that there ought to be an audit to make sure that
any moneys that the Federal Government has given those state
exchanges--we can see what happened to it. We can figure out
later if there is money left over and try to get it back, but
if there is no money left over, we may not have an opportunity.
And I am just wondering if the three of you all would
comment on that, because I haven't heard anybody comment on
that today.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. I will repeat what I said at the outset,
which is I believe this is absolutely what the committee should
do. These are taxpayer dollars. They should be spent wisely,
and there should be the oversight to make sure that is taking
place. And if there are moneys left over, they should come
back.
Mr. Griffith. Do any of our panelists disagree with that?
Ms. Turner. Absolutely not.
And I think that Congressman Allen's bill is very
responsible. If a state exchange fails, then the Federal
Government will go in to conduct an audit to require states to
return any unspent funds to the Treasury. It is really hard to
argue with being responsible for Federal taxpayer dollars, as
this bill does.
Mr. Griffith. Ms. Collins, any comment?
Ms. Collins. I completely agree. Unspent funds should be
returned. Spent funds is another issue.
If anything, the marketplaces right now are struggling and
in need of more dollars for outreach. So the issue before in
much of the discussion has involved enrollment. States are
facing dwindling resources for outreach and enrollment, so, if
anything, more resources are needed to increase enrollment in
the marketplaces.
Mr. Griffith. Another part of the original plan included
various levels. And we have heard some discussion today about
how many different plans are available in various parts. I
represent probably the most rural part of Virginia that you can
get as a district in toto. And in many of my areas, there is
only one provider, so we are having some difficulties with
choice in some of the areas. Some of the areas have two or
three, but there are areas in my district--I represent 29
different geopolitical subdivisions, so it is a mix, but some
of them only have one provider.
And then I saw a headline recently that caused me concern,
and that was that Group Hospitalization and Medical Services, a
unit of CareFirst Blue Cross Blue Shield, will not offer the
bronze-level plans through Virginia's health insurance exchange
in 2017. And, of course, the bronze level was the lowest. You
have to buy a plan, but you can buy the cheaper version if that
is what you want. If you were relatively healthy and you didn't
want to go to the expensive plans, you could buy this one.
And some people think this might be an omen for the future
that a lot of other companies will drop the bronze plan. But,
in 2016, 23 percent of the purchasers in the exchange were
bronze-level purchasers.
I am just wondering if any of you all have any comments on
what--is that an omen, that this group has decided not to carry
the bronze plan or offer the bronze plan? And what does this
mean for rates for those folks who are trying to buy the
insurance but are on the end where they either don't want to
spend more money or can't spend more money to get the silver or
better plan?
Ms. Turner. It is certainly not a good omen for
participation in the marketplace by people who are just trying
to afford the coverage they are required to buy. And if those
policies aren't offered, I think we will see fewer people in
the pools, leading to the kind of spirals we have been
discussing today that really wind up harming everybody that is
in the pools and discouraging others from purchasing insurance.
Mr. Griffith. Is this just another sign of failure of the
plan overall, the ObamaCare plan overall?
Ms. Turner. I think it is a sign of the failure to be able
to have the flexibility to provide the kinds of policies that
people want. If they don't purchase the policies that are
offered--and they are very cookie-cutter plans--then more and
more people won't buy them, and I think we will see a
destabilized market, really undermining the goal that I believe
we all share of what health reform should do, and that is
provide more affordable coverage to more people.
Mr. Griffith. I don't have any problem, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Holtz-Eakin wants to say something, but I am out of time.
Mr. Pitts. He may proceed.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. I just want to emphasize that, on top of
the issues that Grace-Marie has raised, the issue of high-
quality competition, making sure there are many providers, many
plans in every piece of geography, is a concern for me.
And we have seen, if you do apples-to-apples comparison of
the same plan that existed last year and then this year, in the
most recent year the weighted average increase is 10 percent.
That is sort of apples to apples. That is what is going on.
With diminished competition, you can expect even worse
performance, and I think that is a concern for the future.
Ms. Collins. Most people are actually enrolling in silver-
level plans, so the majority of the marketplace is at the
silver plan level. That is where the tax credits are. That is
where the cost-sharing reductions are. So most people are
enrolling in those plans.
That is where the price competition really is, and we are
seeing very strong competition in many markets. Some markets,
some rural markets, maybe less so. But, on average, competition
is really high. It is delivering value to consumers.
Ms. Turner. But many of the people purchasing the bronze
plans aren't eligible for those subsidies. And we want them in
the plans--we want them to participate in insurance, as well.
And that is a real concern.
Ms. Collins. I agree that there should be a range of
choices.
Mr. Griffith. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentlelady from Illinois, Ms. Schakowsky, 5
minutes for questions.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, I am the co-chair of the Senior Task Force of the
Democratic Caucus, so I am particularly concerned about the
impact a 5:1 age rating policy could have on older Americans
and on the marketplaces in general.
Dr. Collins, the Commonwealth Fund conducted a study on
this very issue last September, and one of the most striking
and almost, I would say, counterintuitive findings from this
report was that implementing a 5:1 band, age differential,
would increase total Federal spending by $9.3 billion.
Can you elaborate on that?
Ms. Collins. That is right. So RAND found in its analysis
that, first, about 400,000 older people would lose their
coverage because of the rate band change, but people who
remained, older people who remained in the marketplaces would
see their premiums go up, and that triggers an increase in
their tax credit amount.
The amount of that tax credit RAND estimates to be $9.3
billion a year, so a big, big increase in cost from the rate
band being changed.
Ms. Schakowsky. Well, thank you.
And, Mr. Chairman, I would like to put at least a summary
of the Commonwealth Fund report into the record.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. Schakowsky. And I have another one from the Urban
Institute, ``Why the ACA's Limit on Age Rating Will Not Cause
Rate Shock.'' If I could put that in the record, as well.
Mr. Pitts. And, without objection, so ordered.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. Schakowsky. I wanted to discuss the results of a
different study about the Urban Institute study. This study
concluded that a 5:1 age band would actually undercharge young
adults relative to their actual expenses and overcharge older
adults relative to their actual expenses.
I wonder, Dr. Collins, if you could discuss this finding
and any other relevant findings from these two reports.
Ms. Collins. That is right. So the Urban Institute looked
at people's average costs over their lifetime, and the 3:1 rate
banding actually tracks those expenses pretty well. So people
who are young pay close to what their average costs are, maybe
somewhat higher. People who are older pay a little bit lower
than their average costs are, or around the same, in a 3:1
banding.
When you change this to 5:1, you get premiums that are much
higher for older adults relative to their actual spend,
premiums that are lower for younger adults relative to their
actual spend. So it actually is less efficient in terms of what
people's actual spend is over their lifetime.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you.
I also wanted to go back to an issue that has been
discussed before, and that is changing to a 1-month grace
period. We have been getting a number of calls from people
about that, and let me just tell you and give you a couple
examples.
A family of four from my district was told that their
subsidy was included in their premium payments. When there was
an error processing her subsidy, the insurance chose to
terminate the coverage. Now this family is facing thousands of
dollars in bills for the care they received during the months
when their coverage was terminated, and it was really no fault
of their own.
Another constituent, who used auto-pay to make their
premiums, received a letter stating that their insurance had
been terminated because of some kind of glitch in the auto-pay
that was from the insurance company. And despite making those
payments, the insurer continues to refuse to reinstate their
coverage, claiming they violated the 3-month grace period. And
now they will be without insurance until the open enrollment
period.
And what this means for people, if they got kicked off in
February and the next enrollment period isn't until January,
they could be without insurance for a long time.
So, this idea of gaming the system, we are talking about
the most vulnerable people. Because they are getting subsidies,
that means they make no more than 400 percent of the poverty
level. And it just seems to me that 90 days would make--or is
it 60? No, no, it goes to 30, but from 90, right?
Yes, that changing from the 90 to the 30, I think, is
really unreasonable, and that 90 is not unreasonable.
I guess I am out of time. That must have to qualify as a
statement then. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady and now
recognizes the gentleman from Indiana, Dr. Bucshon, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, Ms. Collins, you said that there is a decline
in out-of-pocket costs. Which group of patients are their out-
of-pocket costs declining specifically? And be short. Because I
just don't believe that.
Ms. Collins. So that estimate comes from CMS, from the
national spending account data. And what they showed between
2013 and 2014 was a slowdown in the rate of growth and out-of-
pocket expenses.
Mr. Bucshon. OK. Let me repeat what you just said. It is a
slowdown in the rate of growth. That is different than a
decline in out-of-pocket costs. OK. There is no----
Ms. Collins. But they also found a decline in----
Mr. Bucshon. You are on my time.
Ms. Collins. Sorry.
Mr. Bucshon. OK. Thank you.
Ms. Collins. Sorry.
Mr. Bucshon. So it is a slowdown in the increase.
And the reason I say that is because that is very
important, because if a deductible goes from $1,000 to $6,000,
if you have a medical problem, your out-of-pocket costs are
going to be six times as much. And what I am hearing, from all
of my constituents--I hear this every day, every business,
every individual--deductibles are way up.
So, a decrease in the rate of growth of out-of-pocket costs
is totally different than saying there is a decline in out-of-
pocket costs. That is just factually not true. And so you can
respond to that.
Ms. Collins. Well, right, there is a decline in the rate of
growth. This is across the population. But they also found an
actual decline in out-of-pocket spending on hospital care. And
that is really----
Mr. Bucshon. For which group of patients?
Ms. Collins. That is the entire----
Mr. Bucshon. Now, in fact, that could be Medicaid,
because----
Ms. Collins. Right.
Mr. Bucshon [continuing]. It is true that if somebody had
no Medicaid before and now they have Medicaid, of course their
out-of-pocket costs are down, because now they have coverage.
Because there is no deductibles or anything for the Medicaid
population, right?
So I am going to----
Ms. Collins. Right. But this is across the----
Mr. Bucshon. I am going to need to move on.
Ms. Collins. Uh-huh.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you for that.
And the other thing you said is they need more money to
tell people that coverage is available to them. I can tell you,
since ObamaCare was put into law, if you don't know that there
are possible options out there to get healthcare coverage in
this country, you haven't turned on the TV or listened to any--
I mean, the constant thing that ``more people will sign up if
we just convince them, if we just get the message to them that
they can do this'' is just not factually true. The reason
people aren't signing up is because it is too expensive and
because they are making a personal choice not to acquire health
care.
And, by the way, 9 percent of the American people is 28
million or 30 million people. And the number of uninsured
before was about 47 million or 48 million people. So, I just
want to make sure that we get all that stuff correct.
So, normally, Dr. Holtz-Eakin, how do insurance companies
determine their pricing? I mean, is it just a general--I mean,
if you are an insurance company and you are going to determine
prices for auto insurance, how do they do that normally?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. You look at the--based on history, the
projected frequency of accidents, you look at the cost per
accident, what kind of vehicles people are driving, and repairs
are increasingly expensive, and you look at the structure of
the policy and whether people would be paying deductibles, and
look at what is left. And what is left, the premiums have to
cover.
Mr. Bucshon. Right. And you look at the type of risk you
are assuming, right?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Yes, who is driving.
Mr. Bucshon. A 16-year-old who just got his license is much
more risky. And, you can't necessarily extrapolate that to
health care, but they are generally higher-cost people, right?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Right.
Mr. Bucshon. And the rate is set by professional
actuaries----
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Yes.
Mr. Bucshon [continuing]. That determine this. So, what we
are doing in the ACA is we are creating a not-actuarially-sound
system, so we are getting the result that we would expect.
Would you agree or disagree with that?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. I would agree. I think the actuaries are
struggling to price, and we are seeing these large premium
increases as a reflection of their past failures, given the
instabilities.
Mr. Bucshon. Yes.
So, you know, the average, it has been said, was one-five
before, approximately? Just the average marketplace, the
pricing difference, on average, was about that before,
somewhere in that range?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Yes. I think this is an important issue. I
mean, the CBO in February put out a report that said that the
spending for 64-year-olds versus 21-year-olds, the ratio is
4.8:1. So that is the data on what is going on. The pricing
should reflect that. And so 5:1 doesn't seem unreasonable.
And I just want to emphasize, nobody in this individual
market, on average, is paying the costs. It is a heavily
subsidized market.
Mr. Bucshon. Right.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. And so, on average, no one is paying their
insurance costs.
Mr. Bucshon. Yes.
And, I was a practicing physician before, I was a cardiac
surgeon. And so a lot of people ask me--because they know
that--when I am in my district, they ask me about this subject.
And when you create--and this will be a statement, and I will
end, Mr. Chairman.
When you create a non-actuarially-sound system, you get the
expected result. We are just trying to make some modest changes
here to get us back on track so that we can accomplish the
goals that we all believe in and get everybody health coverage.
I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes Mr. Cardenas, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you very much.
I appreciate the opportunity to hear from you and your
perspective on this important issue.
And thank you for holding this hearing, Mr. Chairman.
I was happy to see that the administration announced a
series of actions which included a proposed regulation to help
consumers who turn 65 make the transition to Medicare so the
older consumers are served by the program designed for them to
meet their healthcare needs.
So, Ms. Collins, can you talk a little bit about how the
administration's actions will help seniors strengthen
themselves and help the marketplace pools, as well?
Ms. Collins. So that is right. So helping people move into
the coverage that they are eligible for is very important.
There are multiple different paths to coverage across the age
spectrum and also dependent on income, Medicaid, marketplace
plans. And now the transition to Medicaid is very important.
So helping people move into the coverage that they are
eligible for is extremely important, getting the appropriate
subsidies for them and making sure that they are getting the
coverage and the care that they need.
Mr. Cardenas. So one of the fundamental things of
anything--private sector, public sector, et cetera--is if
something is designed with actuarials in mind and formulas, et
cetera, that are truthful and honest about how that should work
if it plays out appropriately, part of that is that, in this
case, that people are actually in the particular pools or in
the particular categories, that helps it play out more to the
reality of how it would work better than if it falls apart
loosely.
In this case, if people are not aware of their eligibility
and they stay in one category versus another, that is part of
what hurts any system. Right?
Ms. Collins. That is right. So it is very helpful that
people, as they age into Medicare, enroll in the Medicare
program. And it is also better for them. If they continue on in
marketplace plans, they are obviously losing subsidies. So it
is very important from a financial perspective, from a coverage
perspective that they are able to make that transition and are
aware of it.
Mr. Cardenas. OK. Thank you.
One of the things that frustrates me as a legislator when I
was at the state level and the city council level and now in
Congress is that when we start arguing about what is wrong with
the current system or policy and yet at the same time we are
not being honest with the public by juxtaposing that against
what the system was like before the change.
Like, right now, one of my colleagues extracted from some
of the panelists some of the truths. A lot of complaints from
our American citizens here that, their deductibles go up a
little faster, what have you, it is uncomfortable, they don't
want to spend that money, et cetera.
But isn't it true that, under the ACA, that the overall cap
per individual, single person in a plan is $6,850 and it caps?
And then, therefore, there is no more out of pocket. The plan
takes care of the rest. And if you are a family, it can go no
higher than $13,700. Isn't that part of the ACA currently, that
fact?
Ms. Collins. That is correct.
Mr. Cardenas. OK.
Secondly is, under the ACA, a person, whether they are on a
public plan or private plan, et cetera, marketplace plan, they
are not allowed to be kicked off for a precondition. Isn't that
current, the law in the United States, when it comes to
healthcare coverage? Fact?
Ms. Collins. That is correct.
Mr. Cardenas. OK.
But, see, the thing is, what I think it is important for me
to do in the last minute and a half of my time here is to point
out that, before the ACA came into law, what was the deductible
cap in America for healthcare coverage?
Let me help because of the limited time. Did it cap at
$100,000? Maybe in a particular plan. Did it cap at $200,000?
Maybe in a particular plan. Wasn't it legal for someone to sign
up for a plan, an insurance company to give them that plan and
have an unlimited deductible?
For example, if a family member or several family members
under one plan actually got cancer, you could have deductibles
of eventually 20 percent of whatever the expenditure was. So if
that cancer treatment in that family was a million dollars--
which is not unlikely, correct, panelists? That is possible,
right, in America?
OK. That being the case, then the family could be on the
hook for $200,000 in 1 year's worth of coverage. But, today,
the worst-case scenario for a family if you have cancer is
$13,700.
And my last point that I want to make is that it is
inappropriate for us as legislators to remind America about the
things that we don't like about the Affordable Care Act without
reminding them that if that family got cancer and then next
year, for example, the father lost his job or what have you and
then had to go to a different plan, before the ACA, they might
not be able to find a plan because they had the right to be
denied because of a precondition.
And under today, one last question to the panel is, under
the ACA, isn't it illegal for someone to be not allowed to have
coverage if they have a precondition? Aren't they required to
be able to be provided coverage by the private sector or the
public sector?
Ms. Collins. Yes.
Mr. Cardenas. Yes.
Yes?
Yes?
Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the vice chairman of the subcommittee, Mr. Guthrie,
5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. Thank you so much.
And the cap would actually lessen the impact of a rating
band change, because if people are at the cap and it went from
3:1 to 5:1, then they actually wouldn't see an effect if they
were at the cap, so the cap would fix that.
But one thing that we are talking about and, trying to
reach out to encourage more people to get into the exchanges
without spending Federal dollars, if the marketplace worked
like it should, then the insurance companies would be doing
that. They would be marketing themselves and trying to attract
people to come into their insurance companies, because that was
kind of the concept. And so it puts into perspective what the
problem is: The insurance companies are exiting the exchanges.
And a month ago, we talked about plans, including the
Nation's largest insurer in the exchange. United has pulled out
of over 25 states because they project $650 million in losses
this year.
And this hurts patients. Plans exiting exchanges has the
potential to severely limit competition in some states where
patients may have only one option. And Alaska is an example.
This week, their state legislature acted out of desperation to
save their last remaining plan from running away from
ObamaCare. They set up a $55 million bailout fund, paid for by
insurance companies, to subsidize enrollees that can't afford
ObamaCare's premium hikes.
In the next decade, the Federal taxpayer will spend $568
billion on premium subsidies, $130 billion on cost-sharing
programs, and, still, exchanges are collapsing. So all those
people are getting benefits, but they are also coming at costs
to the taxpayer that we have to balance.
So, Ms. Turner, is the answer to a failed Federal program
more Federal intervention?
Ms. Turner. No. At some point, I think you realize that the
rules and regulations of the ACA are becoming counterproductive
because people are figuring out how to game the system. And I
think that is really what we have to look at. Where is this
going?
And could I just correct the record earlier about Dr.
Collins saying that the 3:1 age band really reflects more the
consumption of individuals? It is really closer to 6:1.
And the 5:1 rating band that would be allowed under this
legislation really still gives the states the authority to
override this. So it basically says, states, we understand you
have been regulating health insurance for a long time. If you
know best, then you do that, but let's not use wrong data.
Mr. Guthrie. Well, Mr. Holtz-Eakin, would the age rating
band change? How would that affect what is happening in Alaska
today? Would that have a benefit to try to keep people into the
marketplace?
Ms. Turner. Absolutely. Absolutely. If you want to get more
young people in and if you----
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. I agree with her.
Mr. Guthrie. You agree with that?
Ms. Turner. Oh, I am sorry. Was he asking you?
Mr. Guthrie. OK. Yes, you agree.
Well, I asked for that, but that is fine.
And in the time I have left--I was going to yield some time
to Dr. Burgess, but he just stepped out, I guess. In the time I
have left, I would like to call attention to another number.
There are 23,000, that is the number of Alaskans that state
lawmakers are hoping to save with a $55 million cash infusion.
This is real life in the current law. It is not working.
And, with that, I don't see him here. I will yield back.
Mr. Pitts. All right. The chair thanks the gentleman and
recognizes the gentlelady from Indiana, Mrs. Brooks, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am really pleased that our committee is focusing on
market reforms for our healthcare system, particularly those
that might give states greater flexibility to operate their
individual markets in ways that reflect their respective needs.
Before 2010, 42 different states allowed an age band rating
of 5:1. In 2010, of course, it was restricted to 3:1. As we
have heard, this change has resulted in higher premiums for
younger Americans, who have stayed out of the marketplace. And
with fewer young Americans in the marketplace balancing out the
premium costs for older Americans, this is leading to that more
older and more costly insurance pool, which is providing no
cost relief to seniors' rates. So it seems to me to be a no-win
situation, but it should have a solution.
The State Age Rating Flexibility Act would give states the
right to establish age rating bands that best fit their
insurance market to be more reflective of the needs of their
population. And it seems that our goal should be to attract
younger, healthier patients to the healthcare plans. This would
benefit everyone, the young and the elderly.
And so I would like to continue to focus on that, and I
will start with you, Ms. Turner. You indicated in your
testimony making health insurance too expensive for healthier
young people that we want in these insurance pools drives them
away, increasing the cost of the insurance for everyone else
who remains.
Can we go deeper on this issue? And studies you have seen,
analyses you have seen, moving that ratio back to 5:1, would it
have an immediate impact on the cost?
Ms. Turner. Actually, I think Dr. Holtz-Eakin may have some
data here that would inform that.
Mrs. Brooks. So, Dr. Holtz-Eakin, please.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. These are not average premiums for singles
and for families--this includes both the older and the younger
ones which would fall in these markets. That is a benefit. That
is going to lower the out of pocket, the sort of premium costs
for individuals. It is going to lower the taxpayer costs for
subsidies. This is a beneficial move. It matches the data on
spending by those groups, and it leads to better long-run
stability.
So I would be happy to provide this analysis for the
record.
Mrs. Brooks. We would certainly like that analysis provided
for the record.
And, I guess, Ms. Collins, how do you refute those studies?
Ms. Collins. The RAND analysis shows an increase in
premiums for someone who is 64 years old--this is the silver
benchmark plan--of $2,000, relative to a decline, only a
marginal decline, in someone who is 21 years old of about $700.
So, much bigger increases in premiums for older adults.
Mrs. Brooks. And so, Dr. Holtz-Eakin, how would you compare
what that RAND--because I am sure you have seen that RAND study
that differs from the studies that you have. So how do you
explain this discrepancy?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. To be honest, I can't at the table. But I
would be happy to provide, along with ours, our analysis of the
RAND study and why they have come to a different conclusion.
That seems perfectly reasonable.
Mrs. Brooks. OK. I think that would be important to clarify
this.
Ms. Turner, would you like to comment?
Ms. Turner. I think one of the things that--there is a new
study out, actually, this week by the Council for Affordable
Health Coverage that shows that fewer than 40 percent of
enrollees in the exchanges are younger than 35 years old,
although they are 50 percent of the potential exchange market.
So I think that really shows that the premiums, even now--
and the first year, 2 years really did not reflect as much
experience in premium setting as I think subsequent years
were--already we see a smaller percentage of young people
signing up for the exchange than are eligible for them. And I
see that if we continue this same trend, allowing the gaming of
the system and other provisions in this law, that is going to
get even worse and we are going to see even more young people
dropping out. And the costs are going to go up for older people
in the exchanges, no matter what, if young people are not
participating.
Mrs. Brooks. That is the point that I think is so important
here.
Would you agree, Ms. Collins, that if fewer young people
don't get into the exchange, prices will go up for seniors?
Ms. Collins. That is exactly right. And----
Mrs. Brooks. And our goal----
Ms. Collins. Right.
Mrs. Brooks [continuing]. Is to try to bring as many young
people into the pool because that would lower the cost for
seniors.
Ms. Collins. Right. But most young adults who are outside
the pool, outside the marketplace right now actually have
incomes that make them eligible for the subsidies. So they
wouldn't actually be affected by the change in the rate.
Mrs. Brooks. Could you all respond to that?
Ms. Turner. We want more people in the exchanges who are
not eligible for subsidies. And the only way to attract them is
to make the policies more affordable.
Mrs. Brooks. OK.
Dr. Holtz-Eakin?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. And it is not a bad thing to have premiums
be lower and have the subsidies be less of a drain on the
taxpayer.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you.
I yield back. Thank you very much.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady and now
recognizes the vice chair of the full committee, Mrs.
Blackburn, 5 minutes for questions.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you all. And I know we are going to
be running up against votes, so I am going to move on through
this.
I have legislation that would deal with this open
enrollment period. And I am so appreciative of you all being
here. And this is a particular concern of mine because of what
we lived through in Tennessee with TennCare, which was the test
case for HillaryCare.
And, Ms. Turner and Mr. Holtz-Eakin, I know that you both
are familiar with the failures of that program and some of the
strain that was put on that program because of extremely
generous open enrollment and not doing the verification on
eligibility.
And, Mr. Holtz-Eakin, I appreciated that you had called the
ObamaCare special enrollment period extremely generous. That
was how we defined what was happening in Tennessee.
Back in December, Chairman Upton asked CMS for details
about the special enrollment, and we were trying to get
numbers. We are told the insurance companies have those
numbers, that CMS does not have those. But what we did get was
a list of the special enrollment exceptions, which is loss of
minimum essential coverage, a permanent move, a birth,
adoption, placement for adoption, placement for foster care,
child support or other court order, or marriage.
So my question would be--and, Ms. Turner, I will come to
you because you had made the comment--and we saw this in
Tennessee too--that a growing number of people are using
ObamaCare as just-in-time insurance. They only get it if they
think they are going to need it.
So, in your view, would going into a pre-enrollment
verification process and applying that to special enrollment
avoid part of this problem that we are seeing with the special
enrollment programs and the just-in-time insurance?
Ms. Turner. Yes. And you can't, Congresswoman Blackburn,
have a system in which people aren't following the rules of
insurance. If you are going to have private health insurance
system, it has to work like private health insurance. And if
people can only buy the coverage when they are sick and then
drop out afterwards and buy coverage again if they get sick
again later, that is not going to work at stabilizing these
pools over time.
And people are figuring it out. A study with consulting
firm Oliver Wyman said that people who enrolled during the
special enrollment period were 24 percent more likely to have
high costs in the first 3 months than regular enrollees and 41
percent more likely in the next year. So, over and over, we are
seeing that this is a trend, and it is not a trend that is
going to be sustainable over the long term.
Mrs. Blackburn. Well, based on that, wouldn't you say that
doing pre-enrollment verification is really a fairness
mechanism to be fair to everybody?
Ms. Turner. Absolutely. And there should be exceptions. If
somebody has problems with the electronics of the system, which
some people do, then certainly there will be exceptions to
protect people who are trying to play by the rules, but to make
sure people who are not are not incentivized to misuse this
insurance.
Mrs. Blackburn. Yes.
Ms. Collins, would you agree with that, that the pre-
enrollment verification would be fair to everybody involved in
the process?
Ms. Collins. I really think it would actually discourage
people from enrolling. And we really do need to make sure we
have a lot of people in the risk pools, have young adults in
the risk pools.
Mrs. Blackburn. Wait a minute. You think that having to
prove worthiness would be unfair?
Ms. Collins. The new guidance by the administration, by
CMS, is requiring people to submit documentation proving that
they lost their job, proving that they got married, proving
that they had a baby, which is probably the big source of costs
that insurers are seeing. Babies are, by definition, more
expensive when they are born.
And the other thing the administration is doing, they have
made an adjustment in their risk adjustment program to allow
for----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Let me get back to the----
Ms. Collins [continuing]. Partial enrollment.
Mrs. Blackburn [continuing]. Topic, though. But you would
say that to submit to pre-enrollment verification would be an
unfairness?
Ms. Collins. I think that people should be able to enroll
before they provide documentation. So we don't want to----
Mrs. Blackburn. Oh, so you think----
Ms. Collins [continuing]. Discourage people from enrolling.
Mrs. Blackburn [continuing]. They ought to be able to get
the benefits before they prove who they are. I am going to
disagree with you on that one.
And, Mr. Holtz-Eakin, I am going to come to you on this.
Because we are hearing that stability and balance in the
programs, that is the goal--stability. And we know that
verification leads to that.
So wouldn't it behoove these programs to do their
verification on the front end before they let somebody in,
rather than letting them in, letting them get what they want,
paying the bills, and then kicking them out, or them just not
paying the bill?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. I think we have to look closely at this.
The reality is that the term ``special enrollment period''
suggests the exception to the rule, a tiny thing. One in five
of the enrollees comes through these SEPs. They are
disproportionately expensive, so more than one-fifth of the
costs are coming through this. They are disproportionately
likely to stop paying their premiums, so cost-shifting comes
from this.
It seems to me a simple matter to make sure that if those
phenomena are going to happen they should happen only with
people who are genuinely eligible for the coverage.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady.
And, without objection, we will go to Mr. Flores, who is a
member of the full committee, for questions, 5 minutes.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Chairman Pitts. I want to thank you
and Ranking Member Green for allowing me to be part of this
important hearing today.
This hearing is about finding solutions that will better
the healthcare outcomes for our constituents. And one of the
issues before us today is grace periods, which we are trying to
address in my legislation as set forth in H.R. 5410.
As I understand it, under current law, patients with
subsidized exchange plans have up to a 3-month grace period to
maintain coverage when they don't pay their health insurance
premiums for a given period of time. During that 3-month grace
period, the plan they subscribe to cannot discontinue the
service for the nonpayment of premiums.
Given this payment structure, this means that patients
receiving the advanced premium tax credits can pay for only 9
months of health coverage but receive a full year of coverage.
Ms. Turner, is this correct?
Ms. Turner. Yes, that is absolutely correct. And a growing
number of people are doing that, as studies are showing, and
it----
Mr. Flores. We will dig into that in a minute, so thank
you.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Yes.
Mr. Flores. Ms. Collins?
Ms. Collins. No, that is actually not correct. So if they
don't pay their premium in the first month, their claims cannot
be paid and----
Mr. Flores. No, no, no, no. Are they receiving coverage?
They can go to the doctor, right, during months two and three
and get treatment, correct?
Ms. Collins. But their claims are not covered.
Mr. Flores. Go read the----
Ms. Collins. Their claims are not covered.
Mr. Flores. Go read the law. It does say that.
And my second question is, in the first month, the plan
must cover claims. And here is where you are correct, Ms.
Collins, is that in months two and three, the plan may hold the
claim, but the patient is still insured. And that is where you
are incorrect. And after 3 months, the plan may finally
discontinue the coverage and reject the claims from the second
and third months, and then the provider, the doctor, is on the
hook to recoup the outstanding payments from the patient.
So three questions for you.
The first one is, what effect does this have on the
economics of health care? The second one is, what effect does
this have on premiums? And the third one is, what effect does
this have on the providers, our doctors, to their cost and how
do they have to recoup that?
So, Ms. Turner, again, on the economics of health care.
Ms. Turner. I think, in particular, that we have to look at
doctors because doctors and hospitals are on the hook for this.
And one of the things that that does is discourage them from
wanting to take exchange patients.
Mr. Flores. Right.
Ms. Turner. And so that is going to wind up having access
problems, if people have a history of not paying their claims,
because people are often repeat offenders in misusing this.
Mr. Flores. Now also, what happens--let's say, if a doctor
has to provide 12 months' worth of procedures to a patient,
let's say you have got a chronically ill patient, but 2 of
those months the doctor doesn't get paid for that. What does
the doctor do with that 2 months that they have to charge off?
Ms. Turner. Yes, they eat the cost.
Mr. Flores. And what happens then?
Ms. Turner. Their practices are increasingly threatened by
nonpayment of premiums--or of bills and----
Mr. Flores. How do they recoup it? They are not----
Ms. Turner. They have to go after the patient.
Mr. Flores. OK. But if the patient doesn't pay, then what
happens? They have to raise the cost for everybody else. Right?
Ms. Turner. That is right.
Mr. Flores. OK. Mr. Holtz-Eakin--and what effect does it
have on premiums, Ms. Turner? I am sorry. I didn't mean to--on
premiums.
Ms. Turner. Well, of course, it increases premiums because
that has to be built in.
Mr. Flores. OK. Mr. Holtz-Eakin, on the economics of health
care.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Costs are incurred.
Mr. Flores. Right.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. And they will be paid in one form or
another somewhere in the system.
Mr. Flores. Right.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. They simply don't disappear.
Mr. Flores. And so, theoretically, premiums would go up to
offset the loss, the high claims but low premium receipts.
Right?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. The insurers piece, they will try to raise
premiums to cover theirs. The providers' piece, they will try
to raise price to cover theirs. And if they can't do that, they
will stop seeing those patients or leave practices entirely.
You will have fewer providers, costs will go up anyway.
Mr. Flores. OK. So this law is supposed to be about
fairness, yet doesn't this 3-month gap work as a penalty to
patients who follow the law and follow their plans and pay for
12 months' worth of coverage as compared to those who get 12
months of coverage but only pay for 9 months? Mr. Holtz-Eakin,
does that sound fair to you?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. No. Deliberate gaming of the system is
inappropriate.
Mr. Flores. OK. Ms. Turner, does that sound fair to you?
Ms. Turner. Absolutely not. And it is going to discourage
the people who want to play by the rules from doing so.
Mr. Flores. Ms. Collins, does that sound fair to you?
Ms. Collins. There is very little evidence that people are
gaming the system. If anything----
Mr. Flores. Well, I disagree with you on that because I
have got--I am not running out of time here. As Mr. Holtz-
Eakin--this is in response to you, Ms. Collins. As Mr. Holtz-
Eakin points out, this same report goes on to say that 57
percent of the patients who stopped paying for coverage are
medium or high risk, and roughly have the patients admitted
that they stopped paying for their plan in 2014 as well.
So, Mr. Holtz-Eakin, as you note, and the current process
could easily allow individuals to take financial advantage at
the expense of other paying consumers and taxpayers. What
defense is there in not closing this gap?
There is not any. OK.
And I will just end by reading a quote from Ms. Turner's
testimony that I found to be particularly alarming, and that
is, ``Abuse of the grace period is undermining the concept of
insurance and driving up the cost of coverage for others.'' If
we all bought 12 months' worth of car insurance and only paid
for 9 months, then we would all wind up paying for 12 months of
car insurance somehow somewhere.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. That concludes
the first round of questioning.
I have a UC request. The statement by America's Health
Insurance Plans submitted for the record. Without objection, so
ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Pitts. We are going to go to one follow-up per side.
The chair recognizes the ranking member, Mr. Green, 5
minutes for a followup.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the chance
to do a followup. Again, I want to be sure we are trying to get
more--the whole point of the Affordable Care Act was trying to
expand coverage. The three bills limiting grace periods,
special enrollment periods, prior authorization, and age rating
would make it much harder to get and even to keep coverage. And
I understand the churn because that happens every day. People
buy auto insurance and then they get their card, in Texas,
because you have to have mandatory liability, and then they
cancel. And that is part of the system, whether it is
Affordable Care Act or the private sector.
So my concern is, Ms. Collins, would these three bills
limit that opportunity to get more coverage instead of less
coverage? Again recognizing it is a checkerboard. Because if
the states didn't expand their Medicaid, even though for the
first 3 years it would be 100 percent reimbursement--which, by
the way, I introduced a bill that would require Congress to do
it instead of just--because all my legislators said: Well, how
do we know you are going to do it? Well, let's put it in the
law and make sure that happens.
But will these three bills limit the ability to expand
coverage under the Affordable Care Act?
Ms. Collins. It will definitely limit enrollment. Requiring
people to provide documentation before they enroll in a special
enrollment period will definitely moderate or modulate people's
ability to do that. There is an under use, if anything, of
special enrollment periods among people who are eligible for
them, particularly people who lose their jobs. So they are
experiencing gaps in coverage. We know there is much more
likely to have a cost-related access problem or not get care
when you have a gap in coverage.
So that would definitely--and the reduction in the grace
period would also make it likely that people wouldn't--and I
think most people probably think when they don't pay a premium
in one month that their coverage is over. So allowing people,
making sure people are aware that they have a 3-month period to
make up that premium would ensure that they are able to
continue that coverage throughout the year rather than just
drop it and be uninsured for the rest of the year.
Mr. Green. Well, I have to admit when I first saw the
posting on these bills, I thought: Well, good. We are getting
to some level that we can work on the problems with the ACA and
expand coverage at the same time. And I think my colleague from
Oregon mentioned, we might be able to work on the grace period,
to match it with some other Federal--like some other Federal--
but that is not going to happen.
And again, I think the bottom line when we do some day get
into saying, OK, let's fix what is wrong with the ACA, the goal
still ought to be to make sure we have more coverage. Because
that is what the intent was and--of the bill or the law now.
And I would hope that is the intent, to provide opportunity for
people to have health care in our country instead of making it
harder. And, again, the free market will do it.
If I owned an insurance company, believe me, I would want
to make sure everybody was healthy. We used to have examples--
for seniors, for even Medicare Advantage I heard: If you can
walk up these two flights of stairs, we will say you are
Medicare Advantage. That is not something we need to do. People
need health care no matter what their illness is.
Now, again, ratings is ratings. And age is age. But the
whole goal is to expand the coverage for people who don't have
it. Because right now we are paying for it. The private sector
is paying for it. If someone shows up in our emergency rooms in
Houston and maybe--and uncompensated care fund, I think they
may get 10 percent of whatever they--but believe me, those for-
profit, even nonprofit, are somehow going to get reimbursed
from someone, whether it be through the regular insurance
market, the folks who have it. But to get those folks to have
something, even if it is just Medicaid.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlemen and now goes to
Dr. Burgess, 5 minutes for a followup.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Collins, earlier this year the news reports were that
UnitedHealth Group was withdrawing from covering in the
exchanges. Do I understand that correctly?
Ms. Collins. That is right.
Mr. Burgess. Do you know why they made that decision?
Ms. Collins. Well, if you look at the data on UnitedHealth
Group, they were very uncompetitive in most of the markets that
they were operated in. So they were rarely the second lowest
cost silver plan in most of the markets they were operating in.
So they actually were probably not the choice of many consumers
just because they weren't pricing very competitively.
Mr. Burgess. Or perhaps they were pricing more sanely
because--clearly, if a big group like that thinks they can make
money in the system, they are likely to stay. And if they think
they are going to lose money, they are likely to withdraw. Do
you think they saw something that the other companies didn't
see earlier on?
Ms. Collins. Well, they had very little experience in the
individual market prior to entering the marketplaces. So they
knew less about their risk pool than some of the other carriers
that had more experience in the individual market, so which
might have been reflected in their higher premium rating.
Mr. Burgess. Might have been, but they also may have had
the ability to peer over the horizon a little bit. Now, a
company that does have extensive experience in the individual
market in my state, in Texas, Blue Cross Blue Shield, and they
have asked for a 60-percent increase for next year. Does that
seem reasonable that they would come in with that sort of
request?
Ms. Collins. It seems very high. Again, these are
preliminary rates, so they will be adjusted by regulators
through the rate review process. And it is very unlikely that
consumers would end up paying that size of increase, both
because they may choose to enroll in different plans that are
lower priced in Texas or that the tax credits will actually
protect them from that kind of increase.
Mr. Burgess. Yes. But someone like myself who is in the
individual market in an unsubsidized plan, there is no
protection from a subsidy. You either pay the price or you
don't buy the product. Right?
Ms. Collins. Right. But if you have other choices that are
lower priced, then we have evidence that about 43 percent of
people switched plans last year.
Mr. Burgess. I don't mean to interrupt you, because time is
short. What evidence do we have that the number of choices in a
marketplace like Texas are going up?
Ms. Collins. The plan offerings between 2015 and 2016 were
relatively stable. We do know that most carriers--UnitedHealth
Group is an exception, really, to the rule. Most carriers are
committed to the marketplaces in 2017.
Mr. Burgess. I guess we will find out if that is correct.
Let me just ask a couple of questions on the 90-day issue,
because you made some comments earlier in the testimony that on
the nonpayment part, after we have gone the 30 days, the
carrier is on the hook for the first 30 days, I believe you
said, then beyond that the insurance carrier is no longer on
the hook for that. But the recipient, the insured, perhaps they
would be required to pay the part that now was in arrears. Is
that correct?
Ms. Collins. Right. So if they didn't pay their premium in
the first month, and they don't pay in the second month or the
third month, they are responsible for continuing to pay the
premium in the first month, but they also have to pay their tax
credit back in that first month. The claims that they incur in
the second and third months would not be covered by their
insurance coverage. So by restricting--and by the design of
that, of the grace period allows people who have fluctuating
incomes, low income, who can't come up with the premium payment
in that first month, it gives them time to make up that--to pay
that premium. It makes providers happier because their second
month they will get coverage for their care. Third month, be
able to get coverage for their care. Cutting it off at one
month, they will continue to get care but have no health
insurance for that care. Providers would be on the hook too.
Mr. Burgess. But let's talk about that 60 days after the
first 30 days. That insured is no longer receiving the tax
credit in those months. Is that correct?
Ms. Collins. The carrier receives it, but the insured is
not covered.
Mr. Burgess. Is the carrier then required to pay that tax
credit back?
Ms. Collins. The insurer has to pay the tax credit back, if
the premium is not paid in the second or third month.
Mr. Burgess. Does any portion of that recovered tax credit
go to offset the cost of the care that was delivered to the
insured that was being carried during those 30 days? 60 days?
Ms. Collins. In the first month.
Mr. Burgess. No, I am taking about specifically the second
or the third month, the second--the 60-day outlier part of
that.
Ms. Collins. Right. The carrier is not responsible for
covering the claims in the second and third month the premium
is paid.
Mr. Burgess. So is any portion of that recovered tax credit
from the insurance company, does that go to somehow offset the
cost of the care that was delivered?
Ms. Collins. I do not think so.
Mr. Burgess. Yes. And that is inherently the problem here.
And as much as--with all the affection that I have for Dr.
Holtz-Eakin, doctors generally cannot increase their prices. We
generally work under contracts. I know it is supposed to be a
free market, but generally we sign contracts with insurance
companies to provide at a set fee. So it is very difficult--
particularly for the individual provider to raise fees to cover
that which was not covered by the time the patient was in
arrears.
I thought you turned me off because my time was up. You let
me go on. I do want to again thank the panelists for being
here. It was an important hearing. I am glad we have had this
opportunity today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. That concludes
the questions from the members present. We will have follow-up
questions in writing that we will provide to you. We ask that
you please respond.
I remind members that they have 10 business days to submit
questions for the record. That means they should submit their
questions by the close of business on Friday, June 24.
Very interesting hearing, interesting back and forth. We
thank you very much for your presentation today.
And I understand, Ms. Turner, we should wish you happy
birthday today. Thank you for spending your birthday with us.
Without objection, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:28 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
