- THE INTERNET OF THINGS: EXPLORING THE NEXT TECHNOLOGY FRONTIER

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE INTERNET OF THINGS: EXPLORING THE NEXT TECHNOLOGY FRONTIER

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, MANUFACTURING, AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 24, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-26

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

_____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
21-271 PDF                    WASHINGTON : 2016
_______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

7_____

Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade

MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
Chairman
JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey              Ranking Member
Vice Chairman                      YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennesseem         JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi                Massachusetts
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              TONY CARDENAS, California
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             PETER WELCH, Vermont
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana                 officio)
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Janice D. Schakowsky, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Illinois, opening statement...........................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Hon. Marsha Blackburn, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Tennessee, opening statement..........................     5
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7

Witnesse

Daniel Castro, Vice President, Information Technology and
Innovation Foundation..........................................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Brian Van Harlingen, Chief Technology Officer, Belkin
International, Inc.............................................    23
Prepared statement...........................................    25
Rose Schooler, Vice President, Internet of Things Group, and
General Manager, Internet of Things Strategy and Technology
Office, Intel Corporation......................................    30
Prepared statement...........................................    32
R. Brad Morehead, Chief Executive Officer, LiveWatch Security,
LLC............................................................    50
Prepared statement...........................................    53

Submitted Material

Letter of March 24, 2015, from Gary Shapiro, President and CEO,
Consumer Electronics Association, to Mr. Burgess and Ms.
Schakowsky, submitted by Mr. Burgess...........................    74

THE INTERNET OF THINGS: EXPLORING THE NEXT TECHNOLOGY FRONTIER

----------

TUESDAY, MARCH 24, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11:03 a.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Michael
Burgess (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Burgess, Lance, Blackburn,
Harper, Guthrie, Olson, Kinzinger, Brooks, Mullin, Schakowsky,
Cardenas, Butterfield, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Charlotte Baker, Deputy Communications
Director; James Decker, Policy Coordinator, Commerce,
Manufacturing, and Trade; Graham Dufault, Counsel, Commerce,
Manufacturing, and Trade; Kirby Howard, Legislative Clerk; Paul
Nagle, Chief Counsel, Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade;
Olivia Trusty, Professional Staff, Commerce, Manufacturing, and
Trade; Michelle Ash, Democratic Chief Counsel, Commerce,
Manufacturing, and Trade; Christine Brennan, Democratic Press
Secretary; Jeff Carroll, Democratic Staff Director; and Brendan
Hennessey, Democratic Policy and Research Advisor.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Burgess. The Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing,
and Trade will now come to order. The Chair now recognizes
himself for 5 minutes for the purposes of an opening statement.
And again, I want to say good morning to everyone in the
hearing room today and especially to our panel of witnesses as
we begin to explore the emerging market in our digital
ecosystem, the Internet of Things.
The Internet of Things marks a crucial juncture for the
U.S. economy and for American consumers as our country looks
for new economic engines and new sources for jobs. It promises
a world in which digital and physical elements connect, gather
information real-time, predict circumstances, prevent problems,
and create opportunities.
This morning some of us attended the subcommittee's
Internet of Things showcase. We saw first-hand some of the
innovative ways that companies are using the Internet and
networked sensors to create, enhance, and customize products to
better meet consumer preference. I thank all of the companies
who participated in this morning's event.
The products and services displayed at the showcase
represent how, in just a very short period of time, increased
Internet connectivity, capability have led to the creation of a
vast ecosystem in which machines, devices, appliances, and a
whole host of other things are able to connect to the Internet.
We may be most familiar with this concept in the context of
a connected refrigerator that lets us know what we need to
purchase on our next trip to the grocery store or a smart watch
that informs us when we have reached 10,000 steps or met our
caloric intake for the day or a video monitor in our homes that
can be watched remotely when traveling for work or vacation.
These types of ground-breaking technologies, among many others,
are providing valuable conveniences and invaluable information
to users.
And yet this is just the beginning. Much of the excitement
surrounding the Internet of Things lies in its immeasurable
scope and potential to touch everything, to touch everyone, and
every sector of the economy. We are already seeing the
fulfillment of this promise as this technology expands to other
areas and captures more than just objects and things.
Internet connectivity is being integrated into industrial
processes, transportation routes, workforce practices,
buildings, and other operational systems and entities across
several different industries and environments. This is
improving, this is revolutionizing the efficiency,
productivity, and effectiveness of the way that individuals,
businesses, and Governments are conducting various tasks and
responsibilities. The Internet of Things, or the Internet of
Everything, is fundamentally transforming the way we operate
and participate in today's world.
The market is still very young. The potential for growth
and innovation is at this point virtually limitless. As a
physician, I see this potential first hand in the healthcare
space. Medical professionals are able to interact with patients
in revolutionary ways through connected devices, really devices
that no one could have imagined just a few short years ago.
This technology is offering opportunities to reduce healthcare
costs, improve healthcare quality, and most importantly, to
save lives.
The significance of the Internet of Things is that these
types of benefits are not unique to healthcare. This technology
truly has the potential to transform every sector of the
economy in most profound ways. Notwithstanding the economic and
societal benefits of the Internet of Things, the consumer
impact of this market should be a key focus of our discussion
today. While consumers are benefitting from the technologies,
attention must also be given to appropriate consumer
protections for privacy and security.
Today we will explore these issues, and we should recognize
that not all devices are created equal. They are manufactured
for different purposes. They have different capacities, and
they generate varying levels and degrees of consumer
information. Unlike other established markets, the Internet of
Things is still developing, and quite honestly, we are trying
to understand the nature and basis of the threats that face
this ecosystem. In our examination of privacy and security
issues, it is important that we balance these concerns with the
creativity and innovation that is driving this market. Too much
potential for economic progress and consumer welfare is at
stake to act without a full appreciation for what this market
can offer.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Burgess follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Michael C. Burgess

The Internet of Things marks a crucial juncture for the
U.S. economy and American consumers as our country looks for
new economic engines and more jobs. It promises a world in
which digital and physical elements connect and gather
information in real-time to predict circumstances, prevent
problems, and create opportunities.
This morning we attended the subcommittee's Internet of
Things showcase. We saw first-hand the innovative ways in which
companies are using the Internet and networked sensors to
create, enhance and customize products to better meet consumer
preferences and demand. I thank all companies that participated
in this event.
The products and services displayed at this showcase
represent how, in just a short period of time, increased
Internet connectivity, capability, and use have led to the
creation of a vast ecosystem in which machines, devices,
appliances, and a whole host of other things are able to
connect to the Internet.
We may be most familiar with this concept in the context of
a connected refrigerator that lets us know what we need to
purchase at our next trip to the grocery store; or a smart
watch that informs us when we've reached 10,000 steps and met
our caloric intake for the day; or a video monitor in our homes
that can be watched remotely when traveling for work or on
vacation. These types of ground-breaking technologies--among
many others--are providing valuable conveniences and
information to users.
And yet this is just the beginning. Much of the excitement
surrounding the Internet of Things lies in its immeasurable
scope and potential to touch everything, everyone, and every
sector of the economy.
We are already seeing the fulfillment of this promise as
this technology expands to other areas and captures more than
just objects and things.
Internet connectivity is being integrating into industrial
processes, transportation routes, workforce practices,
buildings, and other operational systems and entities across
several different industries and environments. This is
improving and revolutionizing the efficiency, productivity, and
effectiveness of the way individuals, businesses, and
Governments are conducting various tasks and responsibilities.
The Internet of Things--or the Internet of Everything--is
fundamentally transforming the way we operate and participate
in today's world.
While this market is still in its infancy, the potential
for growth, innovation, and advancement is limitless. As a
licensed physician, I see this potential first hand in the
health care space. Medical professionals are able to interact
with patients in revolutionary ways through connected devices
that we only could have imagined just a few years ago. This
technology is offering opportunities to reduce health care
costs, improve health care quality, and most importantly, save
lives.
The significance of the Internet of Things is that these
types of benefits are not unique to health care. This
technology truly has the potential to transform every sector of
the economy in profound ways.
Notwithstanding the economic and societal benefits of the
Internet of Things, the consumer impact of this market should
be a key focus of our discussion today. While consumers are
benefitting from these technologies, attention must also be
given to appropriate consumer protections for privacy and
security.
As we explore these issues, we should recognize that not
all devices are created equally; they are manufactured for
different purposes, have different capacities and generate
varying levels and degrees of consumer information. Unlike
other established markets, the Internet of Things is still
developing and we are still trying to understand the nature and
basis of threats facing this ecosystem. In our examination of
privacy and security issues, it is important that we balance
these concerns with the creativity and innovation driving this
market forward. Too much potential for economic progress and
consumer welfare is at stake to act without a full appreciation
for what this market can offer.

Mr. Burgess. I want to thank the witnesses again for making
time to be with us here this morning. I look forward to an
informative and engaged discussion on this very important topic
and now would like to yield back my time and recognize the
subcommittee ranking member, Ms. Schakowsky, for the purpose of
an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Ms. Schakowsky. Well, you don't think often of events in
this building as being like really fun, and this is a day that
we can say that it is because the showcase down the hall is
very, very exciting. And we are going to hear about things that
I think certainly can enhance and spice up and make our lives
easier and better from incredible entrepreneurs. So I want to
thank you all for being here today. I want to thank the
chairman for holding the showcase and the hearing.
I would like to take a moment to introduce one of our
witnesses, Brad Morehead, CEO of LiveWatch Security, which does
have a demonstration over in the showcase. It is an innovative
company from my hometown of Evanston, Illinois, that uses the
Internet of Things technology to better protect, inform, and
connect its customers. LiveWatch has been honored with the 2014
gold Stevie Award for Customer Service, the 2013 silver Stevie
Award for E-commerce Customer Service, and was recognized as an
enterprise leader by The Economist.
Mr. Morehead also participated in our showcase this
morning. I welcome him and thank him for his time today as
someone who often has people coming in and out of my house who
don't always know the code on my security system and someone
who regularly can't find her key. I want to tell you that these
kinds of technologies can mean a lot in my life.
The Internet of Things is one of the fastest-growing
technologies today. An estimated 25 billion products are now
connected to the Internet, and that number is expected to
double by 2020. Internet of Things technology brings very clear
benefits to consumers, vehicles that can tell a driver if a
part is in need of replacement, as the chairman mentioned,
refrigerators can tell a parent to buy another gallon of milk,
health gadgets that monitor a person's heart rate, running or
walking speed, distance covered. All of these products and many
more are made possible through the Internet of Things.
But this technology also presents some new challenges. How
do we ensure that these technologies are secure? The chairman
was right to raise the question of the important balance, that
sensitive information doesn't get out to unintended audiences
or that products connected to the Internet aren't remotely
deactivated by an unauthorized user. We must ensure that as
this technology continues to grow we take common-sense steps to
assure that it is safe and secure.
These are issues worthy of the subcommittee's time and
consideration. Again, I look forward to hearing from this
distinguished panel about how they are creatively harnessing
the Internet of Things, and I would yield at this time for Mr.
Cardenas.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Schakowsky follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Janice D. Schakowsky

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding today's showcase and
hearing on the Internet of Things. I am eager to learn more
from our distinguished panel about this technology's promise as
well as the new challenges it presents.
I'd like to take a moment to introduce one of our
witnesses--Brad Morehouse, CEO of LiveWatch Security. LiveWatch
is an innovative company from my hometown of Evanston,
Illinois, using Internet of Things technology to better
protect, inform, and connect its customers. LiveWatch has been
honored with the 2014 Gold Stevie Award for Customer Service,
the 2013 Silver Stevie Award for eCommerce Customer Service,
and was recognized as an enterprise leader by The Economist.
Mr. Morehead also participated in our showcase this morning. I
welcome him and I thank him for his time today.
The Internet of Things is one of the fastest-growing
technologies today. An estimated 25 billion products are now
connected to the Internet, and that number is expected to
double by 2020.
Internet of Things technology brings very clear benefits to
consumers. Vehicles that can tell a driver if a part is in need
of replacement. Refrigerators that can tell a parent if they
need an extra gallon of milk at the grocery store. Health
gadgets that monitor a person's heart rate, running or walking
speed, and distance covered. All of those products--and more--
are made possible through the Internet of Things.
But this technology also presents some new challenges. How
do we ensure that these technologies are secure? That sensitive
information doesn't get out to unintended audiences? Or that
products connected to the Internet aren't remotely deactivated
by an unauthorized user? We must ensure that as this technology
continues to grow, we take commonsense steps to ensure that it
is safe and secure. These are issues worthy of this
subcommittee's time and consideration.
Again, I look forward to hearing from our distinguished
panel about how they are creatively harnessing the Internet of
Things. I yield back.

Mr. Cardenas. Thank you. Good afternoon. I want to thank
the ranking member for yielding me some of her time. I want to
introduce Brian Van Harlingen, the Chief Technology Officer at
Belkin. Belkin is a local Los Angeles company, and we are proud
of them. And they have been doing a great job as a driver for
jobs and innovations in our great city.
Since the 1980s, Belkin has been on the forefront of
innovation creating products that benefit all of our
constituents in their daily lives. I look forward to watching
how Belkin will use what we are calling the Internet of Things
to bring new products and services to their consumers, and I
look forward to their testimony today. So welcome to
Washington, DC, and thank you so much for your testimony.
I yield back my time to the ranking member.
Mr. Burgess. I thank the gentlelady. The Chair now
recognizes the vice chairwoman of the full committee, the
gentlelady from Tennessee, Ms. Blackburn, 5 minutes for an
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I really do
appreciate the attention to this issue and that my colleagues
on both sides of the aisle are willing to work on this. We
don't need to let this get away from us if you will. And Mr.
Welch and I have put a great deal of attention on the privacy
and data security issue for the past couple of years and
thereby have had the opportunity with our colleagues to dig a
little deeper into some of these issues.
Going back to the chairman's remarks, I think it is
important that we look at size and scope when we discuss the
Internet of Things. You can look at Cisco's report, 50 billion
devices, 50 billion devices connected to the Internet by the
time we get to the end of this decade. And then you layer upon
that what the expectations are for global economic output and
contribution to the global economy from this. And right now and
by the time we get to 2025, they are saying $2.7 to $6.2
trillion looking at that. So when you look at size and scope
and impact, it behooves us to say, OK, how do we get our hands
around this and make certain that we approach this in a light-
touch way, that we encourage innovation? As Ms. Schakowsky
said, we rely on a lot of these, and people like this because
it does add convenience to our lives. But that accelerates the
additional problem of privacy and security, whether it is B to
B, or B to C, and how that is going to be filtered data and how
we are going to mine it and what we are going to extrapolate
and how we protect that, how we anonymize it, et cetera, et
cetera. We have to realize that we are still running and
hopefully always will on an open-source platform. Go back to
when the Internet started, four known users, four disparate in
varied locations, all known one to another, all vetted, all
secure.
So we want to be here to enhance that experience for the 50
billion items that are going to be attached and still provide
the underpinning and infrastructure that was there when it was
the initial project of four known users.
So we welcome you all. We are going to be direct with our
questions and probably a bit more conversational than some of
the other hearings that you participate in.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you for the attention to the issue
and look forward to the discussion. I yield the balance of my
time for whomever would like to claim it.
Mr. Burgess. Does any other member of the Republican side
seek time? Seeing none, the gentlelady yields back her time.
The Chair recognizes ranking member of the full committee Mr.
Pallone, 5 minutes for an opening statement, please.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Today's hearing gives
us an opportunity to look at a new and evolving technological
development. The Internet of Things has great potential for
growing the American economy and offering consumers new
technology that will enrich their lives and empower them in
ways never before thought possible.
Earlier today, along with my colleagues, I had an
opportunity to see some of the innovation coming out of the
Internet of Things at a showcase hosted by the subcommittee,
and I was proud to have there IMPak Health, a New Jersey
company that is building wireless technologies into products to
solve practical healthcare needs. IMPak Health has taken
advantage of wireless technology to help ensure patients are
taking their medication and staying healthy. And the growth in
these types of devices is so rapid that they soon will be as
ubiquitous as electrical outlets. In fact, it is estimated that
there will be 50 billion connected products by the year 2020.
But in many ways, the future is already here. Just last
Friday Tesla announced that it would remotely install software
updates in its Model S cars providing them with capability of
autonomous driving. Cars that drive themselves were once found
only in science fiction, but today it can be a reality with a
quick update sent over the Internet.
Yet, along with these innovations come some new
vulnerabilities, the vulnerabilities that we in Congress have a
responsibility to protect consumers against. Let us take a
hypothetical situation for a moment. Let us say that I wear a
bracelet that monitors different aspects of my health and
physical activity. It helps me keep track of how many steps I
take each day. It tells me how well I sleep at night. It
monitors my heart rate and along with an app in my phone, it
tracks where I have gone. While, all this data is important to
me, I may not want to have it released to a potential employer
who requires it as part of the job application. I might not
want the bracelet manufacturer selling it to an insurance
company who might then utilize it for my insurance coverage,
and I certainly do not want a hacker accessing the bracelet to
post my information on the Internet or to monitor my location.
So without strong security and privacy protections,
consumers can be at real risk. These risks can have devastating
consequences when the product is accessed and controlled
remotely by an unscrupulous actor. One hacker has shown that he
can remotely access an insulin pump and induce a lethal
overdose. Others have shown that they can remotely hijack the
operations of a car, suddenly turning the wheel or cutting off
the brakes.
In order to protect consumers, there has to be strong
security and privacy protections built into these products. By
building in security, manufacturers can more effectively
prevent hackers from accessing a device or the data it produces
or collects.
At last week's hearing, the FTC's witness stated that his
experience in evaluating the vulnerability in Internet of
Things products has led the agency to recommend that device
security be added to data security and breach notification
legislation. By building in privacy, consumers could have
confidence in these products, and consumers need to know that
their intensely personal information will not be shared with
the world without their consent.
So I am confident great things will be done through the
Internet of Things, but I believe that while we encourage
innovation through these new technologies, we also have to be
innovative in how we protect the consumer.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Thank you, Chairman Burgess. Today's hearing gives us an
opportunity to look at a new and evolving technological
development. The Internet of Things has great potential for
growing the American economy and offering consumers new
technology that will enrich their lives and empower them in
ways never before thought possible.
Earlier today, along with my colleagues, I had an
opportunity to see some of the innovation coming out of the
Internet of Things at a showcase hosted by the subcommittee. I
was proud to have there iMPak Health, a New Jersey company that
is building wireless technology into products to solve
practical healthcare needs. iMPak Health is taking advantage of
wireless technology to help ensure patients are taking their
medication and staying healthy.
The growth in these types of devices is so rapid that they
soon will be as ubiquitous as electrical outlets. In fact, it
is estimated that there will be 50 billion connected products
by 2020.
But in many ways, the future is already here. Just last
Friday, Tesla announced that it would remotely install software
updates in its Model S cars providing them with capability of
autonomous driving. Cars that drive themselves were once only
found in science fiction, but today it can be reality with a
quick update sent over the Internet.
Yet, along with these innovations come new
vulnerabilities--vulnerabilities that we in Congress have a
responsibility to protect consumers against.
Let's take a hypothetical situation for a moment. Let's say
that I wear a bracelet that monitors different aspects of my
health and physical activity. It helps me keep track of how
many steps I take each day, it tells me how well I sleep at
night, it monitors my heart rate, and along with an app in my
phone, it tracks where I have gone.
While all of this data is important to me, I may not want
to have to release it to a potential employer who requires it
as part of the job application. I may not want the bracelet
manufacturer selling it to an insurance company who might then
utilize it for my insurance coverage. And I certainly do not
want a hacker accessing the bracelet to post my information on
the Internet or to monitor my location.
Without strong security and privacy protections, consumers
can be at real risk. These risks can have devastating
consequences when the product is accessed and controlled
remotely by an unscrupulous actor. One hacker has shown that he
can remotely access an insulin pump and induce a lethal
overdose. Others have shown that they can remotely hijack the
operations of a car, suddenly turning the wheel or cutting off
the brakes.
In order to protect consumers, there has to be strong
security and privacy protections built into these products.
By ``building-in'' security, manufacturers can more
effectively prevent hackers from accessing a device or the data
it produces or collects. At last week's hearing, the Federal
Trade Commission's witness stated that its experience in
evaluating the vulnerability in Internet of Things products has
led to the agency recommending that device security be added to
data security and breach notification legislation.
By ``building-in'' privacy, consumers can have confidence
in these products. Consumers need to know that their intensely
personal information will not be shared with the world without
their consent.
I am confident great things will be done through the
Internet of Things. But I believe that while we encourage
innovation through these new technologies, we also must be
innovative in how we protect the consumer.

Mr. Pallone. I yield back. I don't think any other member
on our side wants the time. So I will yield--oh, you do? OK. I
will yield my remaining time to the gentleman from California.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you very much. I would be remiss if I
didn't take this opportunity to thank Intel. So Ms. Schooler, I
just wanted to say thank you very much. Intel made an
announcement just a few months ago that they are investing $300
million into their internal diversity initiatives over at
Intel, and I hope that would be a starting point for all of the
industries to follow suit as these industries are growing. They
are the jobs of the future. And for Intel to make that
commitment and that self-assessment is just wonderful. And many
people on both sides of the aisle believe that industry does a
great job when they police themselves and when they look in the
mirror and they say we can do better. And I think this is a
great opportunity for us to remind everyone that self-
reflection and self-understanding of where we stand as
individuals or organizations in the community certainly would
give us an opportunity to step forward and say we can do
better. And I think Intel has done a tremendous job, and thank
you for that commitment.
Thank you. I yield back my time.
Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentleman. The gentleman
yields back.
So again, we want to welcome all of our witnesses, and
thank you for agreeing to testify before the subcommittee
today. Our witness panel for today's hearing will include Mr.
Daniel Castro who is the Vice President of the Information
Technology and Innovation Foundation; Mr. Brian Van Harlingen
who is the Chief Technology Officer of Belkin International;
Ms. Rose Schooler, Vice President of the Internet of Things
Group and the General Manager of the Internet of Things
Strategy and Technology Office at Intel Corporation; and Mr.
Brad Morehead, the Chief Executive Officer at LiveWatch
Security.
You each are going to be recognized in turn for 5 minutes
for the purposes of an opening statement. Mr. Castro, we will
begin with you. You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF DANIEL CASTRO, VICE PRESIDENT, INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION FOUNDATION; BRIAN VAN HARLINGEN,
CHIEF TECHNOLOGY OFFICER, BELKIN INTERNATIONAL, INC.; ROSE
SCHOOLER, VICE PRESIDENT, INTERNET OF THINGS GROUP, INTEL
CORP.; AND R. BRAD MOREHEAD, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, LIVEWATCH
SECURITY, LLC

STATEMENT OF DANIEL CASTRO

Mr. Castro. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Burgess, Ranking
Member Schakowsky, and members of the committee. I appreciate
the opportunity to discuss the Internet of Things with you
today.
The Internet of Things represents the idea that ordinary
objects will be imbedded with sensors and connected to the
Internet. While many of these changes will be subtle, over the
long term, this technology could ultimately have an enormously
positive impact on individuals, businesses, and society. For
example, consider healthcare. Individuals can use connected
devices to prevent, screen, and diagnose a variety of medical
conditions. By collecting and tracking data about their health,
individuals can identify health problems sooner, get treatment
faster, and save on healthcare costs.
For example, patients can use smart pill bottles to receive
automated alerts when it is time to take a dose, and these
types of interventions can help decrease the rate of medication
non-compliance which costs the United States almost $300
billion annually.
Or look at energy. The Internet of Things is helping to
provide solutions to the global energy challenge by enabling
clean energy technologies. For example, in home, connected
devices like smart thermostats can automate energy efficient
practices and save consumers money.
Or look at public safety. The Internet of Things helps
build not only smarter cities but safer cities. In homes
connected sensors can improve safety by detecting fires and
other emergencies quickly and reliably and alert authorities
sooner.
In vehicles, the sensors can detect a crash and
automatically alert emergency responders about the vehicle's
location and the number of occupants. Some of these systems can
even predict the injuries that might have resulted.
The availability of this real-time data is crucial in an
emergency since the faster response time can mean the
difference between life and death.
The Internet of Things is transforming industries like
manufacturing as well. Using low-cost sensors in automation,
factories can automatically turn off the lights and air-
conditioning when the workers leave, shut off valves if sensors
detect leaks, and shut down dangerous equipment if sensors
detect a malfunction. Innovative manufacturers can use the data
collected on the factory floor to gain insights about the
physical fabrication process, thereby improving efficiency,
increasing yields, and reducing product defects.
Manufacturers can also use sensors to collect real-time
data such as temperature and moisture about their shipments to
help ensure quality and optimize logistics. More information
can mean the difference between a recall and a successful
shipment.
As you can see, a significant amount of the data collected
by the Internet of Things will not involve information about
individuals but instead will be about the environment,
factories, vehicles, infrastructure, and other electronic
devices. And when data is collected about people, much of it
will be de-identified and aggregated. But when it comes to
personal privacy, Congress should tread lightly so as to avoid
impeding innovation. In particular, Congress should recognize
the privacy principles designed for a small-data world do not
work in a big-data world. Proposals such as data minimization
are based on the mistaken belief that it is always possible to
predetermine what information is useful in the early stage and
collect only that minimum amount. Many of the benefits from
data come from exploratory analysis that finds new trends,
relationships, and insights that were not obvious at the
outset. Restricting data collection could severely curtail the
many potential benefits of the Internet of Things.
As more devices are connected to the Internet, it will be
more important than ever that they incorporate strong security
features. While the private sector is moving in the right
direction, Congress should further incentivize companies to
adopt strong security practices by adopting policies that
decrease the cost of strong security and increase the cost of
weak security. For example, Congress should pass data breach
notification legislation that preempts State laws and reduces
the legal compliance costs companies face from abiding by
multiple rules. This will allow them to focus more resources on
improving the security of their products.
Congress should also pass cybersecurity information sharing
legislation to help organizations respond to real-time threats.
Finally, Congress should encourage universities to
integrate cybersecurity training and to technical degrees so
that the next generation of coders and engineers build strong
security into their products. By improving education, Congress
can help raise the bar for security across the entire U.S. tech
sector.
The success of the Internet of Things will depend in part
on the actions of Congress. Just as the United States needed a
national broadband strategy, it also needs a national strategy
for the Internet of Things. Not only should Congress avoid
policies that would impose costs, limit innovation, and slowed
adoption, they should actively support accelerating the
development and deployment of the Internet of Things, such as
by creating pilot projects for smart cities, encouraging smart
infrastructure projects, and designing an efficient regulatory
review process for wearable health technologies.
The Internet of Things has the potential to positively
impact virtually every industry from agriculture to healthcare,
and the Federal Government should be an active partner in
ensuring its success.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today. I
look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Castro follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentleman. The gentleman
yields back. Mr. Van Harlingen, you are recognized for 5
minutes for the purpose of an opening statement, please.

STATEMENT OF BRIAN VAN HARLINGEN

Mr. Van Harlingen. Thank you, and good morning, Chairman
Burgess, Ranking Member Schakowsky, and members of the
committee. Thank you for holding this important hearing on the
Internet of Things, otherwise known as IoT. My name is Brian
Van Harlingen, and I am the Chief Technology Officer at Belkin
International.
Belkin is the maker of the WeMo home automation brand,
which allows users to remotely measure, monitor, and manage
their homes via a software suite including applications, cloud
infrastructure, and a portfolio of more than 25 connected
devices. Surpassing 1 million activations, the WeMo ecosystem
ranges from switches to lighting to home appliances.
After years of talk, the Internet of Things has arrived,
and the pace of innovation is accelerating at a phenomenal
speed. We are pleased that Congress and other policy makers
have joined the conversation, as policy awareness and
leadership will help to maximize the benefits of this
technological revolution and ensure consumer confidence. IoT
will drive economic growth, create jobs, and facilitate
entrepreneurship in completely new markets.
In my testimony, I will discuss three key topics: consumer
benefits, technological considerations, and privacy and
security.
First, consumer benefits. WeMo has been designed as the
most approachable entry point into the smart home. Affordable
and easy to use, WeMo provides bite-sized solutions to make
consumers' lives easier, simpler, and better. WeMo's new Echo
technology uses the home's existing infrastructure to monitor,
measure, and manage water, electricity, and natural gas usage.
Using advanced data science and machine learning, these
technologies have enormous potential to save both money and
resources.
As a connected solution, WeMo gains insight into how
consumers use WeMo devices in order to provide better
experiences and design future products. For example, through
data analytics, we learned that consumers were finding ways to
turn on their devices at sunrise and sunset, so we built that
functionality directly into our WeMo app. We also learned that
most WeMo Switch users were using them for lighting purposes.
So we developed and marketed the WeMo Light Switch as our next
product. These are examples of how we use the data from the
WeMo cloud to drive better experiences for our consumers.
Second, technological considerations. IoT for the home and
business cannot exist without two primary technologies: Wi-Fi
and smart devices. As the maker of both WeMo and Linksys Wi-Fi
routers, Belkin understands both markets. Wi-Fi has been widely
adopted with a 61 percent penetration rate in U.S. homes. WeMo
products use familiar Wi-Fi technology. They do not rely on
hubs for connectivity or intelligence. WeMo can integrate
directly into partner products and serve as an on-ramp to the
Internet of Things for everyday products like Crock-Pot slow
cookers, Mr. Coffee coffeemakers, and Osram Sylvania light
bulbs.
From a policy perspective, the Government and Congress can
help promote and grow the Internet of Things by making sure
these devices can talk to each other. Wireless spectrum,
already an important technology policy issue, becomes even more
important as IoT adoption accelerates and billions of new
devices come on line. Congress and the FCC should continue to
free up new spectrum, particularly on an unlicensed basis.
Failure to expand spectrum will stifle IoT innovation and
growth.
Last but not least, privacy and security. At WeMo, we
believe the nascent IoT market will benefits when consumers
know privacy and security are our top priorities. We believe
the Federal Government can take a light-touch regulatory
approach and work with the industry to ensure consumer
confidence.
We applaud this committee's efforts to pass data breach
legislation that would address the patchwork of State data
breach laws. WeMo has a very transparent data policy and
strictly controls all PII. The data collected from WeMo devices
is aggregated and anonymized. Non-personal information is used
to identify trends, to improve network performance, and to
provide additional benefits to consumers. We understand the
importance of data security and employ a combination of
industry-led security standards, procedures, and organizational
measures.
We have safeguards in place to prevent security breaches
and work closely with outside security researchers to identify
and address potential security vulnerabilities. We support the
latest security applications and continuously improve and push
consumer device firmware and application updates. Security will
always be a top priority, and as the technology evolves, so
will our efforts to provide safe and secure products for
consumers.
In conclusion, at WeMo, we are focused on delivering the
most user-friendly, innovative, and secure products. I
appreciate the opportunity to testify today and to share our
vision of the Internet of Things and answer any questions the
committee might have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Van Harlingen follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentleman. The Chair now
recognizes Ms. Schooler 5 minutes for the purpose of an opening
statement, please.

STATEMENT OF ROSE SCHOOLER

Ms. Schooler. Good morning, Chairman Burgess, Ranking
Member Schakowsky, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you
for the opportunity to provide testimony on the importance of
the United States' establishing a global leadership role in the
Internet of Things or the IoT.
As head of Intel's IoT's Strategy and Technology Office,
own the IoT strategy for the company. Intel's 30 years of
investment, innovations, and standards leadership in the
evolution of computing provide the foundational elements of the
strategy. Intel believes the IoT presents a transformational
opportunity for the United States and for the world. It will
enable innovation, increase productivity, and deliver
efficiencies across the public and private sector. While some
think of the IoT as smart thermostats and wearables, these
consumer devices are only a few of the many applications. The
primary economic driver will be non-consumer areas such as
industrial and commercial applications. I will address three
topics that are important to consider as you chart your policy.
One: Why is the IoT important? Two: What are the barriers to a
successful IoT ecosystem? And three: How can policymakers
accelerate deployments to ensure U.S. leadership?
First: Why is the IoT important? It will drive
unprecedented benefits for Government, businesses, consumers,
and communities. It is estimated that 50 billion devices will
connect to the Internet by 2020 generating 44 zettabytes of
data. Consider that in 2009, the World Wide Web was estimated
at just a half a zettabyte. The IoT presents the opportunity to
connect these devices, efficiently analyze the data, and use
the information to improve our decision-making. In doing so,
the IoT is expected to have a multitrillion-dollar global
economic impact. What should most excite U.S. policymakers is
that America and other developed economies are expected to
capture 20 percent of this impact if we lead.
Let us consider one IoT application. Saia Trucking is
located in Georgia and has a nationwide fleet of 3,000 trucks.
They recently deployed an Intel-based IT solution which alters
routes and guides drivers' performance real-time. Saia
increased fuel efficiency by 6 percent translating into $15
million of annual savings. The U.S. trucking industry consumes
54 billion gallons of fuel per year. Extrapolating that
success, our Nation could save over 3 billion gallons of fuel
yearly while reducing our CO2 emissions.
What are potential barriers to a successful IoT ecosystem?
One barrier as noted could be security. It is not implemented
from the outset. For this reason, Intel prioritizes security as
the foundational element of our IoT strategy. We will integrate
security at the outset building cryptography into our chips to
enable strong identity and data protection. In addition to the
compute device itself, our solutions will employ advanced
software security to prevent harmful applications from being
activated on the device or taking down the network. Integrating
multiple layers of security at the outset enables trusted data
transmission necessary for successful IoT deployments.
Other potential barriers include connecting to legacy
infrastructure, interoperability between devices, and
developing global standards. To address these barriers, Intel
collaborated with industry leaders to define five tenants of
successful IoT solutions. They are security, ease of
connectivity, interoperability, data analytics, and ease of
deploying new applications and services. Based on these
tenants, we recently launched the Intel IoT platform.
Finally, how can policymakers accelerate IoT deployments to
ensure U.S. leadership? Candidly, the United States is behind.
Other countries are aggressively investing and deploying IoT
implementations to transform their economies, address societal
problems, and spur innovation. China, Brazil, Germany have all
adopted national IoT plans with time-bound goals and are
investing heavily in IoT R&D and infrastructure. The United
States must leverage our vast resources and capabilities,
promoting industry alignment around these large-scale IoT
deployments based on secure, open, and interoperable solutions
will showcase U.S. leadership.
Congress can advance our Nation's IoT momentum by
collaborating with industry to establish a national IoT
strategy, encourage public/private partnerships, and invest in
IoT research. Intel is confidence that the United States can
lead the IoT transformation with a continued open dialogue as
you are doing here today and by implementing some of these
recommendations.
Thank you for your time, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Schooler follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. Thank you. The Chair recognizes Mr. Morehead
for 5 minutes for the purpose of an opening statement, please.

STATEMENT OF R. BRAD MOREHEAD

Mr. Morehead. Thank you, Chairman Burgess, Ranking Member
Schakowsky, and members of the committee. We use the IoT every
day when we check traffic or look at the weather forecast. We
also see it in the wide variety of smart devices that are
popping up everywhere, like smart refrigerators, smart coffee
makers, or smart watches. But rather than talking about smart
coffeemakers and refrigerators, I would prefer to illustrate
the potential benefits of a robust Internet of Things by
sharing a brief story about how the security alarm industry
works.
Imagine an emergency at your home or at your school or at
your work, a burglary or violent crime in progress with
multiple potential victims on the scene where the intruder or
the victim has triggered an alarm. Speed and information are
critically important to the first responders. However, when
that security alarm goes off at that home, business, or public
location, that signal is delayed for over a minute to reduce
false alarms. Furthermore, the process of notifying the alarm
monitoring center is surprisingly manual, as the alarm is
transmitted after the delay to a person in the alarm center who
must then be connected to another person at a 911 public safety
answering point, or PSAP, for emergency dispatch.
After an average 1- to 3-minute phone conversation between
that security station and the PSAP safety agency, emergency
responders are contacted and dispatched to the site of the
alarm--again, where time is of the essence. But the first
responders are given nothing more than basic information about
the type of alarm and location of the incident. This average
dispatch total can take 5 to 10 minutes, and that is valuable
time and information that is lost in a true emergency. By some
estimates from the DOJ, each year more than 1 million police
hours are wasted due to these human errors and communication
issues in this transmission process.
Adding to that frustration is the fact that there may be
additional security cameras, motion sensors, door sensors, or
other sensors at the site of the emergency capturing valuable
information. Unfortunately, in most cases, those additional
sensors and cameras have no way of communicating to the
monitoring station, 911 PSAP, or the first responders.
In other words, there is potential lifesaving data
available that no one sees. This can cause first responders to
arrive at the wrong place at the wrong time and without
important information to save lives.
With the IoT, these processes could be seamlessly automated
and integrated to prevent and mitigate crimes in a more
efficient way. In the future, the transmission of emergency
alarms and sensor data could occur instantly from machine to
machine, or M-2-M, instead of manually. Automated applications
could be used to gather and interpret the alarm information
from various IoT devices to determine the probability of a
false alarm or help first responders use their time more
efficiently and arrive at the right place. Smart sensors and
cameras could be used to automatically transmit images and data
from the scene of the crime directly to the officers.
Using IoT, two companies and centers were able to cut alarm
transmission times down to 5 seconds and reduce the volume of
calls going between these centers by 10 percent. Now imagine if
that was implemented nationwide, how much more
productive our police, fire, and EMT responders could be
with fewer false alarms and better, faster information from IoT
connected systems and devices. Internet of Things can help
deliver first responders to the scene faster, more efficiently
and with more information on the current emergency, if we
invest now in the IoT infrastructure that we need so that we go
beyond smart coffeemakers and refrigerators.
Unfortunately, there are still a few technological barriers
that are preventing us from implementing an ideal system. The
IoT consists of a few key components: a power source, a
communication protocol and data processing.
Let us begin with power, since this is a subcommittee of
the Energy and Commerce Committee. These connected sensors in
the Internet of Things must have a power source, and while
wired is preferred in some cases, it is typically too expensive
to implement. Therefore battery power offers the widest array
of uses, but the currently short battery life must be improved
to lower the cost of ongoing maintenance and fully tap the
potential of IoT.
As an example of this, recently a tech startup called
Quirky developed a smart egg holder that would tell you when
you were out of eggs in your refrigerator. This sounds like an
interesting and useful, but due to current battery technology,
it unfortunately it needed its batteries replaced more often
than it ran out of eggs to replace. So when lives are on the
line instead of omelets, we need to make sure that these smart
devices don't lose power. This will require investment in more
powerful batteries with longer lifespans.
Secondly, we need to insure the availability of open
wireless spectrum for IoT and specifically IoT for public
safety agencies. A Government program called FirstNet is
developing new wireless applications to aid first responders
instead of existing radio-dispatch technology first used in the
1960s. We need more funding for projects that involve improving
our Nation's infrastructure for wireless integration and
emergency dispatch.
As an example of our outdated emergency infrastructure,
currently only about 200 out of 5,900 911 PSAP centers can
handle text messages. Text messaging has been around for 20
years, but approximately 3 percent of 911 centers can receive
texts. And when you consider that 96 percent of young people
text regularly but only 67 percent make phone calls regularly,
you can see how much emergency information we may be missing.
Also in our way looms the threat of multiple connection
standards for smart devices. Computers generally connect to the
Internet using one of two methods, Ethernet or Wi-Fi. However,
smart devices connect using a plethora of standards including
Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, Ethernet, z-wave, ZigBee, and Thread, in
addition to numerous proprietary protocols. So currently a Nest
thermostat may know the temperature in a home is increasing due
to a fire but it is unable to contact the 911 PSAP through the
security system if the homeowner is asleep or unavailable. IoT
standards and interconnectivity would solve this.
As an example, my company, LiveWatch Security, developed As
Soon As Possible Emergency Response, or ASAPer, which is an
application that is a step in that direction. It combines the
speed of machine-to-machine communication with the latest group
chat communication technology to allow people to process this
information from the IoT and sensors. This IoT-enabled system
has reduced false alarms by up to 30 percent while also
improving response times, in some cases, by 80 percent. We must
continue to invest in the entrepreneurs that will develop these
new applications and improve the way we process data from the
IoT to turn it into useful information for our first
responders.
These are all issues that can be solved with additional
smart investment in the smart things that make up the Internet
of Things. We can obtain the most progress towards eliminating
these obstacles by focusing on engineering advances in battery
efficacy and low-power radio range, finding better ways to
utilize wireless spectrum for first responders and creating
standards for communication between the IoT ecosystems, and
finally, investing in better first-responder infrastructure
that can handle new types of communication to, and from, IoT
devices and users.
We are at the beginning of the next big shift in technology
where machines and devices can talk to each other and instantly
share data in ways that change lives.
We can use IoT to enhance the security of Americans and the
safety of our first responders. To me, these are compelling
reasons to invest in this new frontier of technology. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Morehead follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentleman for his
remarks. We will now move into the question-and-answer portion
of the hearing. I will begin by recognizing myself 5 minutes
for the purpose of questions.
I want to ask a couple of general questions just on the
general theme of the governance of the Internet of Things, and
I would like to ask each panelist to respond briefly in turn.
And Mr. Castro, we will start with you. It is an open-ended
question, and I will acknowledge that. And many of you have
already addressed this partially in your testimony, but what do
you see is the appropriate role of Congress right now relative
to the Internet of Things, bearing in mind we are marking up
data breach notification tomorrow and probably before the
spring is over, we will have a mark-up on patent demand
letters. But irrespective of that, I welcome your thoughts.
Mr. Castro. Sure. Absolutely. I think the number one issue
right now, just because it is growing in attention, is data
breach. We saw, you know, so many data breaches over the past
year, high profile. This is something that Americans are
worried about, and it is something where I think Congress could
take an immediate and important step. But long-term, as I think
you have heard from at least two panelists up here, we are
really thinking about national strategy for the Internet of
Things. This is something that Congress can get behind, that
the Federal Government can get behind, and you really create a
new vision for the future of commerce, the future of houses
that interact with technology and how we can have an impact in
so many different areas.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you. Mr. Van Harlingen?
Mr. Van Harlingen. As has been mentioned, I think data
breach management and rules around that and consistency around
that nationwide would be very helpful to both the industry and
consumers.
As I mentioned in my opening statement, I think spectrum
management, both for the unlicensed spectrum and as Mr.
Morehead mentioned, for emergency first responders in a more
licensed fashion would be very good investments of time for the
committee and for the Federal Government.
I would advocate a light-touch approach. This is a very new
and emerging space where we have a lot to learn about what is
possible and what value we can create.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you. Ms. Schooler, your thoughts on the
appropriate role of Congress.
Ms. Schooler. Yes, absolutely. I think it is starting
today, an open dialogue between industry and Government,
consumer groups to get the needs and the interests of the
consumers on the table as we chart policy moving forward as
well as people from industry environments.
I think we need, as I mentioned in my statement, to
encourage a focus on security and interoperability. I think the
opportunity to leverage public and private partnerships will be
key, and I think even if you look at the infrastructure and the
capabilities within transportation's $351 billion opportunity
in that segment over I think it is 650,000 fleets and tires and
trucks within the Postal Service in the U.S. Government,
excellent opportunity to try out some of this technology with
public and private partnerships.
We talked about a national IoT strategy. I think that is
critical moving forward. And again, open standards, open
architecture, open source, interoperability, allow for the
continuation of innovation.
Mr. Burgess. Very good. Mr. Morehead?
Mr. Morehead. I agree on the points about open standards
and interconnectivity. For most of the sensors, I think that
investment in battery power and improved performance for
batteries will be incredibly important as we develop new
sensors. But finally I do think investing in the infrastructure
of our Nation's PSAPs and emergency first responders is
incredibly important.
There was an article in the Journal recently about a
company called Smart Things, and the journal reviewed the
technology of smart things. And at the end of the article, what
they found is that the most compelling use of the technology
was turning on the coffeemaker in the morning, which frankly
wasn't compelling, was the summary of the article.
When you talk about investing the types of time and money
that you would be investing, I think you could look to the
Nation's infrastructure and truly save lives which has an
immeasurable benefit of both the first responders and potential
victims by investing in the public infrastructure and the PSAPs
to get the right information distributed to emergency first
responders faster. And that has a faster payback than
potentially some other projects.
Mr. Burgess. Great. I thank all the panelists for their
thoughts on that. Just being mindful that I want to stay within
the constraints of 5 minutes because I am going to insist that
everyone else do that on the dais, Mr. Morehead, you referenced
the fact that, well, the Journal article about the coffeemaker,
well, that is really not that important. But what some days
seems trivial to one person may down the road actually be very
significant, and I guess the overarching theme here is a
regulatory touch. You heard Ms. Blackburn mention it, the light
regulatory touch. Could each of you speak in one word or two
words to the regulatory touch that you would like to see on the
side of the agencies?
Mr. Castro. I think we want to embrace innovation and let,
you know, let these companies--you saw the showcases out there
today. Imagine what it will look like 10 years from now. You
want to see that innovation flourish.
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Van Harlingen?
Mr. Van Harlingen. Agreed, a light touch that fosters
innovation and creativity and exploration in this space.
Mr. Burgess. Great. Ms. Schooler?
Ms. Schooler. Light touch to spur innovation.
Mr. Morehead. The coffee from the smart coffeemaker is good
dark, but regulatory touch I think would be better light.
Mr. Burgess. Very good. You have all allowed me to fit
within the constrains. I will now recognize the ranking member
of the subcommittee, Ms. Schakowsky, 5 minutes for questions,
please.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you very much for all your testimony.
I wanted to give a little bit of opportunity to Mr. Morehead to
tell us a little bit more about LiveWatch. Mr. Morehead, home
security systems have been in existence long before 2002 when
LiveWatch was created. So as we increase our technologies, et
cetera, what motivated you and your business partners to enter
this space? And how do you think that what you are doing
improves consumer experience?
Mr. Morehead. Thank you, Ranking Member Schakowsky. When we
entered the space, we saw an opportunity with a business model
in the home security industry that was relatively unchanged for
decades, predominantly ADT where customers were paying
significant amounts of money and not getting the value that
they needed. And we saw an opportunity to bring a technology
focus, a disruptive technology focus to a relatively nascent
industry.
And the nice thing about home security is it is formed upon
a foundation of security, right? We talk about security and
privacy here, home security is by definition focused on
security. So we use that as a foundation to disrupt the
business by going direct to consumers and lower their prices by
about 30 to 50 percent, by eliminating the middlemen of sales
and delivery and having customers self-install their wireless
systems.
So all of our infrastructure is wireless. It is formed on a
basis of security, and then from that point, we added layers of
additional technology, received multiple patents for that to
determine how customers could use the information that was
flowing from those systems. Specifically the opportunity we saw
there is a home security system was really Internet of Things
before there was an Internet of Things. We have sensors in
homes and businesses throughout the country, throughout the
world. Those produce data. That data is then transmitted to a
central station where it looks for alarms.
But the fact of the matter is, we can do additional things
with that information, and that is where we have taken the next
step with our product, ASAPer, to allow customers to process
the information, the data coming from those devices, in a more
effective way.
Ms. Schakowsky. Are you concerned at all? Because a number
of people will be contacted that there is some sort of breach
of security in the home, right? How do you protect against
unwanted invasions of that information that is circulated to a
certain population of people, family members for example?
Mr. Morehead. The main thing that we try to do is we limit
the information to the people that the homeowner or the
business owner specifically selects to receive that
information. So we keep it in a tight-knit group that is
selected by that person to receive the information.
The challenge is that there is power in numbers, and so we
want to get the information to as many people as we can in an
emergency because we are looking for the one person that knows
what is actually happening and that can help resolve it.
So we need to get it ideally just to the one person that
knows, but to do that we have to get the information to
multiple people. So we allow the homeowner to put those people
on the list, and then we bring them into a group chat to help
facilitate the resolution of that alarm signal. And we found
that thus far, implementing the right technology and security
on the back end, it has been a productive way to do it. And
instead of having two to three fixed members on an alarm
distribution list, we have tested it with up to in a school
setting, up to 170 people simultaneously on one group chat to
see what would happen if there was an emergency at a school and
there is no other system that can facilitate that
communication.
Ms. Schakowsky. Have you seen any particular problems that
result from having a universe as large as 170?
Mr. Morehead. At this point we have not. Overall it has
been pretty positive. I think that there is some learning curve
for consumers and users as they get up to speed and say, oh, I
am chatting and trying to have a conversation with 170 other
people. But in the end, what you tend to find is that only one
or two people actually step up in that conversation because
they are the ones with the relevant information. So of that
170, we are really just looking for the one or two people that
can help resolve the situation.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you. Mr. Castro, you said something
interesting at the end of your written testimony about
education and building cybersecurity education. I am going to
read it. Congress should encourage universities to integrate
cybersecurity training into technical degrees so that the next
generation of coders, engineers, build strong security into
products at the outset.
Do we not do that now as we are training people?
Mr. Castro. Yes, it is a great question. I mean, the field
of information security has evolved over time. So originally
many of the problems that we saw in computer systems were
because the coders weren't thinking about the security issues,
and you had people fixing that afterwards. As we are moving
into the Internet of Things, we want people to be thinking
about the big issues that exist today and how they can fix them
at the outset rather than doing it later on.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you. I think universities and
educational systems have a role, too, to play, and I thank you
for pointing that out.
Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentlelady. The
gentlelady yields back. The Chair recognizes the gentlelady
from Tennessee 5 minutes for questions, please.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I have got
three questions, and I want to hear from each of you on them.
So I appreciate brevity. And if you want to expand to anything
further, please do it in writing within the next week or so.
First of all, let us talk about privacy because that is
always top of mind. What is this going to do to me if I use
this thing? And when you talk about big data and the explosion
of data that is out there, first of all, let us look at it like
this. What do you think the trend is for growth of data on the
Internet? Are we going to continue to see this explosion? And
secondly, what should Congress' role be in protecting that
data? And let us just start. Very quickly, Mr. Castro, I am
going to start with you. Let us work down so we can move to
question two.
Mr. Castro. Sure. So in terms of the trend, it is
increasing.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Mr. Castro. Do you want me to address the second part?
Mrs. Blackburn. Sure.
Mr. Castro. Yes, and so the second part about this is, you
know, Congress should be really looking at how consumers are
hurt or not hurt by the use of the data.
Mrs. Blackburn. So define harm?
Mr. Castro. Define harm and not regulate the collection. We
want data to be collected and shared.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Yes, sir?
Mr. Van Harlingen. So I agree the trend is huge. The amount
of data that we have is directly proportional to the value we
can create, and I think the way to deal with it as in the FTC's
recommendations is pay very attention to providing notice and
choice to the consumers.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Ms. Schooler. I saw data recently where 90 percent of the
data today was created in the last 2 years.
Mrs. Blackburn. That is right.
Ms. Schooler. I think that is indicative of the pace of
innovation and the creation of data, and I think whatever we
say in terms of data growth, we will be grossly wrong.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Ms. Schooler. We will under-call it. What do we need to do
from a policy perspective? Again, I think we need to bring
multiple parties to the table. I think we need to bring the
Government, industry, consumer groups to understand what some
of the use cases are and create policy around use case versus a
broad, blanket policy to try to manage every scenario. And two,
I think we need to build security in from the onset as I
mentioned in my testimony from the device to the network to the
cloud.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Ms. Schooler. And when we often say we want to create
redundancy in that transmission, it means you don't always
secure it at one point. You secure it throughout the
transmission and the manipulation of the data. So those are my
two comments.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Mr. Morehead?
Mr. Morehead. I think there will obviously be substantial
growth in the data. I think you will see multiple models emerge
because this is not a winner-take-all market, and for lack of
better terms, I will call it an Apple model and a Google model,
an Apple model where the data is more private and a Google
model where the data is used publically. The customer, the
consumer, may get less expensive hardware, less expensive or
free services, but the data will be used to provide other
options. So I think multiple models will emerge for the data.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Second question, I want to look at
education for consumers and some of the consent agreements that
companies have when you are talking about the Internet of
Things and the utilization of this data.
Do you think that companies in these agreements for a
particular service, did they adequately inform consumers and
the consumers understand how this data is going to be utilized
and what can be done to improve those privacy policies if you
will so that consumers are offering true informed consent when
they agree to utilization of some of the services that are
there? And you know, one we discussed yesterday was insurance
companies wanting you to utilize some type of component, and it
gives you the number of hard breaks and fast stops and speeds
driven, things of that nature. And we have got only 45 seconds
left. So let me do this. I will ask for that response. I want
to move onto the third question just to lay it out since we are
going to run out of time, the economic impact. And Accenture
had a great report on the economic impact of the Internet of
Things. And I would like to get your take on that statement. We
have it for you. And I want to know if you agree with it, and
then I would like for you to speak specifically when you
respond in writing to the challenges that exist in the United
States to realizing this type of economic growth. What are the
barriers to entry? What are the hurdles that are going to be
there? What are we doing wrong from a regulatory side that are
disenfranchising innovators? And I yield back my time.
Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentlelady. The
gentlelady yields back, and those responses will be anticipated
as written responses. Mr. Cardenas of California, you are
recognized for 5 minutes for questions, please.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The first question
that I have is to Ms. Schooler. The City of Los Angeles is
still a pretty big economic juggernaut for manufacturing in
this country. When it comes to the Internet of Things and that
type of innovation, what do we anticipate for manufacturing and
production of products, et cetera, and the streamlining? And
what is in the back of my mind is jobs, the opportunity to have
successful businesses and therefore, a good, robust economy. So
what can we expect going forward? Is this something that is
going to be utilized more and more when it comes to
manufacturing or something that we plateaued on where are we
at, do you think?
Ms. Schooler. Excellent question. We very much believe
manufacturing will be smart manufacturing, in particular will
be an excellent opportunity for the Internet of Things. At
Intel we actually deployed a smart manufacturing pilot within
one of our manufacturing facilities, and as you know, we make
millions of things every year. So I think we are a pretty good
test case. In that implementation we found that we collected
data that allowed us to do predictive maintenance, and with
predictive maintenance you increase up-time, you improve
yields. And in that pilot, we realized a $9 million return on
that single opportunity for that pilot in that single factory.
Accenture published a report recently that they said 87
percent of the CEOs in the country see a long-term job growth
opportunity, and I think to put that into practical terms, if
you think about lowering the cost of goods sold, that is a
great way to attract jobs back to the United States. So number
one, let us optimize our manufacturing facilities from a
product-cost perspective, use the technology to use predictive
maintenance as a capability to increase up-times, again
bringing down the total cost of goods, and to improve the
utilization and the effective utilization rates of the
equipment, again, improving output.
So I think all of these things will result in job creation
and bringing jobs back on shore.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you. And I like your example that you
gave, and it reminds me that efficiency is a win, win, win,
win, win, not only for the manufacturer but also for the
consumer and for the community.
Which leads me to my next question. Brian, if you could
please. Hopefully it is a great answer for Los Angeles.
California is going through a drought. We have yet to see the
worst of it. So what do you see in the consumer space or even
in the industrial space when it comes to efficiency,
opportunities for energy, water, things of that nature with
this technology?
Mr. Morehead. So one of the technologies that we are
working on in particular is a technology that we call Echo that
allows the consumer's home or a business to monitor their
energy use, their water use, in great detail through a single
point using the existing infrastructure in the home. It is a
very cost-competitive technology or cost-effective technology.
We think we will educate people about how water and power are
being used in their house and lead to improved behavior around
that consumption.
Mr. Cardenas. So you see a lot of advancements there and a
lot more usage?
Mr. Morehead. Absolutely. It is a place that we are putting
a lot of our research efforts.
Mr. Cardenas. Yes. Hopefully it is a lot more efficient
than pounding on the door when I tell my kids they have to take
shorter showers.
Mr. Morehead. Agreed. It is also very good at detecting
leaks which are a huge source of water waste in the city.
Mr. Cardenas. Absolutely. Well, thank you. And the last
question to whoever would like to help enlighten us, what can
we learn from the rest of the world? We are very spoiled in
this country. We are still the economic juggernaut of the
planet. We are looked to by many places around the planet for
leadership. But once in a while we see ourselves looking and
jog our head back and go wow. They got it right over there.
They did something really cool or they did something that is
advanced or something that we probably should have thought of
but we didn't. What examples can you enlighten us about what is
going on maybe around the world that we could learn from and
then take their leadership?
Mr. Castro. Well, following up on your question about the
water, if you look at India, I mean, so many countries have
these big economic and social problems. They don't have any
alternative but to go to the best technology and really look
for an innovative solution. So in India, you know, they have
decaying water infrastructure. Using smart technology, they are
able to actually you know, cut significant waste at less cost
than it would have been to replace the infrastructure. So
really the United States should be looking at the same thing.
We have decaying infrastructure. We just have a lot more money.
So how can we do it really efficiently?
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you. Real quick?
Ms. Schooler. I would be happy to go next. I think I noted
in my testimony that we see national IoT plans in other
countries, Germany, Brazil, China. I definitely think as we had
a broadband plan, we should have an IoT strategy and plan for
the country. I think that would help us accelerate our
learnings and accelerate our deployments which is critical.
And just interestingly enough, a little tidbit from the
demo room, I was talking to the SteadyServ beer keg optimizer
which I think is a fascinating IoT use case. And in that
deployment, one of the things that he was discussing and we
were talking about was the adoption between the United States
and Europe. Well, in Europe, they are looking at the
opportunity, looking at the return on the investment in
adopting the technology much more aggressively. And in the
United States, there is still some hesitancy because it is not
how we are used to doing it. And I think collectively between
Government and industry, large business and small business, we
have to start embracing technology in a much more aggressive
fashion than we have in the past.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield.
Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentleman. The gentleman
yields back. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from New
Jersey, vice chairman of the committee, Mr. Lance, for 5
minutes for your questions, please.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And good morning to the
panel. I was very pleased to see Alcatel-Lucent, Bell Labs, and
Qualcomm representing the district I serve at the showcase
today, and I thought it was a wonderful showcase. And I commend
the chairman for his hard work in making sure that it occurred.
Bell Labs demonstrated truly remarkable 5G wireless
technology that will enable a variety of Internet of Things
applications such as high-quality videos, smart meters, and
connected cars. One thing is clear. Spectrum is one of the
engines that will drive the Internet of Things revolution.
To the panel in its entirety, what would you suggest that
Congress do to provide the spectrum resources needed to support
next generation networks in the Internet of Things? Mr. Castro?
Mr. Castro. Thank you. As we can see in these demos and
just looking around the market, there are going to be a growing
number of devices, a huge number of devices everywhere. So I
think just in general, we are looking for commercial spectrum
to be available, both licensed and unlicensed, and that is
something that I think we are just going to have--Congress will
have to continue to monitor and promote.
Mr. Lance. Thank you.
Mr. Van Harlingen. I agree. I think that there are
requirements for both licensed and unlicensed spectrum for a
variety of different applications. I would encourage Congress
to collaborate in detail with the industry on what those needs
are and provide that spectrum as available.
Mr. Lance. Thank you.
Ms. Schooler. I agree with the previous comments. I think
we need to leverage both the licensed and unlicensed spectrum,
utilize the technologies that exist today to get the economies
of scale that will enable us to drive and growth and accelerate
deployments. That in lieu of looking at a specific use case and
a specific spectrum band for IoT, I think we should leverage
what we have today.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. Mr. Morehead?
Mr. Morehead. As we look forward, it is important to
understand where we are going with the spectrum. I think that
there are some lessons we can learn from the past. One of the
challenges for those of us that have been doing IoT for the
last decade or so is backward compatibility and sunset of
existing wireless connectivity, 2G, 2 \1/2\G and the sunset
that is happening with the wireless providers there is creating
a big issue for us where we already have Internet of Things
systems in the field and we are having to replace those. It is
a large expense.
So as you think about moving forward what you want to do
with the spectrum, I think it is important to consider backward
compatibility and when and how those wireless systems sunset.
Mr. Lance. OK. Thank you very much to the entire panel. Mr.
Castro, privacy oftentimes means different things to different
people. Do you think the market is capable of addressing
concerns related to privacy in the Internet of Things market
over time?
Mr. Castro. Yes. I think, you know, consistently what we
see is when there is new technologies--and this goes back, you
know, decades, centuries even--when new technologies come out,
there are fears and doubt and uncertainty about the technology.
But what we see is over time many of those issues are resolved
just by the market, that you have this, you know, convergence
between what business wants to do, what consumers want to have,
and what Government regulates. And a lot of these issues are
worked out which is why in general I think we want this light
touch approach. Especially it is important with the Internet of
Things because so much of the innovation is around the data,
and if you can't have companies sharing or reusing this data
for lots of innovative purposes, this kind of long tail of
innovation, you are not going to get this magnitude of benefits
that we want to see.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. Belkin has a close connection to
consumers and access to very personal data. How has Belkin
approached the privacy and security of consumer data in its
product offerings?
Mr. Van Harlingen. So Belkin takes privacy very seriously.
Some of our products, you know, are very close to consumers, as
you mentioned, including cameras and things like that. We work
very closely on security, stay standard and ahead of the curve
with industry standards. We have an application security team
that is very active in the industry working with the Black Hat
Community and other security researchers, and they are very
thorough at reviewing our products, both before launch as well
as after launch.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back 28
seconds.
Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentleman. The gentleman
does yield back. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from
Houston, Mr. Olson, 5 minutes for your questions, please.
Mr. Olson. I thank the Chair, and welcome to our witnesses.
I want to follow up on my colleague's comments from California
about manufacturing. As you all know, in the last decade, loss
of good manufacturing jobs have left America and gone overseas.
Many reasons, excessive taxes, excess regulations, but this
appears to be the opportunity to bring things back to America
with the IoT. So my question to you, Ms. Schooler, as one who
has manufacturing as part of your business, you mentioned
Germany, Brazil, and China. What are they doing that we are not
doing? What can we learn from them and how can we make sure we
have U.S. leadership to quote you in the future on the IoT?
Ms. Schooler. Thank you. So one of the things that I noted
was some of the advancements in the manufacturing capabilities
in the IoT standards and national policy in other countries. If
you look in areas like Germany, you will see some of the most
highly automated, highly advanced connected factories in the
world. I think there is a lot we can learn by going into some
of these other geographies and understanding and levering some
of the advancements that they have put into place up until now.
If you look at places like China, they are highly adopting
and supporting things like smart cities where they are using
the technology, not only for manufacturing capability but also
for societal positive impact by looking at the air quality as
an example. We can look at use cases such as monitoring the
health of an oil pipeline, all of these things, and a lot of it
is around predictive maintenance. I think as we journey as
industry over into these other geographies, understand the
deployment capabilities that are in place. We need to bring
that back into the dialogue that we are having on a regular
basis, both with our other industry partners as well as
Government to continue to progress our policy to support some
of the implementations of these technologies moving forward.
Mr. Olson. I know there are at least two domestic groups
that are looking at interoperability here in America and open
standards. Is that enough? Should there be more? Who else
should be involved in this? Because let us bring those jobs
back.
Ms. Schooler. Standards is an excellent point. We have the
OIC and the IIC which I believe are the two----
Mr. Olson. Yes.
Ms. Schooler [continuing]. Consortiums that you are
inferring. One is the Industrial Internet Consortium and the
other is the Open Internet Consortium. In both of those cases,
you are taking very large members of industry, bringing them
together to really set whether it be an architectural framework
or series of test beds that allow for the understanding of the
deployment. It is one thing to set standards. It is another
thing to architect and build solutions based on those
standards.
So in both of those bodies you have not only the definition
of the architecture but the deployment and the testing of the
implementation of that architecture.
So I think those are a good start. I think if you look from
a connectivity perspective, you have efforts in 3GPP around 5G
that are looking at IoT-specific use cases. We need to continue
to put wood behind the arrow on the connectivity solutions as
well. So I think we have a good start. I think as we continue
through the commercial deployment phase, it remains to be seen
as if it is enough or if we need to extend those standards'
efforts further as we learn more through our initial
commercialization efforts.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. Mr. Castro, any comments, sir, on the
issue of manufacturing, bringing it back to America? And Mr.
Van Harlingen? Anybody before I get my time run out here?
Mr. Castro. I think you are absolutely right. When we look
at, you know, the opportunity here, the United States leads in
this technology area, and we want to, you know, regain these
manufacturing jobs. The way to do it is by investing and having
the most innovative factories. And when we look--you know, the
examples that I have in my testimony I submitted for the
record, you know, we see U.S. companies leading in this space
on the Intel, Harley Davidson, Raytheon, you know, these
companies that are able to track to the turn of the screw what
is going on in the factory and use that data to operate more
efficiently than anyone else. That is our competitive
advantage. We have to make sure we are investing in that
opportunity. We have to make sure that our schools that are
leading the development of this have the funding to do that,
and that is one opportunity that Congress might be able to help
support further.
Mr. Olson. Mr. Harlingen?
Mr. Van Harlingen. As a consumer electronics company, most
of our focus is on consumer products. A lot of our
manufacturing is done off shore, but we are constantly
evaluating opportunities to bring manufacturing back on shore.
There have been a couple of instances in some of our business
areas where we have done so, and we are enthusiastic about
doing so. We look forward to IoT technologies brought by other
companies into the manufacturing sector to make that more
possible and more practical for companies like ourselves.
Mr. Olson. Well, come back to Texas. Mr. Morehead, your
final thoughts, sir?
Mr. Morehead. I am not as involved in the manufacturing
side, but most of our vendors unfortunately do use off-shore
partners. Where I see the opportunity, though, here is the fact
that we are talking about 25 billion devices being implemented
in the United States or some portion of that. You can't
outsource the installation, activation, servicing, and
redeployment of those devices here in the United States. So
potentially retraining that workforce to get them intelligent
and smart on how to maintain and install the devices could be
another way to engage the workforce in the United States as
opposed to just being dependent on the manufacturing.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. Yield back. Out of time.
Mr. Burgess. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman yields back. The Chair recognizes the gentleman Mr.
Mullin from Oklahoma for questions, 5 minutes, please.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and first off, I would
like to thank the CMT staff for organizing the showcase earlier
this morning and of course, all the participants. I was kind of
blown away.
One technology that was out there is brought to you by Al
Sutherland from my State who shared the amazing technology that
has already proven extremely useful to people like myself in
the farming and ranching business. Mr. Sutherland has a product
called the Mesonet where basically--and I hope I said that
right--but basically it has a monitoring station in all 77
counties throughout the State. One of them is just located a
couple miles from our place. It gives us real up-to-date
information. He was demonstrating the app on the phone. I had
that app downloaded real shortly, considering that this time of
the year we begin to start burning off fields and then we enter
hay season. It is very useful. In fact, I was very upset that I
didn't already have it on my phone. It would have helped a few
times laying that hay down. You can predict weather only so
well. Well, it gives us some great technology.
So it shows itself very useful out there. But there is been
some fear around technology. There is this group of people out
there that says, you know, it is going to eliminate jobs. And
so for our panel, whoever wants to answer this, how do we
combat that fear? You know, people automatically fear things
that they don't understand. We see that all the time. But there
is an argument being said that, look. If we go so far and we
start continuing getting smart machines, our unemployment is
going to rise. Go ahead, ma'am.
Ms. Schooler. Yes, I think we need to continue to
communicate the positive impacts that we see by doing things
like the smart manufacturing use case that we talked about
earlier. As I noted Intel implemented a smart capability within
our own factory, and it provided a $9 million savings in just
one factory. And what was that savings based on? Equipment
utilization rates, predictive and preventative maintenance, and
for every time you institutionalize one of those learnings, you
bring down product cost. You bring down product costs, you get
more competitive on a world-wide basis, and you have the
opportunity to bring jobs back to the United States.
In those cases, I think we need to get much more aggressive
in sharing those stories and sharing those learnings to balance
out some of the fear and uncertainty that are put into the
press around the other use cases where the news is very
negative around job destruction.
Mr. Mullin. All right.
Ms. Schooler. I noted the data point earlier that in the
January Accenture survey, 87 percent of the CEOs believe it is
going to create new jobs. Mr. Morehead noted that, even in some
cases if it is a consumer device and it is being manufactured
off shore, these still need installed. There are still
services. There are still new information-type positions that
are going to be created. It may not be in all cases the types
of jobs that we are used to today, but it will result in job
creation moving forward. I am very passionate about that.
Mr. Mullin. So how do we educate the people? Do we start
putting these in trade schools? Do we start in high school? How
do we implement it? And that is for anybody on the panel that
wants to try answering this.
Mr. Castro. I will jump in. I mean so, you know, there is
myth that robots or automation kill jobs. I think part of that
is an education problem that, you know, better economics
lessons will teach people that, you know, if you look at the
history--you know, I mean, if we want full employment, yes, we
can get rid of John Deere and all the tractors on farms and,
you know, problem solved. That is not what we want to do. We
want to lower prices for consumers. We want more efficiency.
And most of the Internet things examples that we are talking
about, they are addressing these issues. They are addressing,
you know, productivity on farms. You look at safety issues, you
know, automation with grain bins, you know, making workers
safer. That is not eliminating jobs. That is actually improving
quality of life.
So I think once people start to see how this actually helps
them, they are going to realize it is not technology to be
feared but that technology improves their life.
Mr. Mullin. Anybody else?
Mr. Van Harlingen. So agreed. You know, this technology
promises, like any new technology, it is going to bring change.
Hopefully it will bring manufacturing opportunities back to the
United States, and that will create jobs. But it is also going
to create different types of jobs. As we mentioned in the
service industry and things like that, I think it is going to
be important to invest in education to prepare people for those
new types of roles.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you. I appreciate your time and once
again appreciate the CMT putting this hearing together. Thank
you. I will yield back.
Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentleman. The gentleman
yields back. The Chair recognizes Mr. Harper from Mississippi 5
minutes for questions, please.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to each of
you for being here today and really exciting to see the stuff
on display this morning at the showcase, and I was obviously
very happy to see Camgian Microsystems there which had a
display on their new product, Egburt, so Gary Butler who
started that. It is pretty remarkable what it does and can be
used for a broad range of remote monitoring including the
infrastructure help for say bridges and dams, and the future
looks great for our country and to make sure that we have the
innovation that we need and how we handle that, how we do it
from Congress. So thank you for adding your insight to that.
Mr. Castro, I know we discussed the governance aspect of
this already, but within that Internet of Things, would there
be a difference on that governance based upon the specific
product or machines in that variance there? How would you
comment on that?
Mr. Castro. Absolutely. I think, you know, the traditional
way that Congress has looked at a lot of data issues is
industry specific. I think that is a very useful framework. And
it, you know, differentiates us from Europe which has these
broad-based privacy rules. And I think that is one of the
reasons we were so much more successful I this space.
But going forward, we should continue to do that. We should
look. Are there areas where people have particular
sensitivities? Maybe it is in education. Maybe it is in
healthcare. We have different rules there, but we allow that
same flexibility of sharing data throughout all of those
sectors.
Mr. Harper. And so should that governance even different
within itself be different than other industries, let us say?
Give me a little bit more meat on the bones for that.
Mr. Castro. Yes. So you know, it really depends I think on
what the consumer harm is that we are trying to protect
against. So for example, you know, a really good example that
we have historically is discrimination against pregnant women
when they go to apply for a job. You know, that is something
that we don't want to have happen. So we restrict that use. It
doesn't matter how you found that information out. It doesn't
matter if it is accurate or not. It doesn't matter if you
guessed it from, you know, using some kind of in-home smart
system or you, you know, just saw someone walking down the
street. The point is we regulate the use. And that is what we
want to do. We want to look very clearly at what it is we don't
want to have happen and make that illegal. And that provides
consumers with confidence no matter where their data goes, or
if there is a data breach, they are still safe.
Mr. Harper. Well, what we want to make sure of from our end
is we don't issue some regulation or enable some regulation
that stifles innovation within the creative industry. And so
that sometimes is a tough balancing act. But it seems to allow
for more innovation if we get out of the way sometimes and
don't create that roadblock at the beginning.
Ms. Schooler, if I could ask you, do you see an overlap
between consumer uses and enterprise or industry use of the
Internet of Things?
Ms. Schooler. I will respond to that in two factions.
Mr. Harper. OK.
Ms. Schooler. I think from a privacy concern the use cases
are very different. As Mr. Castro noted, I think the consumer
privacy issues are going to need to have a specific type of set
of considerations around how you share information, what
personal information you share, versus in an enterprise
implementation, you are really collecting, analyzing data
within the confines of your own enterprise yourself. So I think
those use cases will be very different.
The area that I do think that we can leverage learnings is
in security. I think if we look at security as a foundational
element built in from the onset of implementation, there is a
couple different vectors that we have to consider. One, you
need to secure the device, the network, and the cloud because
all are critical on-ramps into the Internet of Things. And if
you only secure one of those assets and not the entire
pipeline, if you will, I think that is an insufficient way to
look at the architecture from a device to a cloud perspective.
So that is one.
Number two, I think we not only need to build in
intellectual property into our silicon architectures and we are
doing much of that at Intel, we also need to also build upon
that software that monitors and manages those security
concerns. The unique position that we are in at Intel is that
we have both assets. So we are looking at how do we not only
secure the device to the network to the cloud, how do we do it
in silicon and how do we do it in software, such that we can
create the most robust, secure, IoT implementation possible
across consumer, industrial, and commercial implementations.
Mr. Harper. Thanks to each of you, and I yield back the
balance of my time.
Mr. Burgess. The gentleman yields back. The Chair thanks
the gentleman from Mississippi. Seeing no other members wishing
to ask questions, I do want to thank the witnesses and the
members for participating in today's hearing. Before we
conclude, I would like to include the following document to be
submitted for the record by unanimous consent: A letter on
behalf of the Consumer Electronics Association.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Burgess. Pursuant to committee rules, I remind members
they have 10 business days to submit additional questions for
the record. I ask that the witnesses submit their response
within 10 business days upon receipt of those written
questions. I also want to take just a moment and thank the
subcommittee staff for their hard work on the showcase this
morning. I thought it was very informative and instructive, and
without objection, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:28 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
