- PROTECTING THE INTERNET AND CONSUMERS THROUGH CONGRESSIONAL ACTION

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PROTECTING THE INTERNET AND CONSUMERS THROUGH CONGRESSIONAL ACTION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JANUARY 21, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-1

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
94-494                      WASHINGTON : 2016

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Missouri               JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                     Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

Subcommittee on Communications and Technology

GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                ANNA G. ESHOO, California
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BILL JOHNSON, Missouri               JERRY McNERNEY, California
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
CHRIS COLLINS, New York                  officio)
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Anna G. Eshoo, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     4
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     9
Hon. Steve Scalise, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Louisiana, opening statement................................   130

Witnesses

Michael Powell, President and CEO, National Cable &
Telecommunications Association.................................    11
Prepared statement...........................................    14
Chad Dickerson, CEO, Etsy........................................    22
Prepared statement...........................................    24
Paul Misener, Vice President of Global Public Policy, Amazon.com.    27
Prepared statement...........................................    30
Jessica Gonzalez, Executive Vice President and General Counsel,
National Hispanic Media Coalition..............................    38
Prepared statement...........................................    40
Nicol Turner-Lee, Vice President and Chief Research and Policy
Officer, Minority Media and Telecommunications Council.........    63
Prepared statement \1\.......................................    66
Meredith Attwell Baker, President and CEO, CTIA--The Wireless
Association....................................................    80
Prepared statement \2\.......................................    82
Answers to submitted questions...............................   164

Submitted Material

Statement of Mayors of San Francisco, CA and New York, NY,
submitted by Ms. Eshoo.........................................   131
Statement of the National Association of Realtors, submitted by
Ms. Eshoo......................................................   133
Statements on racial justice from various organizations, \3\
submitted by Ms. Eshoo.........................................    94
Article entitled, ``Comcast, Charter and Time Warner Cable all
say Obama's net neutrality plan shouldn't worry investors,''
December 16, 2014, the Washington Post, submitted by Mr. Doyle.   135
Letter of January 15, 2015, from Sprint to the Federal
Communications Commission, submitted by Mr. Doyle..............   138
Article entitled, ``Verizon: Actually, strong net neutrality
rules won't affect our network investment,'' December 10, 2014,
the Washington Post, submitted by Mr. Doyle....................   140
Letter of November 14, 2014, from wireless companies to the
Federal Communications Commission, submitted by Mr. Walden.....   142
Verizon Policy Blog post entitled ``The Relationship Between
Investment and Deregulation,'' December 11, 2014, submitted by
Mr. Walden.....................................................   144
Letters and op-eds on net neutrality, submitted by Mr. Walden....   146
Statement of the Internet Association, submitted by Mr. Loebsack.   162

----------
\1\ The attachments to Ms. Turner-Lee's testimony are available
at http://docs.house.gov/meetings/if/if16/20150121/102832/hhrg-
114-if16-wstate-turner-leen-20150121-u2.pdf.
\2\ The attachments to Ms. Baker's testimony are available at
http://docs.house.gov/meetings/if/if16/20150121/102832/hhrg-
114-if16-wstate-bakerm-20150121-u1.pdf.
\3\ The information is available at http://docs.house.gov/
meetings/if/if16/20150121/102832/hhrg-114-if16-20150121-
sd009.pdf.

PROTECTING THE INTERNET AND
CONSUMERS THROUGH CONGRESSIONAL ACTION

----------

WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 21, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m., in
room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Greg Walden
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Walden, Latta, Barton, Shimkus,
Blackburn, Lance, Guthrie, Olson, Pompeo, Kinszinger,
Bilirakis, Johnson, Long, Ellmers, Collins, Cramer, Upton (ex
oficio), Eshoo, Doyle, Welch, Yarmuth, Clarke, Loebsack, Rush,
DeGette, Butterfield, Matsui, McNerney, Lujan, and Pallone (ex
officio).
Staff Present: Gary Andres, Staff Director; Ray Baum,
Senior Policy Advisor/Director of Coalitions; Sean Bonyun,
Communications Director; Leighton Brown, Press Assistant;
Rebecca Card, Staff Assistant; Karen Christian, General
Counsel; Andy Duberstein, Deputy Press Secretary; Gene Fullano,
Detailee, Telecom; Kelsey Guyselmann, Counsel, Telecom; Grace
Koh, Counsel, Telecom; Tim Pataki, Professional Staff Member;
David Redl, Counsel, Telecom; Charlotte Savercool, Legislative
Clerk; Macey Sevcik, Press Assistant; David Goldman, Minority
Chief Counsel for Communications and Technology Subcommittee;
Margaret McCarthy, Minority Professional Staff Member; and Ryan
Skukowski, Minority Legislative Assistant.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. I will call to order the subcommittee on
Communications and Technology.
Good morning and welcome to our subcommittee's first
hearing for the 114th Congress. I can think of no issue within
our jurisdiction that is more important to consider at this
time than the future of the Internet and our responsibility as
legislators to set Internet policy for the country. That is why
we put forward draft legislation to provide consumers the
protections they deserve while not choking off investment and
innovation.
We have shared this draft with my colleagues on both sides
of the aisle. We have made it available publicly and we have
invited our witnesses today to give us their views on this
draft proposal, and I thank all of our witnesses for their
participation.
We have a very important choice to make between letting
three very smart and capable, but unelected people at the FCC,
a majority of the commission, use a statute written for another
era to cobble together a regulatory scheme and undoubtedly will
end up in court for years in litigation, providing no
protections but much uncertainty. Or, we can do our job and
craft a new law for this century through the open and
transparent legislative process that we are beginning today.
We have come together before in this subcommittee and full
committee to craft communications legislation that, frankly, is
now pretty good law, and we must do it again. It is the only
way to bring clarity and certainty to Internet governance.
Now, a little less than 4 years ago the FCC was in court
defending its first attempt to regulate the network management
practices of an ISP. Since then, the commissionhas gone to
court twice in defense of net neutrality and twice the courts
have rejected the FCC's rules. While the court seems to have
given FCC lawyers a third time is the charm roadmap for how to
craft rules under the current act, the commission is preparing
to invoke net neutrality's nuclear option: Reclassification
under the set of aging and inept rules developed for 19th
century railroads and then adapted for the age of the monopoly,
telephone.
We don't have to settle for that. We have a duty to those
who use the Internet, those who manage the Internet, and those
who build the Internet to provide legal certainty, consumer
protection, and clarity for investment. What we are offering
today is a solution that will bring to an end the loop of
litigation and legal gymnastics that has flowed from FCC
attempts to shoehorn the policy it wants to fit the authority
that it has.
Our discussion draft is largely based on the 2010 Open
Internet Order, adopted by former FCC chairman Julius
Genachowski, and it draws from the legislative proposal put
forward by former Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Henry
Waxman.
Now, some pundits have raised concerns that the draft bill
curtails the newfound authority that the courts have read into
Section 706 of the Telecommunications Act. 706 was added in
1996, and it instructs the FCC to promote the deployment of
broadband networks. Until recently, it was understood that
Section 706 meant that the FCC should use its existing
authority to promote broadband deployment, and it worked.
However, last year the courts for the first time
interpreted Section 706 to permit the FCC to take nearly any,
and I underscore any, action to promote broadband so long as it
is not inconsistent with the rest of the act. Did you catch
that? It gives them nearly any authority at the FCC. This is a
broad expansion of what was intended under 706.
Now, while some take comfort that it is a limited majority
at the FCC will do what they want, I just pose the question:
What happens when an FCC not to their liking grabs the
regulatory throttle?
Let me put a finer point on this. That means that Amazon,
Etsy, and every other Internet-based company should be prepared
to meet its new regulator. If you would like an idea of what
you are in for, just look no further than your fellow
witnesses, Mr. Powell and Ms. Baker, former regulators who
currently represent the regulated. It is time to update this
law. It is time for a fresh approach from we who are elected to
write the law and to set the Nation's communications policy.
My priority is to protect consumers and the Internet we all
rely upon. My priority is to encourage its expansion to the
hills and valleys of our vast Nation that lack connectivity and
to various segments of our population that are underserved and
are too often ignored. Together we have taken on complicated
communications challenges and produced good legislative
solutions. We have stood up to powerful special interests and
stood with the American people, and we must do so again.
The draft legislative proposal represents our good-faith
effort to end the net neutrality debate before it goes to court
again. Our committee will not ignore our responsibility. As
some of my colleagues know, we have been working on the
principles and draft legislation literally for months. We have
listened to supporters, opponents, and neutral parties too. We
will take the advice and counsel from our witnesses today into
full consideration, and then we won't let the old Washington
gridlock stand in the way of us doing our job, for the voters
demand it and they deserve it.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden

Welcome to our subcommittee's first hearing of the 114th
Congress. I can think of no issue within our jurisdiction that
is more important to consider at this time than the future of
the Internet and our responsibility as legislators to set
Internet policy for the country. That's why we've put forward
draft legislation to provide consumers the protections they
deserve while not choking off investment and innovation. We
have shared this draft with my colleagues on both sides of the
aisle, we've made it available publicly, and we have invited
our witnesses today to give us their views on this draft
proposal.
We have a very important choice to make between letting
three very smart and capable, but unelected people at the FCC
use a statute written for another era to cobble together a
regulatory scheme that undoubtedly will end up in years of
costly litigation, providing no protections but much
uncertainty, or we can do our job and craft a new law for this
century through the open and transparent legislative process
that we are beginning today.
We have come together before in this committee to craft
communications legislation that is now good law, and we must do
so again. It is the only way to bring clarity and certainty to
Internet governance.
A little less than four years ago, the FCC was in court
defending its first attempt to regulate the network management
practices of an ISP. Since then, the commission has gone to
court twice in defense of net neutrality. And twice, the courts
have rejected the FCC's rules. While the court seems to have
given FCC lawyers a ``third time's the charm'' roadmap for how
to craft rules under the current act, the commission is
preparing to invoke net neutrality's ``nuclear option''--
reclassification under the set of aging and inapt rules
developed for 19th century railroads and adapted for the age of
the monopoly telephone. We don't have to settle for that.
We have a duty to those who use the Internet, those who
manage the Internet and those who build the Internet to provide
legal certainty, consumer protection and clarity for
investment. What we are offering today is a solution that will
bring to an end the loop of litigation and legal gymnastics
that has flowed from FCC attempts to shoehorn the policy it
wants to fit the authority that it has.
Our discussion draft is largely based on the 2010 Open
Internet Order, adopted by former FCC Chairman Julius
Genachowski and draws from the legislative proposal put forward
by former Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Henry Waxman.
Some pundits have raised concerns that this draft bill
curtails the new-found authority that the courts have read into
Section 706 of the Telecommunications Act. Section 706 was
added in 1996 and instructs the FCC to promote the deployment
of broadband networks. Until recently, it was understood that
Section 706 meant that the FCC should use its existing
authority to promote broadband deployment. And it worked.
However, last year the courts for the first time interpreted
Section 706 to permit the FCC to take nearly any action to
promote broadband, so long as it isn't inconsistent with the
rest of the Act. Did you catch that? Nearly any action. While
some take comfort that a slim majority of this FCC will do as
they want, what happens when an FCC not of their liking grabs
the regulatory throttle? Let me put a finer point on this: that
means that Amazon, Etsy, and every other Internet-based company
should be prepared to meet its new regulator. If you'd like an
idea of what you're in for, look no further than your fellow
witnesses Mr. Powell and Ms. Baker, former regulators who
currently represent the regulated.
It's time to update this law. It's time for a fresh
approach from we who are elected to write the law and set the
nation's policy. My priority is to protect consumers and the
Internet we all rely on. My priority is to encourage its
expansion to the hills and valleys of our vast nation that lack
connectivity, and to various segments of our population that
are underserved and too often ignored.
Together, we have taken on complicated communications
challenges and produced good legislative solutions. We've stood
up to powerful special interests and stood with the American
people. We must do so again.
This draft legislative proposal represents our good faith
effort to end the net neutrality debate before it goes to court
again. Our committee will not ignore our responsibility. As
some of my colleagues know, we've been working on the
principles and draft legislation for months. We have listened
to supporters, opponents and neutral parties, too. We will take
the advice and counsel of our witnesses today into full
consideration. And then we won't let the old Washington
gridlock stand in the way of us doing the job our voters demand
and deserve.

Mr. Walden. And with that I recognize the gentlelady from
California, the ranking member of the subcommittee, Ms. Eshoo,
for her opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ANNA G. ESHOO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today's hearing renews a critical discussion in the new
Congress about the Internet. Should it be truly open and equal?
Should consumers, competition, and choice drive our
deliberations? Should privacy and the disabled be protected?
Should every region, city, town, and reservation, be they rural
or urban, have equal access to broadband speeds capable of
leveraging innovative online content and services?
I have reviewed the majority's proposal very carefully, and
I commend you for finally acknowledging that we do in fact have
problems with online blocking, throttling and paid
prioritization. We agree that bright-line rules should apply to
both fixed and mobile broadband services.
What is abundantly clear in the majority's proposal is to
purposely tie the hands of the FCC by prohibiting them from
reclassifying broadband under Title II. The proposal creates a
huge loophole called specialized services. On the one hand, the
proposal says it will prohibit fast lanes, but under
specialized services, a loosely defined term, broadband
providers can give themselves prioritized service and the FCC
will have no power to define this.
If our goal is to have a system that guarantees equal
access of an open Internet to everyone, and it should, who is
going to carry out and oversee this?
This proposal carries an enormous bias against enforcement,
which in turn doesn't give consumers a leg to stand on.
The proposal does harm to the efforts made to bring
broadband to rural areas. It could unintentionally harm the 911
system, limit the FCC's authority to promote access by the
disabled to communication services, and it could restrict
access by competitors to utility poles.
The proposal also attempts to address specific forms of
discrimination, but who today knows with any certainty what
tomorrow's forms of discrimination will be. The proposal takes
away the authority of the FCC to address them. I don't think
your constituents or mine are clamoring for a bill of rights
for various companies. They want the guarantee of an open
accessible Internet. Four million people spoke out to the FCC,
and I think our goal should match theirs. We should protect
ordinary consumers, promote innovation, create real
competition, and advance start-ups, and when we do, our
constituents should be 100 percent confident that these things
are going to be carried out, that there is going to be a cop on
the beat.
An open Internet is not only critical to America's future,
it is essential for every American to learn, to educate, to
conduct commerce, to build businesses and create jobs, to
innovate, to expand our economy, and to promote democracy. It
will strengthen the middle class and it will bring more into
it.
What paths we take will determine much of our future. In an
attempt to eliminate bad practices, we should not be tempted to
establish rules that will create new bad practices. I think
that this would be a march to folly.
Mr. Walden. The gentlelady yield back the balance of her
time?
Ms. Eshoo. The balance of my time I yield to Mr. Doyle. I
am sorry.
Mr. Walden. Mr. Doyle is recognized.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman for holding this
hearing.
This draft legislation represents a step forward by my
colleagues. That being said, the bill still falls short. It
permanently revokes and severely weakens the Commission's
ability to address serious issues in promoting broadband
competition, encouraging broadband deployment, and protecting
consumers and their privacy.
Mr. Chairman, technology policy needs to be flexible, not
proscriptive. It needs to be adaptive and able to change to
meet our future needs.
The principles included in the draft bill are very similar
to what the FCC proposed in its 2010 rules, but since then we
have seen battles between Netflix and ISPs over
interconnection, renewed efforts by cities to build out their
own broadband infrastructure and create jobs, and a continuing
need for strong consumer protection.
The last 5 years have been a lifetime in the technology
world, and we need rules that can adapt to the pace of
innovation and the new challenges that it brings.
I yield back.
Mr. Walden. Gentleman yields back the balance of the time.
And we will now go to the chairman of the full committee,
the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Upton.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, this committee is known for working together to
tackle the tough issues; a tradition of getting the job done
where each side gives a little bit in order to make things
better for the American public.
But one issue that has divided us for too long is how best
to ensure an open Internet rooted in bedrock principles of
freedom and access for consumers and innovators alike.
While I certainly believe that free markets address these
issues, the FCC seems to believe regulatory action is
necessary, and one of the only tools at its disposal is to
apply rules from the Roosevelt era to shape the Internet of the
21st Century.
Given the choice between enacting prudent legislation or
leaving the FCC to tackle this with tools unfit for the task,
we choose to take action.
Last week Chairman Walden, Thune and I put forward draft
legislation that would codify FCC's authority to enforce the
bright-line rules of the Internet road. Legislation protects
consumers and innovators, ensuring America remains the
preeminent global leader of the Internet era. Our proposal
prohibits Internet service providers from blocking content,
selectively changing the quality of traffic based on where it
came from or what it is or prioritizing certain traffic based
on payment.
It requires providers to be open and transparent with
consumers, allowing them to make the most informed choice about
their service.
We have also included safeguards to close potential
loopholes and prevent mischief. This should all sound very
familiar to my Democratic colleagues because they are the rules
many of you and the President have been calling for for some
time.
The FCC has spent years trying to craft rules that achieve
those same goals. In fact, much of this bill's language is
taken from past FCC attempts, but limits on the commission's
authority have resulted in years, many years, of litigation and
certainly uncertainty.
Consumers and industry deserve better. Consumers deserve
certainty to know that they are protected by clear rules.
Providers need certainty so that they can move forward with
their business models, because without that certainty,
innovation and investment suffer and consumers lose.
Our thoughtful solution provides a path forward that
doesn't involve the endless threat of litigation or the baggage
of laws created for a monopoly era telephone service. Only
Congress can give the commission the tools that it needs to
protect consumers and innovation in the Internet era and
beyond.
This draft legislation provides a sustainable, responsible
path to appropriately and effectively address the concerns from
the left and the right. It puts to bed one of the most
contentious issues that we face and allows us to move forward
in our goal of modernizing the Nation's communication laws.
Our Comm Act update process can bring bipartisan change,
direct communication laws, but we first have to come together
and resolve this near-decade-long debate over the future of the
Internet.
Yield the balance of my time to Mr. Barton.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

This committee is known for working together to tackle the
tough issues. A tradition of getting the job done, where each
side gives a little in order to make things better for the
American public. But one issue that has divided us for too long
is how best to ensure an open Internet rooted in bedrock
principles of freedom and access for consumers and innovators
alike.
While I believe free markets address these issues, the FCC
seems to believe regulatory action is necessary, and one of the
only tools at its disposal is to apply rules from the Roosevelt
era to shape the Internet of the 21st century. Given the choice
between enacting prudent legislation or leaving the FCC to
tackle this with tools unfit for the task, we choose to take
action.
Last week, Chairmen Walden, Thune, and I put forward draft
legislation that would codify FCC authority to enforce the
bright-line rules of the Internet road. This legislation
protects consumers and innovators, ensuring America remains the
preeminent global leader of the Internet era. Our proposal
prohibits Internet service providers from blocking content,
selectively changing the quality of traffic based on where it
came from or what it is, or prioritizing certain traffic based
on payment. It requires providers to be open and transparent
with consumers, allowing them to make the most informed choice
about their service. We've also included safeguards to close
potential loopholes and prevent mischief. This should all sound
very familiar to my Democratic colleagues: these are the rules
many of you and the president have been calling for.
The FCC has spent years trying to craft rules that achieve
these same goals. In fact, much of this bill's language is
taken from past FCC attempts. But limits on the commission's
authority have resulted in years of litigation and uncertainty.
Consumers and industry deserve better. Consumers deserve
certainty to know that they are protected by clear rules.
Providers need certainty so they can move forward with their
business models. Without this certainty, innovation and
investment suffer, and consumers lose.
Our thoughtful solution provides a path forward that
doesn't involve the endless threat of litigation or the baggage
of laws created for monopoly-era telephone service. Only
Congress can give the commission the tools it needs to protect
consumers and innovation in the Internet era and beyond.
The draft legislation provides a sustainable, responsible
path to appropriately and effectively address the concerns from
left and right. It puts to bed one of the more contentious
issues we face and allows us to move forward in our goal of
modernizing the nation's communications laws. Our CommActUpdate
process can bring about bipartisan change to our communications
laws, but we must first come together and resolve this near
decade-long debate over the future of the Internet.
I thank our witnesses for their testimony today and look
forward to advancing this legislation.

Mr. Upton. Yield the balance of my time to Mr. Barton.
Mr. Barton. Thank you. I thank the chairman.
I was heartened by some of the comments that Mr. Doyle made
in his remarks.
Last night after the President's State of the Union, I came
back to my office and did a little video that we put on my
FaceBook page, we put on YouTube. I believe we put it on
Twitter. I have a 9-year-old son that has an iPad, an iPod, an
Xbox, a PlayStation 4, his own cell phone, knows how to use the
Internet better than I do. He is spoiled. Well, that is his
mother. That is his mother. She has bought him all these
things, actually.
No. That is not true, but, anyway, my point is, to
paraphrase President Reagan, in his first campaign in 1980, he
asked the American people: Are you better off today than you
were 4 years ago? When you look at the Internet, I think you
could ask the consumers: Are you better off today than you were
4 years ago? And the answer would be: Yes. They are. I see
advertisements every day. There is one playing down in Texas
right now. Give me your bill, we will cut it in half. You know?
I am not going to name who is offering that, but you all would
know it if I said it.
The Internet is not a monopoly like the telephone companies
were or the utilities were in the 1930s. It is one of the most
vibrant markets in the world. The chairman's draft is an
attempt to keep it that vibrant marketplace. Some of the people
that are at this table helped develop the policies that make
that possible. We should support the chairman, work with the
minority and try to come up with a bill that keeps it a vibrant
market.
And I don't have any time, but I am supposed to yield to
Mr. Latta. So if the chairman would give him at least a minute,
I would ask unanimous consent that Mr. Latta has a minute.
Mr. Walden. Is there any objection? If not, we will
recognize Mr. Latta for a minute out of courtesy.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, very much.
And thank you, Mr. Barton, and thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate that, and thanks to our witnesses for being here
today.
The FCC has indicated it intends to soon move forward with
an order to reclassify broadband Internet services under Title
II of the Communications Act. I firmly believe that this course
of action will bring legal uncertainty, slow innovation and
investment, and ultimately negatively affect the American
consumers.
Even those who support reclassification recognize these
challenges, but would attempt to circumvent these limits by
forbearing sections of the law, a plan that would only seem to
magnify legal uncertainty and further postpone innovation.
It is evident that upending the longstanding precedent of a
light-touch regulatory framework that governs the Internet
would add unnecessary regulation on broadband providers and
would restrict their ability to continue investing in faster
networks that consumers demand. That is why I support the
discussion draft put forward by the chairman and Chairman Thune
in the Senate.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the unanimous
consent.
Mr. Walden. And the gentleman returns the balance of his
time.
Before I proceed to Mr. Pallone, who I believe this is your
first hearing in Energy and Commerce as the ranking member of
the full committee. So we welcome you for that.
We will add, with unanimous consent, an extra minute to
your side of the aisle, and I have been told too that
apparently during the open statements the mics literally on
this side were--they could hear it streaming on the Internet.
Apparently not on your side. So I think we have got that
corrected now. It was an attempt to throttle Mr. Doyle. It was
not supposed to catch Anna along the way, but, anyway, I think
we are operating on that.
Mr. Doyle. I think this has something to do with the
deflated footballs, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. That Ohio State--no. I am not going there. It
has been painful enough. I appreciate the green room.
All right. With that, we will get serious again, and I
recognize the gentleman from New Jersey for 6 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me start by stressing the importance of network
neutrality. It is the surprisingly simple concept that
consumers, not big corporate interests, should control what
they access when they go online, and it represents the idea
that small businesses should be able to compete on a level
playing field.
Internet access has become a critical part of all of our
lives. It is how we apply for a job. It is how we help our kids
with our homework. It is how we grow our businesses. And that
is why 4 million Americans reached out to the FCC demanding
strong net neutrality protections, and those 4 million people
expect that we here in Washington will pay attention.
So I am heartened that my Republican colleagues now agree
that we all benefit from clear rules of the road enforced by
the FCC, and I welcome their interest in bipartisan legislation
so long as it is truly bipartisan from the start.
Mr. Chairman, I don't want to undermine the FCC's
authority, as I think you suggested, and I certainly don't
think that that will serve to protect consumers. The FCC must
continue to serve an important role in the broadband age. It
must remain the vigilant cop on the beat standing ready to act,
whether it is to protect consumer privacy, to encourage
accessibility for American's with disabilities, or to promote
broadband deployment to rural areas. And just as important, it
must maintain the flexibility to keep up with new technology.
So while we in Congress continue our work, I do expect the
FCC to continue its work. These are complicated issues with
complex answers. It has taken the FCC nearly 13 months to craft
new rules that respond to the needs of the American public, and
Congress cannot be expected to work it all out in 13 days.
So I urge the FCC to continue to move forward as we begin
this legislative effort. It has been over a year since the
court wiped out the core net neutrality rules. So it has been
over a year since consumers and innovators last had strong
network neutrality protections, and that is simply too long.
The time for the FCC to act is certainly now.
I look forward to working with my colleagues and with the
commission to ensure that the Internet remains an open platform
for commerce, innovation, and self-expression for generations
to come.
Now I would like to yield--I know I got an extra minute--so
I would like to yield 2 minutes to Ms. Matsui, and then the
rest of the time, which is almost 2 minutes, to Mr. Rush.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you.
I thank the ranking member for yielding me time, the chair
for holding this hearing, and the witnesses for being here
today.
The American people have spoken clearly on how important
the Internet is to daily lives and our economy, and I have
personally heard from hundreds of my constituents who write,
call, or come up to me to share their thoughts, and I heard the
message loud and clear when I hosted a field hearing in
Sacramento last September on net neutrality.
I must say, it is remarkable how the debate has shifted on
net neutrality. I am really glad that my Republican colleagues
now agree that there are real threats to Internet openness, but
I am concerned about the unintended consequences of the current
draft bill. In particular, it could undermine the FCC's efforts
to transition USF to broadband, putting at risk broadband
deployment and adoption advances in urban and rural areas.
That said, I do believe that there is a role for Congress,
and that is why I introduced a bill with Senator Leahy to
instruct the FCC to write rules that ban pay prioritization or
so-called Internet fast lanes. The bill has two components. It
bans paid prioritization agreements, and it does not take away
from the commission's authority.
By contrast, the Republican bill attempts to ban paid
prioritization agreements. I am very concerned that the overly
broad definition of specialized services in the bill could
serve as a loophole for paid prioritization schemes and create
a two-tiered Internet system.
The Internet is dynamic. We don't know what tomorrow will
bring us. The FCC needs flexibility to tailor rules to adapt to
changes in the marketplace.
As Congress considers legislation, it is important that the
FCC does not slow down or delay its vote.
I look forward to continuing to work with my colleagues in
a truly bipartisan fashion to reinstate strong net neutrality
rules.
And I yield to Congressman Rush.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank the gentlelady for yielding.
I want to thank the ranking member for yielding also.
For two decades now, the beltway battle over how to best
ensure a free and open Internet has been fought and persisted
without a clear victor or a clear verdict. All of this
uncertainty harms America's broadband consumers, chronically
and disproportionately disconnected segments of our society and
our local and State and Federal Governments, and even our
Nation's economy. Certainly it also affects broadband network
and edge providers as well, but make no mistake about it. It is
the consumers who stand to be the biggest losers of all.
Many consumers weighed in with Congress for the strongest
pro-consumer rules possible. These broadband consumers and
users have said that they love and depend greatly on their
broadband services, and that they want for their services to be
provided on a competitive level, competitive rates, and
competitive terms. But they also said to Washington, to us here
in Washington, with passion and with fervor that they do not
trust that their broadband providers will honor those terms due
to selfish and anti-competitive motives.
This, Mr. Chairman, should serve as a powerful reminder to
us that the issues arising out of this controversy are
propelled by bipartisan concerns and are amenable to bipartisan
resolution and compromise. These issues greatly concern all
broadband consumers and citizens in our society regardless of
political affiliation or leaning.
We have all seen and heard, however, that this matter is
too important for this committee and for Congress to stand by
or for it to consider and mark up only a majority Republican
draft. Accordingly, Mr. Chairman, it is my intention to
introduce open Internet legislation in the not-too-distant
future.
I would hope to work with my colleagues on both sides of
the aisle with aspiration that whatever legislation is hammered
out, that it will be clearly surely nothing but bipartisan.
Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Pallone, I yield back.
Mr. Walden. Gentleman yields backs the balance of the time,
and that takes care of our colleagues for opening statements.
We now go to our distinguished panel of witnesses.
And we are going to start out with Michael Powell,
president and CEO, National Cable & Telecommunications
Association and former chairman of the Federal Communications
Commission, and, Mr. Powell, we are delighted to have you back
before our subcommittee, and we look forward to your testimony.
Please go ahead.

STATEMENTS OF MICHAEL POWELL, PRESIDENT AND CEO, NATIONAL CABLE
& TELECOMMUNICATIONS ASSOCIATION; CHAD DICKERSON, CEO, ETSY;
PAUL MISENER, VICE PRESIDENT OF GLOBAL PUBLIC POLICY,
AMAZON.COM; JESSICA GONZALEZ, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT AND
GENERAL COUNSEL, NATIONAL HISPANIC MEDIA COALITION; NICOL
TURNER-LEE, VICE PRESIDENT AND CHIEF RESEARCH AND POLICY
OFFICER, MINORITY MEDIA AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS COUNCIL; AND
MEREDITH ATTWELL BAKER, PRESIDENT AND CEO, CTIA--THE WIRELESS
ASSOCIATION

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL POWELL

Mr. Powell. Particular welcome to the new members of the
committee. Nothing like starting with something easy.
It is a fundamental constitutional principle that Congress
establishes the law and federal agencies implement it. The net
neutrality debate raises critical institutional policy and
practical problems that only Congress can fully address.
The open Internet struggle has been long and tortuous
precisely because Congress has not established a clear
foundation for the FCC to act. The commission has turned itself
in knots for over 10 years trying to adopt a simple set of
Internet regulations. Twice, the courts have rebuked the
commission for exceeding its Congressional tether, even where
it found merit in the rules themselves.
If Congressional authority is the problem, then surely
Congressional action is the solution. In the absence of such
action, the commission is poised to earnestly try again with
another approach, prompting a third round of litigation with an
uncertain outcome.
Congress has the power and the responsibility to end this
roller coaster, which is damaging to everyone other than
lawyers and advocates.
It should further concern this institution that the Title
II approach being pursued is establishing an FCC role and
regulatory framework over the Internet that Congress has yet to
fully consider and consciously adopt itself.
Congress adopted Title II 80 years ago to address the
parameters of telephone regulation. The technologies were
radically different. The prevailing philosophy favored monopoly
rather than competition. Consumers were passive recipients of
service rather than active publishers and creators. The
telephone era did not have giant Internet companies using and
influencing services and network demand and consumer
applications. Networks were specialized for a single purpose,
unlike the convergence of today.
Has Congress, or, for that matter, anyone, fully thought
through whether this antiquated analog framework should govern
our digital future? We have no doubt that Congress soon will
seek to advance legislation to rewrite our telecom laws, but we
stand now at the precipice of having that decision made for
Congress rather than by Congress in the name of net neutrality,
with potentially far-reaching unintended consequences. Five
unelected regulators should not have the final word on these
serious questions. The institution that represents 320 million
Americans should decide them.
By changing the status quo and invoking Title II to govern
Internet affairs, the commission would affect a major and
dramatic shift in national broadband policy, with sweeping
domestic and international consequences. Countries like Russia,
China, and Iran have consistently sought to subject Internet
access to telephone regulation and give the state greater
authority over infrastructure. They will cheer the news the
U.S. abandoned its leadership and moral authority as a bulwark
against government-controlled over the Internet.
The bevy of legal and practical problems with Title II
counsel for Congressional intervention. For one, the strong
desire to ban prioritization is precarious under Title II,
which bans unjust and unreasonable practices. Under decades of
Title II precedent, carriers have been able to charge for
providing service without violating this requirement, and while
the FCC surely will attempt to declare all priority charges
unreasonable, it will face serious headwinds from well-
established precedent. Only statutorily banned prioritization
rules will avoid this risk.
Other unintended problems are also sure to follow. One
agency's actions will narrow the jurisdiction of another. For
example, if the FCC declares broadband is telecom service, the
Federal Trade Commission's authority over such actions will be
diminished.
Another unintended problem is the reclassification can
result in new fees on Internet service, raising broadband bills
for consumers and hurting our national efforts at adoption.
America has an ambitious national broadband goal. There is
a strong national desire to reach more Americans in more
places. It will take nearly $350 billion by the FCC's own
estimate to reach all of Americans with 100 megabits per
second, and now we dream of gigabit speeds. No one can
consciously claim that Title II will advance the flow of
private capital necessary to meet these ambitions.
For some, Title II's sharp edges can be smoothed by
forbearance, cutting away the dated and choking weeds of
onerous regulation and leaving the fruit needed to protect
consumers, but one person's weeds are another person's fruit,
and the continuous and vigorous battle over this, should it be
included--and excluded, is itself a massive regulatory
undertaking fraught with uncertainty and litigation risk.
Uniquely, Congress has the power to eliminate all of this
legal uncertainty, and working together in good faith and
consensus, we believe a cooperative effort will yield positive
results. We support legislation--we support bipartisan
legislation and are open to working with all members of the
committee to reach a satisfactory resolution.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. Thank the gentleman for his testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Powell follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. We are now going to go to Mr. Chad Dickerson,
the CEO of Etsy.
Mr. Dickerson, we are delighted to have you before the
committee. Please make sure your microphoneis on, and we look
forward to your testimony, sir.

STATEMENT OF CHAD DICKERSON

Mr. Dickerson. Great. Thank you.
Thank you, Chairman Walden, Ranking Member Eshoo, and
members of the subcommittee for the opportunity to testify on
this important issue.
As the CEO of a rapidly growing Internet company--
technology company, I am here today because the Internet, along
with the millions of businesses who depend on it, is under
threat.
Etsy is an online marketplace where you can buy handmade
and vintage goods from artists, designers, and collectors
around the world. We have democratized access to
entrepreneurship for over 1.2 million sellers, 88 percent of
whom are women who collectively sold $1.35 billion worth of
goods in 2013. Most are sole proprietors who work from home,
they live in all 50 states, and they depend on Etsy income to
pay their bills and support their families. Eighteen percent of
those sellers support themselves full time on Etsy.
To build and run the global platform that supports these
Internet micro businesses, Etsy has raised more than $91
million in capital, and we employ over 600 people worldwide.
Without the incredible power of the free and open Internet, we
would not be where we are today.
Like many start-ups, we had humble beginnings. We started
out of a Brooklyn apartment; went from idea to launching in
just a few months. No one had to ask permission to launch Etsy
or pay for the privilege of reaching consumers through Etsy at
the same speeds as other companies. We proved ourselves on the
open market, and this is the entrepreneurial environment that
we hope to preserve, like you.
Without clear bright-line rules that preserve a level
playing field online, millions of start-ups will suffer. Etsy
is a low-margin business. We charge just 20 cents to list an
item, and take only 3 \1/2\ percent of every transaction. We
couldn't afford to pay for priority access to consumers, yet we
know that delays of even milliseconds have a direct and long-
term impact on revenue. So this isn't just about high bandwidth
services like video, it is about every company that depends on
the Internet to reach consumers.
Without strong rules to prevent discrimination online, we
would be either forced to raise our fees to have the same
quality of services our competitors or accept the revenue loss
that comes with delayed load times. This would hurt the micro
businesses who depend on our platform the most.
Etsy's users understand what is at stake. That is why
30,000 of them join millions of Internet users to urge Congress
and the FCC to protect the open Internet.
In her comments to the FCC, Tina, an Etsy seller from
Spring Valley, Illinois, captured the sentiments of many micro
businesses when she wrote, ``We rely on all my sales to make
ends meet. Any change in those and it is the difference between
balanced meals for my children and cereal for dinner.''
We applaud Congress for recognizing that strong net
neutrality rules are essential for innovation online. The
discussion draft for legislation addresses many of our
concerns, and we are encouraged to see bipartisan agreement on
many points. In particular, we support the outright ban on paid
prioritization, blocking, and throttling. We agree that
transparency must underpin strong rules, and we are encouraged
to see that the rules would apply to mobile. Given that the
majority of Etsy's traffic now comes from mobile sources, it is
essential that the same rules apply whether you use your phone
or your laptop to access the Internet.
At the same time, we are concerned that the proposal does
not ban all types of discrimination online, leaving loopholes
that could be easily exploited. For example, under this bill,
broadband companies could prioritize their own services over
others. Even more concerning, the legislation would remove the
FCC's authority to address new unanticipated types of
discrimination. I have worked in this industry my whole adult
life, and I know who quickly technologies change. So how can we
be sure that this bill anticipates every possible form of
discrimination?
We also have serious concerns that by revoking the FCC's
authority under Section 706, the bill would undermine the
agency's ability to promote rapid broadband deployment across
the country, particularly in rural areas where the Internet
allows entrepreneurs to reach a global marketplace. For
example, Linda, an Etsy seller from Buchanan, Michigan, said,
``A free Internet is so important to me because as someone who
moved to a rural area from an urban center, I rely on fair and
open access to the Internet to grow my small Web-based
business.''
Finally, while we understand that this legislation is
narrowly focused on the last mile connection, the door to that
last mile is just as important. This bill doesn't prevent
broadband companies from creating choke points at the entrance
to the last mile, nor does it grant the FCC the authority to
regulate this issue, often referred to as interconnection,
leaving a loophole that would allow broadband companies to
circumvent this legislation, despite its good intentions.
Our position today is the same as it has been all along. We
encourage the government to establish clear bright-line rules
that ban paid prioritization, application-specific
discrimination, access fees, and blocking online, and to apply
those rules equally to fixed and mobile broadband, and at the
point of interconnection with last-mile providers.
We believe the FCC has all the authority it needs to
implement such rules, and that Congress has an important role
to play as well, particularly in helping to address the
litigation risks that will inevitably follow FCC action.
We welcome the opportunity to work with you to protect the
open Internet once and for all.
Thank you.
Mr. Walden. Mr. Dickerson, thank you very much for your
testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dickerson follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. We will now go to Paul Misener, who is vice
president of Global Public Policy for Amazon.com, a slightly
larger platform for sales.
Mr. Misener, please go ahead.
It is good to have you back before the subcommittee.

STATEMENT OF PAUL MISENER

Mr. Misener. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. It is good
to be back.
Thank you, Ranking Member Eshoo, for your attention to this
very important issue, for holding this hearing, and for
inviting me back.
Amazon has long supported maintaining the fundamental
openness of the Internet which has been so beneficial to
consumers and for innovation. Now there is widespread
acceptance of the need for government action to ensure that
Internet openness. Now policymakers need only decide how to
ensure that the Internet openness of net neutrality is
maintained and effective.
At Amazon, our consistent business practice is to start
with customers and work backwards. That is, we begin projects
by determining what customers want and how we can innovate for
them. Here, in the context of net neutrality public policy, we
have done the same. We take our position from our customers',
that is consumers', point of view. Consumers want to keep the
fundamental openness of the Internet and the choice it
provides. Consumers will recognize if their net neutrality is
taken from them. If their net neutrality is taken, they won't
care how or, for example, where in the network infrastructure
it is taken.
We believe that the FCC has ample existing statutory
authority to maintain net neutrality, but of course, obviously,
Congress has the power to set new policies for net neutrality,
either entirely through a new statute or through a mix of new
and existing statutory authority.
Amazon remains very grateful for Congress' continuing
attention to net neutrality. The topic certainly is worth your
vigilant oversight, but thank you, Mr. Chairman, especially for
creating and sharing your discussion draft bill, and for
providing me the opportunity to begin discussing it today.
The principles of net neutrality contained in the
discussion draft are excellent. For example, the draft clearly
acknowledges that throttling and paid prioritization must be
banned; that net neutrality protections must apply to wireless
as well as to wire line; and that providers must disclose their
practices.
Of course, for these excellent principles of Internet
openness to be meaningful to consumers, they need to be
effective. In at least three instances, however, the discussion
draft could be interpreted to undermine that effectiveness. So
the bill should be modified accordingly.
First, in subsection (d), while requiring consumer choice,
the bill would explicitly exempt specialized services from that
requirement. This could create a huge loophole if, for example,
specialized services involved the prioritization of some
content in services, just like the proscribed paid
prioritization. Consumer choice is baked into the Internet.
Nothing would protect consumer choice more than protecting the
open Internet from interference by broadband and Internet
access service providers.
Second, in subsection (f), the discussion draft bill would
permit broadband Internet access providers to engage in
reasonable network management, but any claim of reasonable
network management should be viewed suspiciously if in practice
it undermines prohibitions of blocking, throttling,
prioritization, et cetera.
Third, the discussion draft bill is unclear or silent on an
important point of clarification: Which parts of the broadband
Internet access service providers network are covered by the
net neutrality protections.
As indicated earlier, a consumer will not care where in her
service providers network any interference with net neutrality
occurs, only whether it occurs.
In sum, these three areas of the discussion draft bill
should be modified in order to ensure that the Internet
openness of net neutrality is maintained and effective.
In addition, the discussion draft should be modified to
provide adequate legal detail and certainty to consumers and
businesses in the Internet ecosystem. Like all businesses,
Internet companies need confidence in the state of law and
regulation in order to innovate and invest in products and
services on behalf of their customers. Details, including the
factors that would be considered during formal complaint
procedures are essential for businesses and consumers to have
the confidence to make informed choices about investments and
purchases.
We believe that the FCC should be empowered to create
adequate legal certainty and detail through effective
enforcement tools and notice in comment rule making, but the
discussion draft bill in subsection (b) says the FCC may not
expand Internet openness obligations beyond the obligations
established in the bill. If the intention here is to establish
a ceiling for these obligations, that certainly is Congress'
prerogative and a reasonable expectation which we would support
a provision like this if the bill only went so far.
However, with such a ceiling in place, it is not necessary
to rescind the FCC's authority under Title II of the
Communications Act, which, as in subsection (e), which could
leave the agency helpless to address improper behavior as well
within its authority under the ceiling and would leave
consumers and businesses in the Internet ecosystem without
adequate certainty about the FCC's enforcement powers.
Also in part, because subsection (b) could be directing the
FCC to establish formal complaint procedures, this provision
could be interpreted to bar the commission from notice and
comment rulemaking in this area, and if that is the intent, we
oppose it. Directing the FCC not to expand statutorily
established obligations is one thing, but we believe it would
be a mistake to prohibit the commission from providing, through
notice and comment rulemaking, adequate legal detail and
certainty to customers, consumers, and businesses below that
ceiling.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, I look forward to working with
you and your committee and the FCC to ensure that the Internet
openness of net neutrality is maintained and effective, and, of
course, I welcome your questions.
Mr. Walden. Mr. Misener, thank you very much, and we look
forward to working with you as well.
I think we have got ways to address a lot of what you
pointed out and may actually already have, but we will look
forward to working with you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Misener follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. Next we go to Jessica Gonzalez, Executive Vice
President, General Counsel of the National Hispanic Media
Coalition. Ms. Gonzalez, we are delighted to have you here at
our subcommittee as well. We look forward to your testimony.

STATEMENT OF JESSICA GONZALEZ

Ms. Gonzalez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for having me back,
Ranking Member Eshoo, and all the members of the subcommittee.
The open Internet, as we have heard already today, is a
crucial tool for all people to engage in our democracy,
participate in our economy, become better educated, and share
their stories. I am pleased that members on both sides of the
aisle recognize the pervasive threat that blocking, throttling,
and paid prioritization pose to the American people and our
economy, because the open Internet truly is a bipartisan issue.
I am not on this panel to represent vast industries. I am
here to speak for the millions of Americans who follow this
issue with a level of awareness that is actually very uncommon
for inside the beltway telecom policy.
Over the past year, I have been surprised to align on this
issue with everyone from my conservative in-laws in the Deep
South to my liberal friends on the West Coast, none of whom are
particularly well-steeped in Federal policy, particularly not
telecom policy, but they get this because it personally affects
their lives.
And although NHMC supports congressional attention to this
matter to best protect consumers, I respectfully urge Congress
to allow the FCC to exercise its Title II authority, complete
its rulemaking process, and enact light-touch open Internet
rules.
This is the most certain path to ensure that individuals
and businesses are protected without delay. It would allow the
expert agency flexibility to respond to innovation and changes
in the marketplace.
The FCC has wide support from nearly 7 million Americans
that submitted comments or signed petitions, as well as
hundreds of public interest, civil rights, and consumer
advocacy organizations and leaders.
The discussion draft of legislative on the table today
would represent a seismic policy shift with repercussions far
beyond the open Internet debate. It has drawn robust criticism
for four main reasons.
First, it would strip the country's expert communications
agency of authority to protect consumers on the communications
platform of the 21st Century, upending consumer protections
that Americans have come to expect and this subcommittee has
supported for decades; privacy, network reliability, access to
911 services, disability access, just to name a few. It
effectively freezes the FCC in time, only allowing it to ever
confront a handful of harmful practices that we have
contemplated based on market conditions and technology that
exists today.
Second, it would pour cement on FCC efforts to close the
digital divide, such as rural broadband subsidies and
modernization of lifeline which could bring greater broadband
affordability to the working poor. Today nearly one in three
American people still lack home broadband access. The vast
majority of these people are rural, poor, brown, black, or a
combination thereof.
At the same time, standardized testing in American public
schools is moving to digital formats. It is critically
important that we do no harm with legislation that would
undermine serious efforts to achieve the now indivisible goals
of digital and educational equality.
Third, as compared to FCC rules crafted under Title II, it
would offer consumers limited and inferior protections. The
draft legislation does not ban unreasonable discrimination and
creates an exception for specialized services that threatens to
swallow the rules.
Fourth, it would create market uncertainty by relying on a
flawed adjudication process. Consumers and aggrieved parties
would have the burden to identify, report, and litigate
violations, but most of us are likely to lack the technical
expertise to identify the violations, the source, or have the
legal expertise to pursue enforcement, or both.
Those who oppose reclassification point to four concerns.
My written testimony goes into greater detail about those
arguments, but let me summarize.
There is no evidence that Title II would harm investment or
innovation, hamper broadband adoption, lead to higher taxes or
fees or welcome protracted litigation. In fact, the hard
evidence, including statements from the ISPs themselves,
suggest just the opposite.
The open Internet has allowed Americans to engage in our
democracy at a whole new level. Tea party activists, dreamers,
organizers of Black Lives Matter are all excellent examples of
regular people who have harnessed the power of the open
Internet to disseminate their messages and engage in the
political process. This is democracy and free speech at work,
and it is a virtue deserving of the strongest protections.
Thank you very much for having me here today. I look
forward to questions.
Mr. Walden. Delighted to have you back. Thanks for your
comments on the legislation and the issue at hand.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Gonzalez follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. We will now turn to Dr. Nicol Turner-Lee, the
vice president and chief research and policy officer for
Minority Media and Telecommunications Council.
Dr. Turner-Lee, delighted to have you here as well. Please
go ahead with your testimony.

STATEMENT OF NICOL TURNER-LEE

Ms. Turner-Lee. Thank you very much, Chairman Walden,
Ranking Member Eshoo, and distinguished members of the
committee.
And I do have to say, as vice president and chief research
and policy officer, that we just changed our name today at 9
a.m. To the Multicultural Media Telecom and Internet Council.
So----
Mr. Walden. We reserve the right to revise and extend our
remarks.
Ms. Turner-Lee. And at MMTC, still acronym is the same, we
actually support and work to represent, for those of you that
are unaware, organizations that consist of the NAACP, The
National Urban League, Rainbow Push Coalition, AAJC, among
others, so as my colleague Ms. Gonzalez has recognized, we also
stand on the side of people who are on the other side of the
digital divide.
And I think that is pretty important on the topic of open
Internet because we have been actively engaged in this debate
as historically disadvantaged communities embark on a journey
towards first class digital citizenship and all of the
opportunities. So we welcome and applaud the draft legislation
addressing the President's values.
I want to use my time to bring three issues to the
committee's attention today. My statement is on record in much
more detail, but my time is best spent on these points.
I first would like to highlight the unique benefits that an
open Internet brings to people of color and vulnerable
populations who we represent, and encourage the committee's
consideration of legislation that promotes an open Internet,
and finally I would like to offer two friendly recommendations
designed to strengthen and ensure that the legislation realizes
the value of all consumers who want to acknowledge the promise
of digital equality.
I want to affirm the words of Ranking Member Eshoo that
broadband access, adoption, and digital literacy are civil
right prerequisites. Broadband allows people to gain new
skills, secure jobs, obtain quality education, and receive
greater access to healthcare.
Today, however, too many Americans still do not benefit
from all that broadband enables. The rate of broadband adoption
among vulnerable populations is disproportionately low,
contributing to a persistent digital divide. Despite growth in
minority home, broadband adoption rates among African Americans
and Hispanics are still lower than whites. African Americans
over 65, for example, still exhibit especially low rates. Fort-
five percent of African American seniors are Internet users,
yet 30 percent only have broadband at home, compared to 63
percent and 51 percent respectively for white seniors.
Non-users overall cite a perceived lack of relevance,
affordability, and the lack of a device, in that order, as
their prime reasons for not being online.
So closing the digital divide should and must be an
important goal for policymakers, and steering the right course
of action to promote and protect an open Internet is one of the
ways to get there.
I want to acknowledge that Congress has had a proud history
of recognizing structural injustices in our society and acting
to correct them.
In the 1860s Congress framed and passed the 13th, 14th, and
15th Amendments which enabled slavery-extended protection and
enfranchised millions of Americans for the first time.
In the 1960s, Congress enacted the Civil Rights Act of
1964, the Voting Rights Act of 1965, and the Fair Housing Act
of 1968, all due in great measure to the Reverend Martin Luther
King whose birthday we just celebrated.
Today Congress has the opportunity to show that leadership
again. By enacting a legislative solution that preserves the
open Internet we all enjoy, Congress can extend the promise of
justice, equality, and democracy to all and avoid a legal
quagmire that will lead to an unending uncertainty for our
economy and citizens.
I agree with Jessica Gonzalez that an open Internet
stimulates demand for broadband which in turn stimulates
investment in infrastructure and innovation. At MMTC, we know
firsthand in this, and it is our belief that increased
investment in broadband also improves access and adoption to
the types of innovations we like to drive in our communities,
but of course the way that we get there is going to have an
impact.
For the past 20 years, administration and FCC chairs from
both political parties have charted a successful regulatory
platform for the Internet, and communities of color have
benefitted. Look at the state of wireless adoption among people
of color.
Under the current regulatory framework, nearly 75 percent
of African Americans and nearly 70 percent of Hispanic cell
phone owners use their devices to access the Internet more than
the overall population, and people of color have embraced it as
a tool of empowerment. Under the current rules, we have
actually seen the type of collective mobilization in Ferguson,
Missouri, New York City, and Columbus, Ohio. These stats to
drive policymakers to continue the progress that is already
being made.
But unfortunately, meaningful open Internet rules have
failed in the FCC. Last year the D.C. Circuit Court struck down
key portions of the commission's open Internet order, and
notwithstanding the current regulatory framework that has
allowed broadband to flourish and adoption to take hold, the
FCC is now considering the imposition of Title II regulation,
which we believe as national civil rights organizations is ill-
suited to the current realities.
Imposing such heavy-handed framework on the Internet would
only serve to stifle broadband deployment, discourage
investment, and harm innovation. It would also place
uncertainty for consumers through regressive taxation on
universal service and potential ambiguity on consumer
enforcements.
Some have argued that the adverse effects of Title II
regulation through judicious application of forbearance
authority is the right way. We think that misses the point. If
the commission could exercise its forbearance authority in
productive matter, it still would take years to sort out and
appropriately calibrate a set of rules, and this uncertainty
will continue to drive us away from the attention of those
issues that our community needs the most, the modernization of
our schools, universal service reform in other areas.
So in closing, it is for those reasons that our groups have
actually asked that we steer away from a tight regulatory
framework to something that has more flexibility to allow the
ecosystem to continue to grow, and we think the proposed
legislative is close in actually getting there.
I would like to just close again with two additional
recommendations for Congress to ponder in this debate as we
look at this issue.
First, Congress should address the harmful practice of
digital red lining. Digital red lining is the refusal to build
and serve lower income communities on the same terms as
wealthier communities. In essence, it imposes digital
segregation. Sadly, as the experience of our country shows,
segregation harms and degrades all of us, and this is no less
true in the digital age. Congress should empower the FCC to
prohibit digital red lining and we urge in this legislation
that Congress also look at how to prevent that because
currently this is a problem.
Second, Congress should ensure that its open Internet rules
will be enforced. MMTC has recommended to the commission the
creation of an accessible, affordable, and expedited procedure
for the reporting and resolution of complaints.
One approach would be to use the consumer friendly
complaint process under the Title VII framework of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964. Under Title VII, a complainant receiving
the expedited ruling from EEOC and does not need to hire a
lawyer or write a complicated filing, whether the precise
details of implementing a similar mechanism in the
communications context, the core principle here remains the
same.
Consumers, particularly individuals from vulnerable
populations, deserve, as it has been mentioned, an accessible,
affordable, and expedited procedure for ensuring that their
government protects them, and this must apply at whatever
solution that we seek.
My friends, the time is now to get past the morass of a
debate that has been lingering for more than a decade, and with
Congress' discussion and guidance on this issue, we at MMTC
think we can make it happen, and we look forward to working
with Congress to do such so that we can get to the issues that
mean the most for our communities, universal service, public
safety, and assuring that we actually allow the Internet to
grow to the next level of innovation to solve our social
problems.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Turner-Lee \1\ follows:]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Attachments to Ms. Turner-Lee's testimony have been retained in
committee files and are available at http://docs.house.gov/meetings/if/
if16/20150121/102832/hhrg-114-if16-wstate-turner-leen-20150121-u2.pdf.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. Dr. Turner-Lee, thank you for your testimony
and your suggestions.
We will now turn to our final witness this morning,
Meredith Atwell Baker, president and CEO of CTIA--The Wireless
Association.
Ms. Baker, glad to have you back before the subcommittee as
well. Look for forward to your comments.

STATEMENT OF MEREDITH ATWELL BAKER

Ms. Baker. Chairman Walden, Ranking Member Eshoo, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to share
the wireless industry's perspective on the importance of an
open Internet. At the outset I want to be clear, America's
wireless industry fully supports an open Internet. Wireless
users demand it in a marketplace where competition has never
been more vigorous. In the past 20 years, the wireless industry
has grown from a luxury product to a key driver of economic
growth. We all benefit from faster speeds, more services, and
lower prices.
The U.S. is the global leader in wireless by any metric,
and it is at the forefront of mobile innovation in health,
automotive, and payment fields. Central to that growth was
Congress's foresight in establishing Section 332, a mobile-
specific regulatory framework outside of Title II. Congress has
the opportunity to provide the same stability for broadband.
We greatly appreciate this committee's work to develop a
regulatory foundation for future innovation with commonsense
net neutrality provisions. The draft is an excellent start and
offers a viable path to preserve an open Internet with
enforceable requirements. Properly crafted legislation will
guarantee the protections the President has called for, while
allowing broadband providers to continue to invest billions,
create jobs, and innovate products.
We do not ask that wireless be exempt from any new laws,
only that any new requirements reflect our industry, our
technology, and our inherent differences. I want to highlight
three key differences.
First, mobile services are technically different and depend
upon limited spectrum resources. This requires substantial
network management, millisecond by millisecond, to deliver
service to consumers. Remarkably, there is more bandwidth in a
single strand of fiber than in all of the spectrum allocated to
commercial mobile services.
Second, we are competitively different. More than 8 out of
10 Americans can choose from 4 or more mobile broadband
providers. This is fierce competition, and it is driving new
services, offerings, and differentiation that benefits
consumers.
Third, we are evolutionarily different. 4G networks are
less than 5 years old, and the future is bright, with
advancements like LTE Broadcast, 5G services, and connected
life applications. It is vital that any legislation is
sufficiently flexible to preserve the competition,
differentiation, and innovation mobile consumers enjoy today.
While we are optimistic that the process on the Hill will
enhance the wireless experience for all Americans, we have
significant reservations with the FCC's proposed path of Title
II. The application of Title II in any form to wireless
broadband would harm consumers and our economy. Title II is
designed for another technology in another era, an era in which
competition was largely nonexistent, if at all, and innovation
came slowly, if at all.
Given our industry's great success with mobile broadband
outside of Title II, we have significant concerns with how
Title II and its 682 pages of regulation would apply to the
dynamic mobile broadband space. If the Commission proceeds with
Title II, as opposed to the 706 path the court contemplated a
year ago, the wireless industry will have no choice but to look
to the courts. Given the clear language of Section 332, we have
every confidence that we would prevail, but it is not our
preferred course.
Under Section 332, mobile broadband is legally different
too. In 1993, Congress exempted future nonvoice mobile
services, like mobile broadband, from common carriage
regulation. It did so unambiguously.
Given our industry's great success with mobile broadband
outside of Title II, we have significant concerns of how Title
II and its 682 pages of regulation would apply. The Commission
and the courts have repeatedly found that wireless broadband is
not a common carriage service. The FCC lacks the statutory
authority to change course, and litigation would harm
consumers, with a year or more of uncertainty and delay. As
leaders across the globe are trying to replicate our mobile
success and embrace 5G, this is the wrong time to inject
uncertainty and delay into our Nation's efforts. We risk
falling behind when the stakes have never been higher and our
connected life and global competitiveness are more within
reach.
The better approach would be for Congress to act and end
this debate. Doing so would free us to turn to pressing
bipartisan issues like spectrum reform and Comm Act
modernization. By acting, Congress can help ensure that the
United States remains the most dynamic and innovative mobile
ecosystem. Thank you for the opportunity to appear on today's
panel, and I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Walden. Ms. Baker, thank you for being here.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Baker \2\ follows:]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Attachments to Ms. Baker's testimony have been retained in
committee files and are available at http://docs.house.gov/meetings/if/
if16/20150121/102832/hhrg-114-if16-wstate-bakerm-20150121-u1.pdf.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. And thanks to all of our witnesses. You have
blessed us with some really good thought starters. And some of
you like what we are doing, some of you don't. All of you, I
think we can all agree on the principles at stake here. It is a
matter of how we get there.
I have got a couple of questions I want to ask. I will lead
off.
To follow up on your testimony, Ms. Baker, regarding
Section 332, and I am not trying to mimic our former chairman,
Mr. Dingell, but in the essence of time I have a couple of yes-
and-no questions that really would be helpful. And I would
start with Mr. Powell and just work down.
Yes or no, do you agree with Ms. Baker that mobile would
not be covered under the FCC's existing authority when it comes
to applying these new net neutrality standards? Mr. Powell?
Mr. Powell. I forgot whether it is phrased as yes or no,
but we believe that the FCC could reach wireless by
reclassifying much as they are proposing to do with respect to
fixed broadband.
Mr. Walden. So you think they could get there, even though
332 has a different view of that.
Mr. Powell. Not without risk, but we do believe that they
could.
Mr. Walden. All right.
Mr. Dickerson.
Mr. Dickerson. I am not an attorney.
Mr. Walden. That is two of us. But I stayed in a Holiday
Inn, so I can legislate.
Mr. Dickerson. I think the most important thing for us is
that in our minds there is no difference between mobile and
broadband.
Mr. Walden. So you want them both covered?
Mr. Dickerson. Both covered in any regulations.
Mr. Walden. Right. On these protections. OK.
Mr. Misener?
Mr. Misener. I agree with Chairman Powell's assessment,
legal assessment. I also agree that consumers view these
interchangeably----
Mr. Walden. Right.
Mr. Misener [continuing]. And it should be the same policy
for both.
Mr. Walden. So you think it is legally sustainable.
Ms. Gonzalez.
Ms. Gonzalez. I agree. It is legally sustainable.
Mr. Walden. All right. Ms. Turner-Lee.
Ms. Turner-Lee. I am not an attorney, but we think that
Title II would actually stifle the expansion of mobile. So we
think that is a bad idea.
Mr. Walden. Ms. Baker, one more time from you.
Ms. Baker. Mobile broadband has never been under Title II
because of the explicit expression of Congress, so it is not
sustainable.
Mr. Walden. So there might be an opportunity for litigation
here, you think. This is my point. We have got some really
talented people, some are attorneys, some are not. Some are
backed up by really smart attorneys as well. There is division
right here on this panel. This is where I think certainty
matters and legislating matters.
Yes or no, have you actually seen what the FCC is
proposing? Mr. Powell.
Mr. Powell. No.
Mr. Walden. Mr. Dickerson.
Mr. Dickerson. We have seen principles.
Mr. Walden. No, I mean have you seen the language?
Mr. Dickerson. No.
Mr. Walden. Got it.
Mr. Misener.
Mr. Misener. No.
Ms. Gonzalez. They don't typically release the order. But I
have heard a great deal about what is in.
Mr. Walden. Oh, you have. But you haven't read it?
Ms. Gonzalez. Haven't read it, no.
Mr. Walden. OK.
Ms. Turner-Lee. Don't know nothing.
Mr. Walden. Ms. Baker.
Ms. Baker. No.
Mr. Walden. All right. And does anybody anticipate they
will see it before they vote on it?
Mr. Powell. No.
Mr. Dickerson. I am sorry, could you repeat that question?
Mr. Walden. Does anybody anticipate actually being able to
see the language before the commissioners are called upon to
vote on it?
Mr. Powell. No.
Mr. Walden. Mr. Dickerson.
Mr. Dickerson. We have found the FCC process so far to be
quite open, so we believe it is quite possible that we could.
Mr. Walden. All right.
Mr. Misener.
Mr. Misener. No.
Mr. Walden. Ms. Gonzalez.
Ms. Gonzalez. Not sure if we would see it.
Mr. Walden. Right.
Ms. Turner-Lee. Probably not.
Ms. Baker. No.
Mr. Walden. We have two former commissioners, both of whom
said very unlikely, nope, that you will actually see it. That
is why I think it is a better process. You will actually get it
see it through a legislative, transparent, open environment.
Text is posted. You all have given us great input as we move
forward.
There is a disagreement, I will say, at least this is what
I am hearing, regarding the application of universal service
fund fees. If I heard different testimony correctly, some
believe that the FCC's order would allow it, some believe it
wouldn't. Some think our bill would preclude it, some wouldn't.
My question to you is, when it comes to universal service fees,
under what we know of the FCC's order, what they are proposing,
would the Internet now be subject to USF levy?
Mr. Powell.
Mr. Powell. Yes. The way it works in short is that Congress
requires an assessment of universal service from any
telecommunication services provider. If the FCC reclassifies
broadband, it will immediately be in that classification and
subject to that assessment. There is an argument that the
Commission could theoretically forebear from that, but in the
absence of that action it would absolutely result in increased
charges on federal universal service.
Mr. Walden. All right. There is also an argument out there
in the public, some agree, some disagree, that if the FCC goes
down a Title II path and declares that the Internet is a public
utility under Title II, that that nearly totally eliminates the
Federal Trade Commission's authority, because they don't have
authority on regulated common carriers. Correct?
Mr. Powell, can you speak to that?
Mr. Powell. That is correct. Under the Clayton Act Section
5, the FTC is prohibited from exercising its authority over
privacy, data security, and a number of other things against
telecommunication services providers. They are obviously a
champion of privacy today, and have broad-reaching authority to
do so. That would be disenfranchised by this decision.
Mr. Walden. All right.
Mr. Misener, finally, you raised concerns in your testimony
about specialized services--you are not the only one--that
exemption in our draft legislation. Now, both the FCC and the
President have said a specialized services exemption is
necessary, and the language in our draft tracks the FCC's
proposals. Has there about been a net neutrality rule proposed
that does not acknowledge the need for specialized services?
Mr. Misener. I can't say that there hasn't been one, but
what we are concerned about, if that becomes a substitute for
paid prioritization.
Mr. Walden. Right.
Mr. Misener. So that is the concern. Whether someone has
proposed it elsewhere, I don't know.
I will point out, however, in light of one of the prior
comments by Chairman Powell, that he is viewing Title II as a
binary thing, either it is all there or it is not. The
Commission did forebear from Title II across the board. It need
not have back in 2002. And so it could be partially unforeborn,
as it were, and done very judiciously. So I think we can be
much more precise about what this means and not view it as an
all-or-nothing solution.
Mr. Walden. You could also have another Commission that
decides to change all that too. So that gets to our issue of
certainty.
I have gone over my time. I now recognize the gentlelady
from California, Ms. Eshoo.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank all the witnesses. I think that you have
done a marvelous job through your testimony today to highlight
what you like and what you don't, where you agree and where you
don't. And I think that you have done it very well, and I am
grateful to you for it.
I just want to make a comment before I begin with my
questions. It is thrown around--and it is a heavy charge,
because everyone cares about this--and that is that if we go,
we move in a certain direction, that the private sector will
stop investing. That is a big chill for me and for everyone
else. But there isn't anything to substantiate that. I mean,
when you look at the wireless auction, billions of dollars have
come in. And when we began that effort, Chairman Walden,
myself, and the subcommittee, people laughed, and they said you
are not going to raise a dime out of this. Forty-five billion
dollars so far. Well, I don't know about anyone else, I think
$45 billion is a lot of money. That is a lot of investment.
That is worth something. And the CFO of Verizon said, we will
keep investing whether there is Title II or not. The CTO of
Sprint. I don't think these are insignificant comments.
So I think it is important for the record, if someone makes
that charge, then it should be backed up for us, because we
need facts and the evidence that comes with the facts. I think
that that would be most helpful to us.
I want to go to Mr. Dickerson. I should say to everyone,
today is the first time I met Mr. Etsy. But get a life, Anna, I
met him on C-SPAN. He was part of a conference, the Washington
ideas conference, and I was so taken with how he presented
himself, what he knew, and what his company has been able to
do, I said let's invite him in and be a witness.
So thank you for being here. And thank you for all the jobs
that you have created.
The proposed bill doesn't prevent a broadband provider from
prioritizing content from one of its own affiliates. So my
question to you is, if a broadband provider were to prioritize
an affiliate's content, what effect would that have on Etsy?
And most importantly, everyone that deals with you is a
company. They have created a new company. What kind of an
effect would that have?
Mr. Dickerson. Yes. One thing that you may not know about
me, I was actually chief technology officer before I was CEO.
So I know a lot about technology. And one of the things that we
know is that for commerce sites, for business sites, and I
define this broadly from Etsy to Amazon to Google, that the
speed of your Web site is absolutely directly correlated with
revenue. So if things are slower, revenue drops. If things are
faster, revenue goes up.
So in a world of paid prioritization, if smaller companies
like Etsy were disadvantaged against larger companies, then you
could see the larger companies see advantages purely based on
speed. Higher revenues. And this would hurt the Etsy sellers
who are receiving lower speeds than some of the other
competitors.
Ms. Eshoo. Could it put them out of business?
Mr. Dickerson. Put them out of business. And as I said in
my remarks, we have sellers who are making money using the
Internet in rural areas and elsewhere, and they are using this
money to feed their families, pay for school, do all the things
that they need to do in their lives.
Ms. Eshoo. Let me go to Mr. Misener. Under the proposed
legislation the problem of interconnection abuse is not only
ignored, but the FCC is prevented from doing anything about it
in the future. Now, do you believe that if interconnection
isn't explicitly addressed, how would your business and the
ability to serve your customers, what would happen?
Mr. Misener. Thank you, Ms. Eshoo, very much. I am not so
clear in the bill whether it is precluded or whether it is not.
Some people believe very strongly it is precluded. I think it
is silent and it needs to be explicit that it is included for
the very reason I stated in my testimony, which is consumers
shouldn't care. A customer of Amazon should not care where in a
network operator's network discrimination is occurring, only
that it is occurring. And to leave that out is a major gap in
the legislation, and I would like to see that filled.
Ms. Eshoo. Good.
Let's see. I am over time. Mr. Chairman, I failed to ask
for a unanimous consent request to include in the record a
letter dated January 20 from the mayors of New York and San
Francisco, and the letter urges the FCC to adopt the strongest
possible open Internet rules using Title II. And I also ask
that letters from the National Association of Realtors and a
group of racial justice organizations be included in the
record. Both letters reiterate that the legislative process
should not hold up the FCC from moving forward with strong,
legally enforceable open Internet rules.
Mr. Latta [presiding]. Without objection. \3\
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ The information has been retained in committee files and is
also available athttp://docs.house.gov/meetings/if/if16/20150121/
102832/hhrg-114-if16-20150121-sd009.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yield back.
Mr. Latta. The chair recognizes himself for 5 minutes. And,
again, thanks to our panel for being here today. And as the
gentlelady just said, it has been a very interesting discussion
today.
Mr. Powell, if I could start with a question for you. I
found your testimony very interesting about when we are dealing
with regulations in this town, about trying to put round pegs
in square holes and all the different things that folks out
there are facing. But for many of us, we have very diverse
districts. We represent suburban, urban, rural. But with many
of the cable operators that I have in my area there have been
concerns that the prospect of Title II regulation may require
them to overhaul their billing practices, change their pole
attachment rates, require them to review all of the customer
privacy terms and conditions, and subject them to new
enforcement rules. For many of these small companies, this
would stifle future investment. Balancing potential harms with
the new regulatory burdens doesn't seem to be equitable to
those small providers. Should small providers be exempt from
any network neutrality rules?
Mr. Powell. First of all, I would say that we as an
industry, and I would think that my small members would concur,
are quite supportive of both the concept of open Internet and
the government's interest in developing strong and sustainable
rules. It is simply a false choice to suggest that we are
opposed to the core and substantive effort to do so.
What we are concerned about is in the effort to do so we
will employ a comprehensive, complex regulatory regime that
will substantially raise the costs of being in the ISP
business. Cost management is a critical concern for small
businesses, much more than even the larger. And on the margins
of uneconomic regions that have difficulty, like rural America,
anything that adds to the costs of deploying that
infrastructure in those places will dampen both the ability and
the enthusiasm to reach the hardest parts of the country.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Ms. Baker, if I could turn to your testimony, you also had
some discussion about rural America in it, under your section
regarding the significant risk of Title II. And you mentioned
that if the Commission proceeds down that path that litigation
would inevitably have more delays and uncertainties out there,
and it's also interesting that the harm may be particularly
acute for rural customers, as a collection of regional
providers explained that ``applying an outdated and backward-
looking Title II common-carriage regime to our services...would
stifle innovation and investment and would do a disservice to
rural America.'' Could you elaborate on that disservice to
rural America?
Ms. Baker. Of course. Our association this year is chaired
by Ron Smith, who is president and CEO of Bluegrass Cellular
from Kentucky, and we brought our rural carriers in to visit
with the FCC. They don't have armies of regulatory lawyers to
go and comply with transparency and other burdens. Mobile
broadband has never been under Title II. The uncertainty has
already stifled their deployment. They are worried. They do not
know what Title II brings.
And, additionally, the wireless industry is extremely
competitive. They need to differentiate to serve their
communities. They need to make sure that they can compete with
different concepts, and they are not sure what Title II will
bring them in that respect.
So the lawyers and what Title II would bring is unknown.
Competition and differentiation are important to our rural
carriers. And I think that is at risk under Title II.
Mr. Latta. Let me ask you this, because when I am out in my
district and talk to folks, especially if you are a small
business way out in an area that might not have very good
coverage. They are concerned, in fact I just talked with
somebody not too long ago, about 2 weeks ago, that they have a
problem with being able to connect with their costumers, even
though people are trying to contact them. So are you saying
build out and things like that for some of these folks would be
hampered because of that, because of Title II?
Ms. Baker. Build out and advanced services.
Mr. Latta. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Powell, if I could go back to your testimony, you go
into great detail about how the current light touch regulatory
structure has spurred a rapidly evolving and successful
broadband ecosystem. Will Title II regulations do anything to
encourage continued growth as we have seen over the past 15
years? And would the reclassification encourage incumbent
providers to upgrade networks or new companies to enter the
market?
Mr. Powell. I think, all hyperbole aside, the issue isn't
whether people will invest. Of course they will. They have
businesses to run. The real question is, will it be at a
diminished and dampened level compared to the velocity and the
ambitions that the country has? We hear the President and other
people talk about wanting the Nation to achieve world class,
top broadband speed and status. We want gigabit to every
American, we want every American to have access to the
Internet, and we are impatient about that.
Networks are rebuilt every 18 to 24 months to the tune of
$30 billion to $50 billion annually. To get to gigabit speeds,
we are talking about hundreds of billions of dollars required
over some amount of time. It is simply common sense to
understand increasing regulatory costs, increasing uncertainty
certainly will slow the magnitude or the velocity or the timing
or the pace of those evolutions. And I am sure even in
companies like Mr. Etsy's or Amazon they have just as much of
an imperative of having a continued high growth evolution of
network capacity as the primary input to the businesses they
provide.
So we do believe both the increased costs associated with
the regulatory environment, the cost of borrowing that will go
up when now the rate of return is based on being a regulatory
industry rather than a lightly regulated one, and the years of
uncertainty to truly finalize and settle and stabilize the
rules will probably have a negative and depressive effect. All
you have to do is look at the recession, when companies had
plenty of capital but were unwilling to deploy or hire or
invest because of the uncertainties that surrounded the market
during the depths of the recession to have an example of how
this works.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much.
And my time has expired. And the chair recognizes Mr.
Pallone for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Mr. Chairman, I yield to Ms. Eshoo.
Ms. Eshoo. I thank the gentleman.
I just want to state for the record something that is very
important given what Ms. Baker said. Wireless voice has been,
as you know, a former commissioner of the FCC, under Title II
since 1993. So I think everyone needs to have an appreciation
of that, and I don't think the testimony reflected that.
Thank you.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Ms. Gonzalez, I think we both agree that putting net
neutrality protections into law would be a win for consumers.
But how might consumers lose if Congress were to enact the
draft bill that we are discussing today?
Ms. Gonzalez. Thank you, Congressman Pallone, for the
question. I think with what is on the table today there are
serious threats. This undermines FCC efforts to bridge the
digital divide. Particularly concerned with rural subsidies and
efforts to reform the lifeline program, which could have the
potential to bring affordable broadband to the working poor. It
undermines privacy, truth in billing, all kinds of consumer
protections that we as Americans have come to expect and rely
on, and it calls into question the FCC's ability to continue
protecting us on the communications platform of the 21st
century.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Now, my Republican colleagues characterize their draft bill
as consistent with the FCC's 2010 net neutrality rules. Do you
agree that the draft bill provides the same level of protection
as the 2010 rules?
Ms. Gonzalez. I think it is true there are some rules that
look like the 2010 rules. There are a number of distinctions
that I laid out in my testimony, but I think the critical
distinction is that it strips the FCC of any flexibility to
oversee consumer protection and ensure that there are not
harmful, discriminatory practices on the Internet. And so that
is the concern. It essentially freezes the FCC in time so that
it cannot address any harms that fall outside of the principles
laid out in the draft legislation, nor can it address any new
harms that present themselves as technology and the marketplace
evolve.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Mr. Powell, we have heard the argument today that Title II
will stifle innovation and investment. In fact, I think the
chairman called it the nuclear option. How would we evaluate
this argument in light of the fact that cable companies' stock
prices are up since President Obama announced his support for
Title II?
Mr. Powell. Well, public stock prices are a complex
question. I am no market expert. But a careful examination
historically over periods of regulatory intervention versus
periods of light regulation will demonstrate a clear pattern.
In the wake of the 1992 act, when cable rates were regulated,
investment was depressed for several years until the prospect
of the 1996 act, which deregulated those rates again and they
soared. In 2001 and 2002, when the decisions to regulate
broadband as an information service were put in place, it
unleashed a radical increase in investment, totaling $1
trillion over the course of the year.
I sincerely believe that the market believes in the
assertions and promises that Title II will not include rate
regulation, it will not include the whole bevy of onerous
regulations that exist. But unless that is clearly identified
in an unequivocal way, I don't think it is priced into the
market, and very likely would be if anything changed.
Mr. Pallone. Maybe the economy is just getting so good
that----
Mr. Powell. Could be that too.
Mr. Pallone. We are just seeing it soar these days based on
what the President said last night.
One more question. Most broadband providers, including your
member companies, say they are already in compliance with
network neutrality, and what they are really afraid of is the
rate regulation by the FCC, but both the President and the FCC
have said they support forbearance from regulation of consumer
prices. So, Mr. Powell, if we all agree rate regulation should
be off the table, couldn't Congress narrowly address that issue
in legislation, and couldn't there beunintended consequences
from placing the kind of broad restrictions on the FCC's
authority that are in the draft bill?
Mr. Powell. Thank you, sir. I would say two things. First
of all, rate regulation is the most dangerous of all of the
provisions, but I wouldn't concede that of the thousands of
regulations in Title II that alone is the sole focus of our
concern. We do appreciate the President saying that rate
regulation should be forborne from, and Chairman Wheeler's
assertions.
But simultaneously, we have heard Chairman Wheeler talk
about the adoption of Sections 201, 202, and 208. Section 201
is the statutory provision where rate regulation is derived. It
says that to ensure that practices for charging will be just
and reasonable. That is the basis and the historical basis of
the Commission's rate regulation.
So we don't yet have any confidence that the words are
matching the direction of the order and whether the government
will make clear that rate regulation is off the table or merely
say they have the power to rate regulate but for now are
choosing not to.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden [presiding]. Thank the gentleman.
I will now recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Shimkus.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My good friend Congresswoman Eshoo kind of had a shot
across the bow at former Commissioner Baker, now president or
chairman or czar of CTIA, and so I thought I would give her a
chance to maybe respond to the statement made by my friend
Anna.
Ms. Baker. Thank you. I appreciate that.
Ranking Member Eshoo is correct. First of all, we know the
current framework is working. We have $112 billion of
investment in the wireless industry in the last 4 years. But
let's go to 1993, when Congress was enacting Section 332 and
deregulating wireless. They did it two ways. They did two
buckets. They did CMRS, which was mobile voice, and they did
that subjected to limited Title II requirements. They
separately created a second bucket, which is called PMRS, and
that was for all new services, like mobile broadband, and they
specifically exempt the FCC from applying Title II requirements
on mobile--well, new services, which mobile broadband is a new
service. FCC has always acted in accordance with that, and the
court has always upheld that mobile broadband is not regulated
by Title II and cannot be, according to the explicit language
of Congress.
Mr. Shimkus. Great. Thank you.
And I know my colleagues have given some credit to the
chairman of the subcommittee on movement. I mean, I am a paid
prioritization guy. So that is where I come from in this
debate. And I have always been the point that if you are going
to make the $30 billion of investment every 18 months to
upgrade the pipes, you have to have revenue to do that or you
have to have a business model to do that.
My whole position in this has not been limited and
government control of the existing pipes, but encouragement of
the expansion of more. But that was then, this is now, we are
in a new world order where I think we have now looked at the
debate and said--and businesses have done that too--and said,
hey, we need to get this monkey off our back, we need to get
some rules and some certainty. Businesses always talks about
certainty.
So, again, credit to the chairman by saying, OK, well,
let's go back to the previous debates, look at what was put out
in front by our colleagues, where can we find middle ground?
And I believe that is the product that Chairman Walden has set
forth, now with great consternation from my friends on the
other side.
So I am with the chairman. I think we can move forward and
set some certainty. But I am a legislator. Right? This process
we want to legislate, we want to define in law, and then allow
the executive branch, or in this case the FCC, to implement the
law. Because as, again, Chairman Walden said, if another FCC
comes and is established by some other President, it could get
turned topsy-turvy again.
So I just wanted to just in the big point just give some
credit about how even Chairman Walden is bringing some of us
kicking and screaming along with him on this policy.
Mr. Walden. Boy, can he kick.
Ms. Eshoo. Would the gentleman yield just for a second?
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, I would.
Ms. Eshoo. I am Catholic, and for Catholics, we understand
confession. So thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. I still believe in the paid prioritization and
incentivizing build-out. I am not sure we get there this way.
And that is my concern.
Mr. Walden. I appreciate it. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Shimkus. I would.
Mr. Walden. I appreciate that. And remember part of what
drives us to legislation. First of all, we would want the FCC,
before they go off and regulate something that everybody has
testified has worked pretty darn well, right, I mean what we
have today has been light touch regulation. That is how it has
been built out. There is no overwhelming evidence of clear
market failure that would drive to deep regulatory control from
Washington top down. That is where some of us have been, why do
we have to go down this path?
What is before us today, though, is the President is now
turning the FCC into his open puppeteer here, you know, and
saying here is what you have to do, which goes beyond where the
FCC chairman said he thought he should go, or what was right
for the market. He is being pushed. And then he said, we are
going to act at the FCC by February 26. And by the way, none of
us here is going to necessarily see that order. That is part of
our reform effort, by the way, which we passed out of the
House, where we would have more transparency in the process.
So they are moving. We don't know precisely what that is
going to look like. We would rather give certainty because of
this issue that Ms. Baker has outlined regarding mobile
devices, because Mr. Etsy and Mr. Misener, as you know, we are
all going to a mobile world. And yet the statute under 332 is
pretty clear, that authority doesn't exist at the FCC. Now,
they may try to go there, and there is dispute whether you can
get there and sort of hook something around. You are going to
be in court. Consumers aren't going to get certainty. The
marketplace isn't going to have certainty. And for the third or
fourth time, the lawyers are going to get rich. And, Mr.
Dickerson, you and I aren't lawyers. So all we are going to do
is get to pay the bill here.
So I would prefer to get the committee together, do what we
do as a committee, find a common ground here. And that is why
we started with the 2010 order, we started with a lot of the
work that the Democrats, frankly, had done with Mr. Waxman. If
you go through section by section you will see that here. And
then we just want to give pause to the market. So, anyway, I
have overextended your time.
Mr. Shimkus. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Walden. Thank you.
Where do we go now? We go now to Mr. Doyle, who hopefully
will be streamed on the Internet on this version of his
comments.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me start by saying I am very concerned about the way in
which this bill strips the FCC of its authority under Section
706 and prevents the FCC from giving new entrants access to key
infrastructure under Title II. The FCC needs access to every
tool in its arsenal to promote and encourage the build-out of
advanced broadband infrastructure. Municipal broadband and new
entrants in the marketplace, like Google Fiber, they are
driving U.S. innovation and driving ISPs to offer faster,
cheaper services by bringing much-needed competition to the
broadband market. These build-outs also create jobs across the
country, and it is often in areas where ISPs have opted not to
make the investments theirselves.
I want to ask Mr. Misener and Mr. Dickerson, both of your
companies offer innovative and high-bandwidth applications. Mr.
Misener, I understand that Amazon has recently begun streaming
in 4K. Are either of you concerned that the draft bill does not
include any mention of peering or interconnection, particularly
given how congestion at points of interconnection has recently
been used to leverage payments from edge providers?
Mr. Dickerson. I will speak first. We are absolutely
concerned that interconnection is not included. I agree with
what Mr. Misener said earlier, we think very much about our
customer experience and their experience of the Internet. So
regardless of whether the choke point may happen upstream or in
the last mile doesn't matter. So interconnection is very
important to us.
Mr. Doyle. Mr. Misener.
Mr. Misener. I share that view on behalf of our customers.
It is one thing that customers just simply should not need to
care about. Where throttling or discrimination or paid
prioritization takes place in a network they shouldn't care.
Frankly, they shouldn't need to care much about where in the
statute their rights are protected, where net neutrality is
extended. It could be done in Congress, it could be done at the
Commission, a mix of the two. And I would suggest that
consumers really don't care, they just want their net
neutrality.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you.
Ms. Gonzalez, do you want to add to that?
Ms. Gonzalez. Thank you, Congressman Doyle. I think we
should consider anything that impacts a consumer's ability to
access what they want to access on the Internet. The discussion
draft strips the FCC of authority to even investigate this
issue, and that is very concerning.
Mr. Walden. Would the gentleman just on that point? Because
I don't believe our draft does that.
Mr. Doyle. As long as you give me all my time back.
Mr. Walden. I will give you all your time back. I don't
believe our discussion draft does that, and would welcome that
opportunity. An on the interconnection piece, we leave that
authority with the FCC. We don't do away with that here. So
although it is absent in the bill, it is still resident at the
Commission. So that interconnection piece we felt was taken
care of. We would be happy to have a further discussion. I
yield back.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Misener and Mr. Dickerson, the draft bill also provides
this carveout for so-called specialized services, yet it
doesn't allow the FCC to define what constitutes a specialized
service. Can you envision this language being used by an ISP to
sell preferred treatment or advantaging one competitor over
another or even they themselves providing specialized services
that unfairly compete in the marketplace?
Mr. Dickerson. Absolutely. I think the lack of specificity
in the language could allow for many applications that could be
tantamount to discrimination. So, yes.
Mr. Doyle. Mr. Misener.
Mr. Misener. Mr. Doyle, certainly it would permit it with
respect to affiliated content. So the network provider itself
could engage in the provision of specialized services, which
would look a lot like paid prioritization, only it is just a
matter of ownership as opposed to payment by a third party. So,
yes, we are very concerned.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you.
I just want to add on to what Ms. Eshoo was saying too
about we have read in several news reports that senior
executives from major companies that are represented by
Chairman Powell and Ms. Baker, having made statements about
Title II, which, Mr. Chairman, I would like to enter into the
record.
The first is one now that Comcast, Charter, and Time
Warner, all members of Chairman Powell's organization, and I
quote, Charter Chief Executive Tom Rutledge said that so long
as the Federal Communications Commission waived parts of Title
II that weren't relevant, a step that Net Neutrality advocates
support, it would be an acceptable outcome. Similar statements
were made by Comcast and Time Warner Cable.
Stephen Bye, the Chief Technology Officer of Sprint, a
member of Ms. Baker's organization, said Sprint will continue
to invest in data networks regardless of whether they are
regulated by Title II, Section 706, or some other light touch
regulatory regime. And Francis Shammo, the CFO of Verizon,
said, ``I mean to be real clear, I mean this does not influence
the way we invest. I mean we are going to continue to invest in
our networks and our platforms, both in Wireless and Wireline
FiOS where we need to. So nothing will influence that.''
So I would like to enter these three into the record, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Walden. Without objection.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the record.]
Mr. Doyle. I thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Walden. The gentleman yields back.
We now turn to Mr. Guthrie for 5 minutes. Oh, wait a
minute, Mr. Barton is back. I am sorry.
Mr. Barton. I need to get reconnected, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. All right. Then he will yield. And I think next
is Mr. Guthrie.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you very much. It is a privilege to be
here.
And sorry, on this committee we have so many subcommittees
going on with interesting testimony. I was out just a few
minutes ago. And I understand, Ms. Baker, you mentioned
Bluegrass Cellular, which is in my district. And we are very
proud to have a very interesting concept and a successful rural
carrier. And I understand you also talked about issues facing
small rural carriers. But in the context of evaluating what
constitutes reasonable network management, how are congestion
issues different for wireless networks, particularly in small
rural carriers?
Ms. Baker. Well, that is a great question. I did talk about
Bluegrass Cellular. They are our chairman this year. And they
are deeply concerned. They have issued a letter in the record
at the FCC. I am happy to offer it into the record here about
their concerns for rural carriers. So with no objection? So
there we go.
As far as the technical capacity and the reasonable network
management standard, we have to be very careful. If, say, Mr.
Latta and Chairman Walden were reliving the national football
championship and Ranking Member Eshoo were tweeting, and you
were taking your e-mail, if you were all on the same service
provider, you would all be on the same cell. If we had a bunch
of 16-year-olds walking through doing a tour of what Congress
looks like, that is a millisecond by millisecond management
that has to happen by our carriers. That is the same cell. It
is constrained. One strand of fiber is the same capacity of the
entire electromagnetic spectrum.
So there is an awful lot of network management that goes
on. These people, if you were a CTO of one of these smaller
carriers, you are updating any sort of things that can help you
handle this data capacity, just amazing upload. You say $45
billion in the spectrum auction. Well, it is no surprise
because the data that we use has increased by 730 percent.
Mr. Guthrie. Was that the same as congestion issues and
interference issues? Is that different?
Ms. Baker. Yes.
Mr. Guthrie. And how are they different?
Ms. Baker. The data is increasing, so the congestion is
increasing. So we are all using more data. So it is more and
more congested, and we have to manage our network more and
more.
Mr. Guthrie. It is all about interference, interference
issues.
Ms. Baker. Interference is if we are all using the same, if
it is raining outside, if more people come onto our cell site,
then we have to manage it, we have to make sure that it is
optimized so that all of us have the best user experience.
Mr. Guthrie. Well, thanks. And thanks for mentioning
Bluegrass Cellular. It is a great business.
And, Mr. Powell, I have a question. I know this issue was
touched here earlier, but I wanted your input. The FCC, do they
need to act in February? I mean, everyone wants the Internet to
remain open and vibrant, but is there some particular reason
the FCC shouldn't wait and see whether Congress can enact a
bipartisan bill?
Mr. Powell. It is really the decision of the Commission and
the chairman. That is the schedule he establishes. He has that
authority under the statute. I do believe that the Commission
should always be respectful of the legislative process and
provide both the expertise it needs to make a decision. But I
also do respect their separate and different authorities, and
they set their own timelines.
Mr. Guthrie. So when you were chairman in 2002, when cable
modem service was determined to be an information service, in
comments to the FCC the NCTA indicated that, quote, ``The
record shows that today's increasingly sophisticated broadband
services fall even more squarely within the definition of
information service than ever before,'' unquote. And could you
explain this from the perspective and understanding of
technology that you had before you in 2002 to the NCTA comments
expressed to the FCC last year?
Mr. Powell. I will try my best. I think one thing to note
is the draft legislation, as I understand it, rather than
disenfranchising the FCC of authority, is classifying a service
the same way this Commission has classified that service for
over 12 years, through both Republican and Democratic
administrations, including most recently in 2010 by President
Obama's first chairman of the FCC, who also agreed it was an
information service. The Commission has been operating under
that definition since the very beginning of broadband. That is
not new.
It is important to remember this isn't completely
discretionary. Congress creates classes of service and defines
them. It defines what a telecom service is and it defines what
an information service is. When broadband first emerged, and I
was privileged to see it come onto the scene when I was at the
Commission, there was an open question as to whether the nature
of that new integrated Internet service was either a
telecommunication service or an information service under our
precedents. It was our judgment that the factual
characteristics, the nature of the service, the way that it was
used was much more faithful to the definition that Congress set
out for information services than the one they set out for
telephone services. That went all the way to the United States
Supreme Court, who agreed with the Commission's judgment.
The Commission now is proposing to try to reinterpret the
facts and apply it to the other definition. Certainly they have
prerogative to try. But the facts are fundamentally the same as
they were in 2002, and that will be a very serious source of
litigation risk for the Commission when it fundamentally
changes its mind about the factual nature of the underlying
service.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. My time has expired.
Mr. Walden. The gentleman's time has expired.
We will now go to Mr. Welch for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Welch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A couple of points and
then a few questions.
Number one, I thank you and the ranking member. This is an
excellent hearing.
Number two, we are way ahead of where we were last year. I
mean, this draft bill does contain I think real responses to
the over 3 million comments that were offered to the FCC. So
that is terrific.
Third, I think the FCC itself, Chairman Wheeler, has been
extremely responsive. And I have had confidence that his
experience in the industry, as well as on the public sector
side, makes him someone who we can have confidence with respect
to light touch regulation.
But number four, and this is the heart of it for me,
whatever we do, my concern is for access to the Internet and
the cost. And three out of four Americans, and this is
especially true in rural America, really only have one
provider. So they have no competition in many parts of the
country.
So this question of what do we do has been answered
affirmatively about trying to maintain net neutrality in this
legislation, but there has been injected into it a major new
issue, which is new, and that is, do we take away jurisdiction
from the FCC? And that is a fundamental question that requires,
I think, an enormous amount of attention before we make a
decision to go forward.
Mr. Powell, I appreciate the point you made about
uncertainty, because if you are making big investment
decisions, obviously knowing what the rules of the road are,
are important to you. But the uncertainty goes both ways. If
you have legislation, it is very hard to change it. Let's be
real. We know that. If you have a regulatory policy, it is
there, and if it is done right it can respond to issues.
So I want to go to a couple of things that Mr. Misener
said, because I appreciated how specific you were. In the
legislation there is talk about specialized services without
definition, reasonable network management without definition in
the legislation, and third, which parts of the broadband are
protected by network connection. And under this legislation, if
there were a problem in any one of those three areas, who would
resolve the dispute or provide the remedy to somebody adversely
affected?
Mr. Misener. Thank you, Mr. Welch.
It is unclear. I mean, there is a direction in the bill to
establish an ex post adjudicatory process, which sounds nice in
practice, but it certainly does not provide the kind of
certainty and detail that most businesses and consumers seek.
Mr. Welch. So, Mr. Powell, who would resolve those issues?
I mean, there is not a dispute here that there is not a
definition in our legislation. We could all anticipate there
will be disputes. How would they be resolved?
Mr. Powell. First thing I think is really important to note
is the Commission, under judicial precedent, has the right and
the obligation to interpret the words of Congress. What
specialized services means or any other term of Congress would
absolutely be within the Commission's power to interpret and
enforce as they best understood it.
Mr. Welch. So let me just understand, because that is
important, I think, to me at least, what you just said. If
there were a dispute, you are saying the FCC would have
jurisdiction even though we are taking jurisdiction away from
the FCC in this legislation?
Mr. Powell. The draft, as I read it, certainly contemplates
the FCC enforcing the provisions.
Mr. Welch. OK. This is serious, because we know this
question is coming. Let's say Amazon had a dispute. Where would
they go to resolve it? Would they go to their legislator or
would they go to the FCC?
Mr. Powell. Surely, they would complain to the Federal
Communications Commission, who as I understand is fully
empowered to resolve that complaint under the provisions laid
out by Congress, as they do with every other complaint in their
regulatory jurisdiction.
Mr. Welch. OK. Thank you, Mr. Powell.
Mr. Powell. You are welcome.
Mr. Welch. Ms. Baker, one of the questions that I have is
most of the open Internet talk centers around over the last
mile between the Internet service provider and the end
consumer. But aren't there very real competitive concerns and
potential consumer impacts that arise in the exchange of data
between the ISPs and networks too? And how can we ensure under
this legislation that the interconnection continues to happen
for smaller competitive carriers in the telecommunication
marketplace?
Ms. Baker. That actually might be a better question for
Chairman Powell. We have been very focused on the mobile
industry and the technical parameters that are around the
mobile industry and the competitive factors on the mobile
industry. You mentioned competition and only one provider. In
the mobile industry, 8 out of 10 Americans have a choice of 4
or more providers, 94 percent have 3 or more providers. So it
is a very different issue, so you may want to redirect your
question.
Mr. Welch. OK. I think my time has expired. So thank you. I
yield back.
Mr. Walden. The gentleman's time has expired.
I would like unanimous consent to submit for the record a
letter to Ms. Marlene H. Dortch, Secretary, Federal
Communications Commission, from various companies, Bluegrass
Cellular and others. Without objection, it will be entered into
the record.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Walden. We will now turn to the gentleman from Texas,
Mr. Barton, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am going to ask just kind of a general information
question. The gentleman at the end of the table down there, Mr.
Powell, I used to know a Michael Powell, but he had some hair.
Mr. Walden. He reached perfection. He is my role model.
Mr. Powell. That was at the beginning of net neutrality.
Mr. Barton. Is this the same Michael Powell who used to be
important, used to be the chairman of the FCC?
Mr. Walden. If the gentleman would yield, yes, I believe
that is the case, and he has reached folic perfection.
Mr. Barton. OK. I just wanted to make sure before I asked
him a question.
Now, Mr. Powell, now that I know who you are--and I am
kidding, I know you--I wouldn't kid you if I didn't know you
pretty well.
But he is blushing, Mr. Chairman. Let the record show.
When you were chairman of the FCC, did your Commission give
any thought to regulating the Internet under Title II?
Mr. Powell. No. As I said, this was a question of first
impression when broadband was in essence invented. And that
question was presented to the Commission of, how should it be
properly classified under congressional law? So we did weigh
whether to regulate it as a telecommunication provider under
Title II or whether to regulate it as an information services
provider under Title I. The Commission voted to do the latter.
Mr. Barton. Are you aware of any academic or industry study
that claims the Internet is a natural monopoly?
Mr. Powell. I am not aware of any study. And in fact I
think one of the most substantial decisions made by this body
in 1996, when it passed the Telecomm Act, was to abandon that
thesis of regulatory policy that the markets are not natural
monopolies, they should be subject to competitive forces, and
it shouldn't be regulated as such. I mean, I think that is one
of the things that concerns us about the historical use of
Title II. Built in and woven throughout that body of law is the
assumption that the market is served most efficiently by a
monopoly, a state-sanctioned monopoly, as AT&T once was for a
very, very long time.
Mr. Barton. Assuming, and I think it is a correct
assumption, that the Internet is not a natural monopoly, that
it is in fact a competitive market, given your knowledge, both
in your prior capacity as chairman of the FCC and your current
capacity as an industry leader, do you view any participant on
the provider, the base provider part of the market to have what
would be called monopoly market power?
Mr. Powell. No, not during my tenure. And I disagree that
is the case today. As an old antitrust lawyer, we know that you
don't count noses, you look at what the effects are in the
market. Has capacity expanded? Capacity has expanded 1,500
percent in a decade. Has the market continued to invest? It
invested over a trillion dollars in that decade. Have prices
gone up to monopoly rent levels? Prices have stayed flat and
declined on a per megabit basis. I don't think any antitrust
scholar or Justice Department could conclude that it is an
unhealthy, uncompetitive market based on the actual
characteristics of the market that they use to measure that
question.
Mr. Barton. Well, if it is not a natural monopoly and there
is no participant in the provider sector of the market that has
monopoly market power, then it stands to reason that the
committee draft is correct that we should explicitly say you
shall not regulate or oversee the Internet under Title II. Do
you agree with that?
Mr. Powell. As I have testified consistently, I do think
the cost and damage to Americans' ambitions in broadband and
Title II far outweigh its benefits. I think that if the narrow
task before us is to create solid, bulletproof, legally
sustainable net neutrality rules, which we accept, we believe
that can be done without resorting to that hammer.
Mr. Barton. OK.
Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the former chairman for those
comments. I do believe that it is wise to put this out as a
draft. I think there are some very valid questions--and my
friends on the minority are asking some of those questions--
about how to perfect the language. I have some concerns myself
about certain parts of the draft. But as a base principle, the
fact that we should not regulate the Internet under Title II, I
think is beyond question. And if we start from that premise, I
think the discussion draft is an excellent document, and we can
iron out the details through these hearings and if you take it
to subcommittee markup in the markup itself.
With that, I yield back.
Mr.  Walden. I thank the gentleman.
We will now turn to the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr.
Yarmuth. Welcome aboard, and----
Mr. Yarmuth. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I want
to thank the panel. It has been a very enlightening
conversation, and I am new to this entire area. So I am
learning a lot as we go.
And one of the things that intrigues me about this entire
field is that we have a field that is changing as rapidly as
anything probably in history has changed, and we talked--some
of the members have talked about the difference between 1996
and now and how the world has changed.
But it is not just the technology that has changed, it is
also the industries have changed in the sense that this is kind
of an amorphous corporate structure that is out there now too.
There is a lot of consolidation going on. There are companies
getting into all various areas of the business so that at one
point they are acting like a common carrier, at another point
they are acting as a content provider and so forth.
So, Mr. Powell, you have mentioned before the distinction
between information services and telecommunication services in
the law. Is that a meaningful distinction today?
Mr. Powell. I think over time it shouldn't be, meaning, you
know, this is, I think, the case for this institution which I
think it is already committed to taking on the responsibility
to write a new act. We are entering into a world in which a bit
is a bit. Data networks follow radically different
characteristics than the ones that informed those judgments
when these laws were written in the 1930s or the 1990s, and I
do think that is a continuing problem.
I think net neutrality is actually just one of the first
highly contentious issues related to ambiguity, and it won't be
the last, and what concerns me is that I think Title II is even
more inapplicable to modern functions and modern networks, and
I think we will be ironing out, if that is the governing body,
for years to come how it is properly applied to networks that
do not behave in the ways that existed when those judgements
were made.
Mr. Yarmuth. Right. Thank you.
Ms. Baker, you say in your testimony this similar
conversation, mobile broadband is different, and I agree with
you that network neutrality rules need to be flexible enough to
take into account the technological differences between
networks.
The draft, though, we are discussing today would restrict
the FCC's ability to interpret the net neutrality rules once
they are enacted.
How can the FCC give wireless carriers the flexibility they
need without the authority to modify or clarify the network
neutrality rules?
Ms. Baker. I think the draft is a great start. I think as
we evolve we need to work on the definitions and make sure that
we have the proper definition for reasonable network
management. Currently it acknowledges the technological
differences. I think that is important. We will have to watch
all the definitions, but I think we have got a great start, and
look forward to working with all of you on it.
Mr. Yarmuth. Thank you.
The 1996 act created a partnership between the states and
the Federal Government, and each had important
telecommunications oversight and responsibilities. Our partners
in state governments and public utility commissions are often
closer to the ground and can respond quickly to consumer
complaints.
As we are considering this legislation, I want to address
this to Ms. Gonzalez, should we be thinking about the consumer
protection role of the states as well?
Ms. Gonzalez. Absolutely. In fact, there has been a lot of
talk recently about the FCC acting to protect local choice in
broadband. In particular, there is an effort to ensure that
states do not restrict local communities from building their
own broadband networks. I have concern that the draft
legislation, as it stands today, would disempower the
commission from addressing that very serious issue of local
choice for consumers.
Mr. Yarmuth. And while I have your attention, we have been
talking about the competitive situation with broadband. In my
community there is basically one system, and so there is really
no incentive for them to provide great quality service or
consumer service.
Are you concerned about the ramifications for consumer
protection if we go down this route literally that is in the
draft bill?
Ms. Gonzalez. Yes. Absolutely. I think it calls into
question the FCC's role in protecting consumers and there may
be some competition that might not be an actual monopoly, but I
think if you ask people around the kitchen table do they feel
like they have choice in particularly their home broadband
connections, I think the vast majority of consumers feel kind
of trapped.
Mr. Yarmuth. Yes. I agree.
I just want to say one thing. It is certainly my preference
for Congress to act in all of these areas, but I have very
serious concerns, again, the way the world is moving, Congress
at its optimum efficiency moves at about 10 miles an hour, and
the world is moving at 100, and I think in this field and many,
many others it is becoming very, very difficult for us to make
long-term policy decisions because the future is so uncertain,
and we talk about providing certainty, there is not a lot of
certainty out in the world just because the worldis changing so
fast.
So, anyway, editorial comment.
Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr.  Walden. Gentleman yields back.
We now go to the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Olson, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Olson. Mr. Chairman, as you know, today is my first
hearing as a member of this subcommittee, and I think I am
thrilled to be here.
All kidding aside, Ms. Baker, it is always refreshing to
have someone who went to school in Houston, Texas, as a
panelist.
As you know, ma'am, the last major update to the
Communications Act occurred 19 years ago. Giving the importance
of the Internet to our economy, our social fabric, does it make
sense for Congress to take a fresh look at how to tackle
Internet openness rather than try to invoke statutory
provisions that are decades old?
Ms. Baker. Absolutely, and we are very committed to work
with you on that.
Mr. Olson. Thank you.
One question for all the panelists. We all agree that these
proposed changes by the FCC rule to Title II will bring about
legislation. I think we can all agree with that.
My question is that is going to make for a lot of
uncertainty. How long will that last? When it is decided by the
courts, how long? Any idea? A year? Two years? Five years? A
decade? Mr. Powell?
Mr. Powell. Well it is always hard to say without looking
back historically, but when my commission first adopted the
definition of information services, it was 3 to 4 years before
there was complete resolution of a litigation case because of
the ruling of the Supreme Court.
The commission now is proposing to do fundamentally the
same thing, a brand-new untested definitional change coupled,
by the way, with new and untested other applications of
forbearance and other things.
So we are talking about potentially a litigation process
that typically would run 3 to 5 years depending on its
complexity, depending on the parties, and depending on the
court system.
Mr. Olson. Does that assume applications that decisions
come out longer than 3 to 5 years, or is that sort of the whole
window?
Mr. Powell. Well, the problem is if any part of the order
is overturned by a court, then there are remands to the
commission. That could be a whole new commission. This
commission will only be in power for the next 2 years. It could
be remanded to the next administration's commission. This thing
could start all over again. It is not a complete exaggeration
to say 10 years from now we could still be sitting here.
Mr. Olson. Mr. Dickerson, your comments, sir. How long?
Mr. Dickerson. Yes. Well, first of all, we don't see the
FCC action in congressional action as mutually exclusive. I
think, obviously, Mr. Powell has a lot of experience in these
areas. So I don't want to contradict his legal expertise and
the process expertise.
I am very encouraged by many of the principles in the bill.
I have stated the issues that I am concerned about. I think the
congressional action can--if the bill is amended in the ways
that we have described could provide much more certainty and
work along with FCC regulations.
I wanted to really quickly while I have the floor amend an
earlier comment. I wanted to clarify that I will not see the
draft FCC order before they vote, and I apologize for that
mistake.
Thank you.
Mr. Olson. Duly noted.
Mr. Misener, how about the courts? How long?
Mr. Misener. Well, all litigation is optional, and so it
might be up to the litigants whether they pursue it. If we get
a great FCC order that everyone loves, maybe no one will sue.
Some parties have suggested that they are going to sue
regardless. It is not we, it is they. It is a choice of theirs.
Mr. Olson. Ms. Gonzalez, how long?
Ms. Gonzalez. I think the risk of litigation comes with an
FCC order as well as with the proposed legislation. I think no
matter what there will be legal action to clarify definitional
issues in the legislative draft, and so while all of us,
especially those of us who are lawyers who don't make a lot of
money on these issues would like to see, you know, as little
litigation as possible, I think it is unavoidable regardless of
the path.
Mr. Olson. How about 3 to 5 years like Chairman Powell
said? Do you think that is the window of this uncertainty?
Ms. Gonzalez. I think the draft legislation opens up the
opportunity for case-by-case adjudications of various
definitional issues that the FCC would have to resolve, and so
it could even be longer----
Mr. Olson. Thank you.
Fairly quick, ma'am, because Ms. Baker is waiting.
Ms. Turner-Lee. Yes. I would actually say that I think the
draft legislation would actually reduce the amount of time and
that we will experience litigation----
Mr. Olson. OK.
Ms. Turner-Lee [continuing]. If we go towards that. And I
also think the draft legislation would give the Congress as
well as the FCC some room to look at some of the areas of the
bill because out of the 11 principles there is probably one
that it sounds like needs to be debated, and that is the
Section 706 authority piece, but I think Congress would act
much quicker than the type of litigation that we would actual
have, and we would avoid the consequences of Title II.
Mr. Olson. Ms. Baker?
Ms. Baker. So the 2010 rules were not published for a
while. There are various kind of procedural ways that the FCC
can extend that time before they publish them. Once they were
published, they were turned back last year. We are now at the
FCC revisiting those.
Certainly the best way to act for certainty is for Congress
to act. So it depends on how you count it. That is 2010. It is
2015. They will promote some more rules that will also--
depending if they really go Title II, they will be litigated.
That will be another window of several years of litigation and
uncertainty.
Mr. Olson. Thank you.
My time has expired.
Mr. Walden. Thank the gentleman for his participation.
I ask unanimous consent that we enter into the record a
statement on the Verizon Policy Blog from Fran Shammo, the
Verizon executive vice president, chief financial officer,
which deals with this issue of investment, and in which Fran
says, ``Experience in other countries shows that over-
regulation decreases network investment. If the U.S. ends up
with permanent regulations inflicting Title II's 1930-era rules
and broadband Internet access, the same thing will happen in
the U.S. And investment broadband networks will go down.'' So
it was a clarifying statement from December 11th.
Ms. Eshoo. Somebody is scolding him.
Mr. Walden. I don't have any knowledge of that since this
was December 11th, but would enter that into the record.
Without opposition, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Walden. We will go now to Mr. Loebsack.
Welcome aboard the subcommittee. As you can see, we don't
deal with many controversial issues here.
Mr. Loebsack. I am happy to jump into this one as the very
first issue that I am dealing with, despite the admonition from
Mr. Powell about the difficulty of this subject.
I want to thank the ranking member as well for this
wonderful hearing today. I have learned a lot. This is the
first hearing that I have had on this subcommittee. I am on the
larger committee as well, and if I might, Mr. Chairman, I would
like at the outset to request submission for the record a
letter from the Internet Association offering their analysis
and concerns of the draft bill that we are discussing.
Mr. Chair, I would like to submit----
Mr. Walden. Without objection.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Loebsack. Thank you.
I come from Iowa. I have 24 counties in my congressional
district. It is a much more diverse district than folks on
either coast of the United States might imagine. No offense to
folks on either coast, especially our chair and ranking member
here, but we have got a lot of issues in a district like mine.
It is a very big area.
What I would like to start off with is a question to you,
Ms. Baker. Those statistics that you cited, something about 8
out of 10 folks have 4 choices or--can you cite those
statistics again?
Ms. Baker. 8 out of 10 Americans have a choice of more
mobile broadband providers, and 94 percent have a choice of
three or more.
Mr. Loebsack. And do you know where the 20 percent and the
6 percent reside? Do you have any idea at all?
Ms. Baker. I am certain we can get you a map.
Mr. Loebsack. That would be wonderful. I would really
appreciate it. I would suspect, although I don't know for sure,
that it is probably in rural areas where those folks reside.
This is my ninth year in Congress. My first year on this
committee, but I have been getting around my district for the
last 8 years, and this is a huge issue that has come up, the
access on the part of rural areas to broadband, to cellular
service, to all the things that we are talking about here. That
is why I am so excited to be on this subcommittee. It was my
first choice so I could do what I can for the folks in my
district, and I want to thank all of you.
Mr. Dickerson, in particular, I knew nothing about Etsy
until my daughter requested a gift certificate as a Christmas
present, and I immediately went online and found out what a
wonderful service you offer. So thank you for you being here as
well.
Mr. Dickerson. Thank you.
Mr. Loebsack. I support net neutrality, obviously. I am
interested in working with both sides of the aisle so we can
craft some kind of legislation to bring this up to where we
ought to be in 2015, fully recognizing that we really will
never as legislators understand all the issues down the road
because things are going to be changing all the time.
We are going to do the best we can, and I do appreciate the
majority bringing a bill to the floor--or bringing a draft to
us at this point so we can spend a lot of time working on this,
but as I said, the rural areas are really probably my major
concern as a Congressman, and I would like to ask, Ms. Gonzalez
and perhaps Dr. Turner-Lee and maybe the rest of you as time
permits what effects might this proposed legislation have on
our rural consumers, especially the Universal Service Fund
programs, universal programs, service programs, which were
already mentioned briefly?
Ms. Gonzalez. Thank you.
Thank you, Congressman for the question.
This is one of my deep concerns with the draft legislation
as it stands. Stripping the FCC of Title II and 706 authority,
calls into question the ability of the commission to continue
ongoing processes that help subsidize expansion of broadband in
rural areas as well as programs that could make it more
affordable for those rural folks that do have a connection but
can't afford to connect.
We are really concerned about, people in rural areas
driving down the road to wherever they can get a wireless
signal to do their homework or we need to ensure that this bill
does no harm to efforts to, you know, increase digital
inclusion. It is an important imperative for education as well.
Mr. Loebsack. Thank you.
Dr. Turner-Lee?
Ms. Turner-Lee. Thank you, Congressman.
I actually want to say that I think that the bill, if you
flip it on the other side, has the promise if we were to look
carefully at Section 706 authority over Title II to actually
increase the further deployment and adoption in rural
communities. I think part of the reason why the FCC has the
authority of 706 is to get at the very issue that you are
talking about, and I think by looking at the bill in a way
where that is a point of debate because it is a discussion
draft will actually allow us to be careful in the legislative
path that we do take.
I mean, if we take Title II--we have already heard from the
association leaders about the high capital investment in
communities overall, but the communities like rural and the
communities that we are concerned with at MMTC will be the last
on the list if capital is depressed among our communities.
So I think we need to be real careful about that. In the
study that I did in 2010 of the national broadband map, there
was very little coverage of census tracks that were the lowest
in their areas in their states and communities, and it has been
since 2010 under the light-touch regulatory environment that we
have seen a lot of growth, particularly with wireless as an
onramp for some of these communities as well.
So I would caution against throwing the baby out with the
bath water with the legislative proposal and to come to the
table to really think about what ways can Section 706 perhaps--
and we have offered some solutions that we are willing to work
and sit down with congressional members, the staff to talk
about, but how can you actually leverage that point in there so
that to the earlier point of the congressman we don't spend a
lot of time wasted where we can't get to the debate of
universal service deployment and other things that you do care
about and we do too.
Mr. Loebsack. I see my time has expired, Mr. Chair, but I
would like a response from the others if that is possible for
the record----
Mr. Walden. Sure.
Mr. Loebsack [continuing]. Moving forward.
Thank you so much.
Mr.  Walden. Or if they can give it to you really quickly.
Mr. Loebsack. Yes.
Mr. Dickerson. I could go very quickly. In my opening
remarks, I said that Etsy is a democratizing force for
entrepreneurship. Democratizing entrepreneurship means
providing rural broadband so that people are not disadvantaged
by where they live on whether or not they can take advantage of
this great platform that we have.
So we are concerned that legislation, by revoking the FCC's
authority, could really undermine efforts to promote adoption
in rural areas, broadband adoption.
Mr. Loebsack. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Powell. I think the thing I would emphasize quickly is
the biggest problem of reaching rural America, which should be
a sacred obligation of all telecom policy is because the costs
are highly uneconomical for entry.
Mr. Loebsack. I understand that.
Mr. Powell. And so you have to balance off FCC power with
ensuring that we are not raising the cost of providing services
and further disincenting infrastructure builders from coming
into those communities, and that is the other worry about
moving to a regime that could raise those costs.
Mr. Loebsack. Any other----
Mr. Walden. Any others real quickly?
Mr. Misener, go ahead.
Mr. Misener. Thank you.
It is hard for me to believe that investment requires
blocking, throttling, not disclosing, engaging in paid
prioritization.
Mr. Loebsack. Thank you.
Mr. Walden. All of which would be banned under our draft.
Correct?
Mr. Misener. Question whether it is enforceably banned, and
question whether network operators can get out of it by
offering specialized services or claiming reasonable network
management.
So there are a lot of questions, but clearly those good
things, that what I call excellent principles, should be
protected.
Mr. Walden. And, remember, you still have the FTC in the
background unless it goes Title II.
Ms. Gonzalez.
Ms. Gonzalez. To response directly to Dr. Turner-Lee,
currently the Universal Service Fund is located in Title II in
Section 254, and so 706 isn't enough for us to get there, and
we want assurances that the commission continue ongoing and
upcoming processes to expand access.
Mr. Loebsack. Thank you.
Mr. Walden. Dr. Turner-Lee?
Ms. Turner-Lee. In response to Ms. Gonzalez--we are going
down the line.
I mean, I think that in terms of Title II clearly you are
correct in terms of the assurances that are there, but then it
comes with everything else, and I think that everything else is
what we are actually concerned about in our communities if you
do go back to the conversation about rate regulation, et
cetera.
For the communities that we represent, they are not even at
the beginning of the finish line of this, and we have a lot
more work to do, and I think we need to be really cautious
about the regulatory action that is taken given the fact that
there are 30 million people that still do not have broadband
access, and Congressman, many of them in your area, and I think
the fact that we have been at this conversation and we keep
going into this whirlwind continues to disadvantage the people
that we represent that needs to get about the business of other
issues, and so respectfully, Ms. Gonzalez, I think you are
right, but I think, the same token, I think Title II is just
much too excessive to actually get the things that we want.
Mr. Loebsack. Got it.
Mr. Walden. Ms. Baker.
Ms. Baker. Schools and libraries and rural programs exist
as broadband is classified under Title I. I think they would
continue. I think it is a good discussion to have. We have a
Comm Act rewrite that is going forward. So I think it is
important and we all realize it is important and we can
continue the conversation.
Mr. Loebsack. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Walden. You are welcome.
I thought it would be helpful too for the whole committee
to hear everybody get a shot at it, and, Mr. Loebsack, if you
would like to meet with Mr. Cramer and me afterwards, we can
show you what a real rural district looks like.
We are now going to go to the gentleman from Florida who
has joined our subcommittee, Mr. Bilirakis, for five minutes.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is an honor to serve on this subcommittee. It has been a
terrific hearing. Thank you so very much. I have a couple
questions here.
First for Mr. Powell. After speaking with a medium-sized
broadband provider in my district, they were concerned that
during this push for a reclassification the FCC has not
conducted a single study on the impact that reclassification
would have on small- and medium-sized operators.
What are your thoughts on the ability of small- and medium-
sized ISPs to handle the increased burden of internet
regulation?
Mr. Powell. I think it is fair to say they are deeply
concerned. I would emphasize that the FCC has a legal
obligation on the Regulatory Flexibility Act to take special
consideration of small businesses in the cost benefit analysis
of their decisions.
Our members have filed with the commission raising grave
concerns that they have not complied with the RFA as part of
that analysis. That is an ongoing conversation with the
commission, but yet another potential vulnerability in the
rules that will come out from the commission.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, sir.
Ms. Turner-Lee, and I know you touched upon this, but maybe
you want to elaborate a little bit, I have a couple areas in my
district, Lacoochee and Trilby, as many members do, where even
today Internet adoption is significantly behind the rest of the
country and they are struggling to get reliable broadband up
and running.
Can you explain why Title II reclassification could
disproportionately impact and further harm communities with
lower broadband adoption already?
Ms. Turner-Lee. Yes. Thank you, Congressman.
So in my testimony and on record I actually put more
statistics in there to actually talk about the fact that
relevance actually leads when it comes to the reasons why
people do not get online. The cost of broadband as well as the
type of device actually come after why do I need to use this
tool, and I think for all of us in this room, if we want to
equalize democracy, as it was said earlier, we need to get
people online to they can realize the full value.
The challenge with Title II, to your question, is, you
know, again, as I have said, that we still have to get
everybody to the starting point before we get to the finish
line, and trying to manage around some of the hypothetical
harms of what the Internet can do really does a disservice, and
under monopoly-era telephone service we can only talk and hear.
Under broadband, we can talk, hear, discuss, engage, see, and
do other things.
If a community is of color, we want to solve social
problems that are chronic, like chronic disease or the lack of
educational resources, et cetera. The possibilities and
aspirations of the Internet are so great, and why would we try
to restrict and regulate something that is really just still in
its infancy, and for our communities, again, relevance is the
issue.
We have got to move people of color, more vulnerable
populations like the poor and the disabled and seniors and the
folks that do not speak English as first language to the
Internet for the power of government resources so they can move
from an inline economy to an online economy. We have got to
move them into places where we can solve those problems much
like in Florida where people are not taking advantage of the
new technology, and having a restrictive Title II stance, I
think, has its impacts outside of chilling investment and
deployment.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you so very much.
Mr. Powell, will Title II regulation do anything to
encourage incumbents to upgrade networks or new companies to
enter the market?
Mr. Powell. Well, I would like to take the latter part of
your question because I think this is a serious overlooked
aspect of Title II. It is a major disincentive for a new
competitor to enter the market, and all you need to do to look
for evidence is some of the examples that are held up as
sterling new entry like Google Fiber. Google Fiber entered the
market, by the way, it only entered the market in a handful of
selected cities, it elected to provide broadband service and it
elected to provide video service but refused to offer telephone
service.
It refused in its own public statements in saying it chose
not to provide telephone service because of the regulatory
compliance costs associated with being a telephone company. In
fact, the President of the United States was in Iowa recently,
in Cedar Falls, talking about the municipal broadband company
that provides a very fast Internet service. That company also
provides broadband and video service. To date, provides no
telephone or telecommunication service in part because of the
regulatory cost incentives.
Title II fundamentally assumes an incumbent state-
sanctioned monopoly, and it tends to provide a regime that is
very hostile to entering and providing a new and competitive
alternative.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you very much.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Gonzalez. Gentleman yields back his time.
We now go to the gentlelady from California, Matsui, for
five minutes.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, ranking
member, for hold this hearing today.
You know, the Internet is very dynamic, and I must say this
hearing has also been dynamic and lively, and has been much
appreciated, I know, by the members here.
You know, a year ago no one was talking about paid
prioritization. Now people are talking a lot about it. It is
also called Internet fast lanes. Now, it is central now to the
net neutrality debate, and that is why I had introduced a bill
with Senator Leahy to ban paid prioritization or so-called
Internet fast lanes.
Now, the reason why I bring this up is because this is
where the consumer gets involved. The consumer understands
this, and when I had my hearing and at home when I talk with
people, they understand. They don't like the idea of having to
pay extra to access the content of programs they want to see or
view online, and this is pretty clear, and I talk to some of
the anchor institutions, schools and libraries, and they also
feel that they can't afford to cut deals. Neither can the
start-ups cut deals with each ISP to compete. So this is very
central to what we are talking about today. So our policy has
to be very clear about how it impacts the consumer.
Ms. Baker and Mr. Powell, do your associations support a
ban on paid prioritizations? And I would like a yes or no.
Mr. Powell. Yes.
Ms. Baker. Yes.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you.
Ms. Gonzalez, and I would like Mr. Misener to comment on
this too, from a consumer point of view, does the bill truly
ban all forms of paid prioritization, and if not, why? We have
been talking around this, but can you please expand on this,
and also Mr. Misener?
Ms. Gonzalez. Sure. So I think as many have raised, there
is a question around the definition or lack thereof of--or the
vague definition of specialized services and whether or not
that creates a giant loophole that could severely diminish the
rule that was intended to ban paid prioritization. I think it
is also worthwhile to consider issues of discrimination on the
Internet that fall outside paid prioritization, and there are
quite a few.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Mr. Misener?
Mr. Misener. Thank you.
I think in addition to the concern about specialized
services which, by the way, isn't just possibly a loophole for,
quote, ``paid prioritization by third parties,'' but rather by
affiliated companies engaged in more or less the same behavior.
You can imagine a Internet broadband access provider also
having an affiliated content business which gets special
treatment. It wouldn't be paid prioritization in the sense that
they were getting paid by a third party, but it would be
prioritizing traffic based on the ownership rather than a
payment.
The other two areas of concern are ones that we have
discussed previously. One is keeping the reasonable network
management carveout as narrow as possible, and we should again
view that askance if it does seem to favor some content over
others.
And, lastly, of course, this business about where in the
network these things could occur. It needs to be clear in the
bill that it is throughout the broadband Internet access
service provider's network.
Ms. Matsui. Do you feel that this bill is a good starting
point? How do you feel about this?
Mr. Misener. Are you asking me?
Ms. Matsui. Yes.
Mr. Misener. Yes. I do. I do. I think it is a novel
approach where a set of principles, and which I have called
excellent principles, are clearly defined and then capped with
a ceiling. If that actually works, it is a great start, but our
concerns expressed today are that how they would actually--how
that ceiling with the great principles would actually work, but
if it works, that is a great start.
Ms. Matsui. Ms. Gonzalez, you feel the same way?
Ms. Gonzalez. I am certainly pleased that members on both
sides of the aisle agree that that net neutrality is a serious
problem and we need to address it through government action in
some way or another.
I have serious reservations about the draft legislation as
it stands, mostly given the level of authority that it would
strip of the commission right now and the lack of inclusion of
a ban on unreasonable discrimination on the Internet.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Well, you know, I strongly believe that we
have to get this right, either at the FCC or Congress. It is
far too important.
You think about the Internet affects everything that we do
in our lives, and this is--and I think that this is--the first
thing I think is a starting point is 100 percent ban on paid
prioritization, and we have to figure out how to do that, and
there can't be any loopholes. I mean, you are talking about
some loopholes already. So we have to start addressing that.
If we can't get that right, we are moving backwards. Our
consumers will know that we are moving backwards, and we are
really stifling competition when you think about that too. I
have heard from many start-ups who really feel that they were
able to start their businesses, but in fact if we don't play
this right and ban paid prioritization, we will go backwards,
and if we don't ban it, institute strong net neutrality
protections for consumers and innovation.
So I truly believe that this is our opportunity, and this
is a wonderful hearing to begin the discussion.
So I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Walden. Thank the gentlelady for her comments.
And we will look forward to working with Mr. Misener, and
we appreciated your comments as well as we try and--that is
obviously not our intent to ban it and then come back and
create a loophole and allow it to go through. So I appreciate
your willingness to work with us on that.
We are going to go now to the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Johnson. New member of our subcommittee and delighted to have
you part of the team.
Mr. Johnson. And winner of the national championship, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Walden. And the gentleman's time has expired. Let's
go----
Mr. Johnson. No. In all seriousness, Mr. Chairman, it is an
honor to be on the subcommittee. Under your leadership, I look
forward to the work that we will----
Mr. Walden. No amount of sucking up is going to get you out
of that one. OK?
Mr. Johnson. All right. I will buy you a new red tie later.
To the panelists, thank you folks for being here. I have
about 30-plus years of private sector and DOD experience in
information technology, and so I am very familiar with the
issues that we are dealing with and the criticality of those
issues.
I can remember back in the 1970s when I first got started
in information technology and telecommunications, we went
through generations of technological upgrades about every 10
years. There was a generation from the 1970s to the 1980s and
then the 1980s to the 1990s and about the mid-1990s leading
into the 2000s it began to accelerate to where we are today. I
mean, many of the devices that we all use on a daily basis,
many of them weren't even here even 5 years ago.
Today we see technological turnover about every quarter
almost. As soon as one model comes out, the next one comes in.
And so technological innovation requires the right conditions,
and more government means less flexibility and fewer
opportunities to grow. I think it was President Ronald Reagan
that said, ``The answer to our problems is never more
government.''
If you look at what the telecom industry needs, in order to
be successful it needs to be nimble in order to innovate, which
it can't do if a heavy hand of government prevents it from
doing so. Windows of opportunity in the industry of
telecommunications, they only open for a very, very short
period of time, and innovators must have the certainty that if
they jump into the fray and if they put big investments on the
next great big thing, that they are going to be able to take
advantage and get a return on their investment.
So, these issues that we are talking about today are
extremely important, I know I represent a very rural district.
We have talked about how important this is to some of those
areas, and I appreciate those comments.
Mr. Powell, in NCTA's comments to the FCC in the open
Internet docket, it is stated that Title II reclassification,
and I quote, ``Would dampen the very infrastructure investment
the commission seeks to foster.'' These comments go on to
indicate that the reclassification, again, quote, ``Would
require providers to divert substantial time and resources to
design and implement numerous systems and processes necessary
to comply with the various requirements and obligations of
Title II.''
Can you quantify in any way the time and resources that you
are describing in those comments?
Mr. Powell. Well, I think it would be difficult to put a
number on it without agreeing to what the scope is we would
have to comply with it, and I think, as we have all recognized,
it depends on what you are going to be subject to and what you
are not. There are 1,000 Title II regulations. How many of them
will apply, to what depth they apply, and what your obligation
is on them is a huge open question.
Mr. Johnson. Is it safe to say, though, that this type of
diversion of time and resources will have the effect of
chilling innovation?
Mr. Powell. If people want a better understanding of this,
they would go read the history of what the biggest regulatory
problems were in the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s with telephone
companies. There was an enormous dissatisfaction that they were
not investing, that they were not innovating.
What was the last telephone innovation you recall in the
area of wired phones? Was it the pink princess phone or the
blue one? I mean, there was a real disincentive belief, and it
has been the government's policy, both at the FCC and Congress,
to be retreating from those regulatory tools for decades in
order to spur more investment and innovation into those
industries, and it really was that retreat that helped foster
and explode the wireless----
Mr. Johnson. Right.
Mr. Powell [continuing]. Industry, the cable industry as a
competitor to broadcast and a whole host of other industries
with the revision of those policies.
So I think there is plenty of examples of the way that
Title II or that kind of regulatory model disincents and if you
need one last example, go look at the experience in Europe, who
when we defined it as an information service, they pursued the
equivalent of Title II regulation. Their ministers today are
calling for an end to that regulatory environment and an
adoption of the U.S. model because of the depressing effects on
innovation and investment and----
Mr. Johnson. Like I said, more government is never the
answer to the problem.
Ms. Baker, do you have a thought on that as well?
Ms. Baker. Sure. I would follow up on his example with
Europe, because as we talk investment, if we want to put some
hard numbers to it, we in the wireless industry don't have it
because we have never been under title II, but a real world
example is Europe, and from 2011 to 2013 we put 73 percent more
capex in investment than Europe. Our networks are 30 times
faster, and we have three times more LTE, which is the 4G
platform than the rest of--than Europe.
So we don't know how much this would chill. We don't know--
certainly we are going to continue to innovate. We are going to
continue to invest. The question is how much. Maybe not as
much, and I would say that when we looked towards the future,
we look towards specialized services such as the connected car
and what mobile health services are going to offer, and we are
going to need to have smarter, faster, stronger networks to
perform our connected life activities.
It is going to be really exciting, but we want to make sure
that we continue the framework that has shown such great
investment and such great opportunity that we are leading the
world.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chairman, the case has just been made why
it is to critically important that we do this right.
Innovation, particularly in this industry, gives us the tools
that we need to get our economy thriving once again, and we
need to make sure we do this the right way.
And I yield back.
Mr. Walden. Appreciate that.
Appreciate the gentleman's experience. We are glad to have
you on the subcommittee.
We will turn now to the gentleman from California, Mr.
McNerney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Well, Mr. Chairman, I am thrilled to be back
on this subcommittee, and I want to thank you for holding this
hearing and for trying to get ahead of this issue by issuing
the draft legislation.
You heard our deep concern about the reduction of the
enforcement authority both from the Democrats on the panel and
from many of our panelists.
Mr. Chairman, I would love to be able to vote for the final
package, and I hope that we can work together to find something
that would work.
Mr. Powell, I certainly sympathize with your concerns about
overregulation raising cost to the providers. However, I also
have concerns about reducing enforcement authority,thus raising
the cost for end users.
But my first question has to do with the forbearance of the
Title II requirements. Mr. Wheeler has indicated that he is
willing to forbear, and even if he does this, the current
concern is that the legislation may inhibit the FCC's ability
to react and adjust to technological advances.
Do you share that concern that the legislation would
inhibit the FCC's ability to react?
Mr. Powell. Well, I think the FCC has way more to react and
interpret than is being suggested. The FCC, with any
Congressional act, has the first instance in responsibility to
interpret those provisions and enforce them across a wide range
of activity. Even in the context of specialized service, if the
effect of something someone was doing was to block or ban or
throttle, I am absolutely confident the commission could reach
that behavior even under this statute.
The complexities of forbearance are substantial. Everybody,
including the chairman, have professed an interest in doing so.
If one were to pull out the record, many of the advocates
arguing that this is easy to do and will be a light touch are
all on record with laundry lists of other provisions that
should not be forborne from. Groups like Public Knowledge and
others have long lists of additional requirements that should
be maintained.
There are also serious questions about----
Mr. McNerney. Do you think that the FCC is more agile than
the Congress in addressing these complex issues?
Mr. Powell. Not always, to be perfectly honest. The
commission and Title II have been no bastion of efficiency over
time. Regulatory proceedings rarely take less than a year. They
often are quite exhaustive and take a lot of time. Sometimes
that is because they struggle to find clear direction from
Congress as to how to act. The clearer that direction and the
more direct it is, the more expeditious the process works, even
with FCC implementation.
Mr. McNerney. Well, we have a chance to pass legislation
here, I believe, but it may be a 2015 piece of legislation that
is in effect for 10 years. So we have to get this right and
give the FCC the flexibility it needs to carry out those
intents. At least that is my opinion.
Miss Gonzalez, would you briefly summarize for us the types
of litigation risk the FCC will likely face under the approach
provided by the draft legislation.
Ms. Gonzalez. So I think there is quite a few factual
determinations. If we are talking about procedural risks that
the legislation poses, I think it puts the burden on consumers
to, first of all, assess whether or not they have had their net
neutrality rights violated, and then to figure out how to bring
that before the commission, and it is somewhat complicated
adjudication process that requires lawyers that even many of
the start-ups that do have some resources, more resources than
consumers at least, have said they would be unlikely to be able
to engage in because they have limited legal counsel.
But beyond that, after those decisions are issued, there
could be follow-up litigation because this creates a situation
where we would have to get to the details on a case-by-case
basis which could not just be one lawsuit that would likely
come from the FCC order, but a series of lawsuits.
Mr. Walden. Would the gentleman yield? I was trying to get
clarification.
Mr. McNerney. I don't want to lose too much time here.
Mr.  Walden. I will give you a little extra with unanimous
consent, but how is what we are proposing here directing the
FCC to put in place appeals mechanism so consumers can appeal
differ from how it works across any other agency in the
government? I am confused.
Don't we want citizens to have that ability to file a
complete and appeal and----
Ms. Gonzalez. We want them to have the ability, but we also
want the Internet service providers to have the burden to show
that they are not discriminating.
So it is really about how we are shifting the burden, and
it is really difficult for--there is actually not a lot of us
consumers activists doing this work, and so it is really
difficult for consumers to carry the burden alone.
Mr. Walden. We will continue this conversation.
Ms. Gonzalez. Sure. I would be happy to continue the
conversation.
Mr. Walden. And I will go back to the gentleman because I--
--
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Mr. Dickerson, do you think that the FCC has a role to play
to ensure robust broadband competition?
Mr. Dickerson. Absolutely, and one of our concerns with the
draft legislation is the revocation of authority of the FCC to
do that.
Mr. McNerney. OK. Miss Gonzalez, do you think the broadband
market is sufficiently competitive to protect consumers on its
own?
Ms. Gonzalez. Not at this time.
Mr. McNerney. OK. Thank you.
I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr.  Walden. The gentleman yields back the balance of his
time.
We go now to the gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Long, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Powell, a minute ago you were talking about
technology and the old land lines and telephone development,
our choices were pink princess phone or a blue princess phone,
and I had to think, my 20-year-old daughters--20-something,
they are in their 20s, what they would do if I handed them a
rotary dial phone today and said: Here. You need to make a
telephone call. I question whether they would be able to do
that.
And I saw a cartoon the other day of a young man in 1983,
and he probably weighed 120 pounds, and he had a desktop
computer, like we all had, about that size, and it showed 2015
and his computer was now this size, and he weighed about the
same thing I do today. So while his computer got smaller and he
got larger, that is kind of what--with this, I am given a
reminder or reminded about the story that Steve Forbes used to
tell that if the cell phone development was left to the United
States Government, what we would have--because in that same
year, 1983, first phone I had was a brick phone and made by
Motorola.
It weighed two pounds, and in 1983 it cost $3,995. This
phone didn't cost me $3,995, and Steve Forbes told the story
something to the effect of if it was left to the government to
develop cell phone technology today, that same 2-pound phone
would weigh 4 pounds and it would cost $7,995. So I think that
innovation is a pretty good thing, and the government, the more
it stays out of it, the better we would be.
We have had a long hearing here today. Had a full table of
witnesses. Lot of my colleagues have spoken before me as they
are prone to do in these things. Usually the time it gets
around to me I am one of the wrap-up guys. The time it gets
around to me a lot of the questions have already been asked,
and so normally I like to kind of cut to the chase at this
point and just get to the meat of the issue.
And, Mr. Powell, sticking with you here, the consensus is
that the Internet should be open and vibrant. Everybody agrees
to that. But isn't the controversy really about the extent of
the FCC's authority to ensure that it remains open and vibrant,
whether the authority should be derived from Title II or
Section 706, doesn't it make sense for Congress to make that
call?
Mr. Powell. Well, yes, sir. I think we have to recognize
that it is not for the FCC or any regulatory agency to create
its own jurisdiction. It is for it to act on the jurisdiction
provided to it by this institution. There is no question that
the reason this has been a tortuous and long debate for a
decade is because the ambiguity surrounding the commission's
authority to adopt a set of rules that, as you can tell from
this panel, have almost near unanimous consent around the
substantive rules we are attempting to achieve.
The only thing that is being argued about is what
authoritative basis that is executed on, and every time the
commission attempts to do that on its own it is going to face,
necessarily, litigation, complexity, and challenge around that.
That is within the power of this institution to pre-
terminate, end, and settle once and for all, and I think that
is why we are so supportive of your efforts to find bipartisan
conclusion.
Mr. Long. Well, the Title II proponents tell us not to
worry about the onerous provisions of title II because the FCC
can simply forbear from applying them.
Is there anything simple about forbearance and couldn't
numerous individual legal battles occur regarding what the
commission has and hasn't decided to forbear upon the net
neutrality once the orderis released?
Mr. Powell. Asking me, sir?
Mr. Long. Yes.
Mr. Powell. I think people--not a lot of understanding of
how forbearance works. First of all, there is an institutional
risk here. It is a pretty hostile thing to say that a
regulatory agency should sweep away broadly an act of Congress
without Congress directing it to do so. If you get sweeping
forbearance, which we are desperately relying that we will get,
is the commission doing something in an untested untried way
that essentially eliminates statutorily passed, Presidentially
signed legislation, and that poses significant legal risk.
The other challenge with forbearance is the commission must
make very specific findings for every rule that it forebears
from, and it will attempt to do that in a global way we hope,
but there is a real risk that the courts will say: You are not
permitted to do that. You are not permitted to just brush away
a whole title. You have to explain with micro detail why each
of these rules doesn't meet the standards Congress set out for
you. If that ends up being the law, we are talking about a real
morass of a process to go through rule by rule and make a
separate and independent forbearance finding.
For example, the commission in the past in forbearance
proceedings has often said that it has to do it by market. So
the forbearance definition says is the market competitive?
Well, whatis the market? The market in Missouri is arguably
different than the market in New York City. There have been
times when the commission has said it can only assess that
question on a specific market basis. If that turns out to be
required, now we are talking about a voluminous set of
calculations about whether a rule can no longer be implemented
or not.
It is easy to believe the commission is just some plenary
authority free to make these judgments as it sees fit, but it
is bound very strictly by the tools that this institution sets
out, and while certainly it can try, and I understand its
sincerity, and we are committed to trying to get the best
resolution, it is fraught with complexity that can easily be
cut through by this institution.
Mr. Long. OK. Thank you.
I was going to save a little time to yield back to the
chairman and let him tell us everything good about the Oregon
Ducks and how good they are going to be next year, but I think
I am out of time.
Mr. Walden. But I could yield you more for that purpose.
We will turn now to the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Rush.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this
first-class hearing, and I want to thank the panelists for
being an all-star panel of witnesses.
Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the panel if they would answer
this question in the Dingell-esque fashion, this first
question, with a yes or no answer.
Do you think that the FCC is on a collision course with the
D.C. Circuit again if it exercises its Section 706 authority to
reclassify broadband Internet access as a common carrier
service under its rules? Yes or no beginning with Chairman
Powell.
Mr. Powell. Yes, sir, I do.
Mr. Dickerson. Yes.
Mr. Misener. If the network operators choose to make it so,
yes.
Ms. Gonzalez. Is the question whether they will go to the
D.C. Circuit or whether the D.C. Circuit will uphold the
decision or not?
Mr. Rush. Will they be on a collision course?
Ms. Gonzalez. I think it is certain to go to litigation. I
do believe that the D.C. Circuit will uphold the Title II if it
is done well.
Ms. Turner-Lee. Yes to a collision course.
Ms. Baker. Yes.
Mr. Rush. All right.
Chairman Powell, you have hit on this, but I want to ask
you again in more of a forthright manner.
Do you have any concerns that under the Republican draft
Congress will be restating its intent to say that Section 706
is not a direct grant of statutory authority?
Mr. Powell. Let me say that I think that is a question for
Congress, but representing my industry, we do not have problems
with the commission retaining some 706 authority and breathing
room to address changing circumstances as the D.C. Circuit
found.
I found the D.C. Circuit interpretation of 706
questionable; highly in conflict with past rulings of the
commission and Congressional intent, but the D.C. Circuit ruled
that that is what it meant, and I think we would rather live
with the FCC administering that provision than Title II.
Mr. Rush. Thank you.
I want to move on to Dr. Turner-Lee.
Are you concerned that the FCC would not be able to deploy
broadband services and invest in network facilities that
provide service to low-income rural and minority communities
under this proposed bill?
Ms. Turner-Lee. Under the current bill, I think, as it has
been said, if there were some additional discussion around the
provision of Section 706 authority as we have all talked about,
I actually think, Congressman, to your question, that it would
be a win/win for what we are looking for in terms of broadband
deployment for low income consumers as well as rural
communities as well.
As I said earlier, it would also be a great way to look at
a proclamation against digital red lining that has the
potential to back stop and limit progress of what we have been
trying to do when it comes to ubiquitous deployment among
communities.
I honestly want to just keep reiterating that, you know,
adoption still is at the top of this debate, and it continues
to get swept under the rug when we talk about these issues, and
so we are looking for some type of parody. In the legislative
proposal, I think that that should stay top of mind as well as
the legitimate consumer concerns that need to be dealt with.
Even in the case of specialized services, consumer demand is
driving everything.
So I think it is important to keep that as the bill is
discussed and debated, top of mind, Congressman, but I think to
your point we have to avoid that collision course that you just
mentioned, and we are on that pathway if we don't put in the
right effects to actually make sure that we don't do that.
Mr. Rush. Miss Gonzalez, I wanted to ask this question. I
only have 30 seconds--well, 37 seconds. The chairman might be
graceful and give me a couple of more seconds.
The Republicans draft would authorize the FCC to hear and
adjudicate complaints brought by individuals against their
Internet broadband provider on a case-by-case basis.
Should these complaints and outcomes be germane to FCC
consideration on whether certain merger transactions would
promote the public interest?
Ms. Gonzalez. I am sorry, Mr. Congressman. Is the question
whether or not this would serve the public interest to allow
the commission to adjudicate on a case-by-case basis?
Mr. Rush. No. If in fact the commission--should they
consider that certain merger transactions in association with
these complaints brought by individuals, would the FCC take--
should the FCC consider these complaints germane to its
decisions regarding----
Ms. Gonzalez. On mergers?
Mr. Rush. Yes.
Ms. Gonzalez. Well, I think when it considers complaints,
it has to look at the ecosystem in general to determine whether
or not there is competition. I think merger determinations are
in separate dockets, and rightly so.
But certainly when considering what kind of protections we
need, we need to look at the marketplace and whether or not
there is competition in the merger. You know, mergers and
acquisitions and the level of competition certainly is
relevant.
Mr. Rush. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I just have--if I can ask for an additional
45 seconds.
Mr.  Walden. If you go fast.
Mr. Rush. OK. As you all know, the cash cow of competition
around the passage of the 1996 Telecommunications Act was
really a long-distance voice. That is where the profits and
traffic volumes were. Congress gave the FCC and state
commissions authority to allow competitors to enter in their
local phone markets through resale and interconnection. That
was the regulatory, and we saw billions and billions of dollars
and investments follow into that sector, but times have
changed.
Congress knew about the Internet then, but only a few
peoples around the world knew what a game changer the Internet
would become. By the turn of the decade, it had become more
apparent that the cash cows of communications were not long-
distance voice but instead wireless voice and later broadband
data.
Mr. Powell stated that over the course of a number of
proceedings, the FCC found that broadband Internet access
services are more like information services than
telecommunications services. And perhaps Congress should have
stepped back in and reconsidered these definitions, but we did
not.
And, Mr. Chairman, I think that we are on our way with this
hearing and with additional hearings trying to settle the
question of do broadband Internet services now fit the criteria
for telecommunications services more than information services?
And with that I yield back.
Mr. Walden. Thank the gentleman.
Thank the gentleman.
I will now go to the gentleman from New York, new member of
our subcommittee, Mr. Collins.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank all the witnesses. As a new member, we are
playing catch up a bit, and your testimony has been very
valuable.
My question is for Ms. Baker. I know wireline and wireless,
they are two different worlds, and you represent the wireless
world. And the language in our bill does talk about reasonable
network management. I would think that is the attempt to give
you and the wireless some flexibility, because you are in
different worlds.
I also seem to understand your industry is adamantly
opposed to Title II. So we are here and we are talking and we
understand there is difference. Could you expand a little bit
on the reasonable network management language, which all of us
embrace but may be difficult to interpret, and let me know how
you see it impacting the wireless world?
Ms. Baker. Thanks for the question.
Yes, the wireless industry is different for a number of
different reasons. The number one that I think we all have our
arms around is the technical parameters. We operate on the
spectrum, which is limited capacity, which is shared, and it is
moving. So we need dynamic management millisecond to
millisecond, and it changes all the time depending on who is
sharing the spectrum. And it is going to change from today to
45 days from now, because someone is going to come up with a
more efficient way, and we are going to upgrade our networks.
But they are not just technically different, they are also
competitively different, and so our guys need to be able to
differentiate different services so that they can compete more
effectively against each other. We are worried what happens in
Title II is that we might become one size fits all, and that is
not what we want the wireless industry. We want the wireless
industry to remain dynamic and competitive and continue to
innovate and differentiate themselves.
We are also very new, so we are worried with the Title II
world that we would not be able to introduce some of the
exciting things that are coming from the wireless platform. I
talk about connected life, meaning mobile health, connected
cars, some of the innovations in education.
So we want to make sure that our future in wireless, we are
the world's leader in 4G, and we want to make sure that we are
the world's leader in 5G. We think this bill is a great start.
The definition of reasonable network management includes
technology. We will work with the committee on other
definitions. But we are encouraged from the action here because
we think the FCC is headed down the wrong path.
Mr. Collins. That is very helpful, because I am glad to
hear you are embracing what we are doing, especially that
language, and that you feel your industry can live with that
language. And certainly I think the committee would be very
open as this moves forward. And I just know that there has been
that discussion, because they are two different worlds. Very
happy, again, to hear your support of this critical
legislation.
With time running late, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back the
balance of my time.
Mr. Walden. The gentleman has yielded back the balance of
his time.
It looks like we will go to our final member at the dais,
Mr. Cramer of North Dakota. Thanks for sticking with us, and
thanks for being on the subcommittee.
Mr. Cramer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity.
And as you know, I spent nearly 10 years in North Dakota
regulating various industries. And the more telecom cases that
came before us, the less I was enthused about it, because it
just seemed like every case that came before us was about a new
technology that required less regulation, not more.
Nonetheless, I was happy to carry out really several cases,
some landmark. I think we did one of the early ETCs for a
wireless company. We did an early VoIP interconnection case
with a rural telco. We did a very contentious cable company
seeking facilities-based ILEC in the Bakken. I don't know that
any of them were unanimous. I am proud to say I was on the
prevailing side, and all of them were held up in court, both
federal and state court. That said, I don't feel as smart as I
used to today for some reason. So I appreciate everybody.
I also have to say that I was amused by Ms. Eshoo's
admonition of Catholic confession with Mr. Shimkus, but I
noticed that he said he came kicking and screaming, which is
far short of repentance, I will tell you.
Ms. Eshoo. It is part of it.
Mr. Cramer. I appreciate, Chairman Powell, your reference
to the omission of the RFA in this by the Commission, because
this is a far too common omission by several regulatory
agencies in recent years, and it was one that hadn't come to my
attention yet. But you are right, I think a lot of issues could
be solved much better, much more to the liking of investment
opportunity if we were applying the RFA appropriately.
I am also interested in this issue of specialized services.
And maybe this will demonstrate my ignorance a little bit. But
if we are on the one hand arguing that we should give and we
trust the FCC's use of flexibility in determining forbearance,
why wouldn't we trust their flexibility in determining
specialized services under this draft? And is there some way we
can tighten that up if it concerns people? If somebody wanted
to take that one on.
Mr. Misener.
Mr. Misener. Yes, thank you for the question, Congressman.
I do believe the FCC, as the specialized agency, ought to be
empowered to help flesh out rules, provide through notice and
comment rulemaking the detail and certainty that both
businesses and consumers need, under, again, that ceiling set
by Congress. So if the bill goes forward, the ceiling is fine,
but the commission ought to have the authority beneath it.
Mr. Cramer. Did you want to take a stab at that, Mr.
Powell?
Mr. Powell. Well, I just wanted to quickly say, in this
denigration of specialized services this Commission has
repeatedly held that there is room for specialized services,
even in its 2010 rules, because it believed there were really
serious consumer-benefiting characteristics to that.
The reason specialized services is an issue is we use the
same network for the provision of proprietary services that we
built and privately financed and own a network to deliver. A
huge amount of that capacity is reserved and used for the
services we are in the business of selling. There is an effort,
subtle or otherwise, to confiscate the entire platform for
public Internet use.
What the FCC recognized was some portion of that
infrastructure will always rightfully be available to the
incumbent who built the network to deliver the services and
innovate for their consumers in the provision of the services
they are in business to provide. You have to provide for an
allowance for specialized services lest you are creating a
taking of property in its totality.
Now, if Mr. Misener is correct, can we talk about how you
define it or what the FCC's flexibility in interpreting it? I
have absolutely no problem with that.
Mr. Cramer. Dr. Turner-Lee.
Ms. Turner-Lee. Thank you. And Congressman, if I may, I
will just add on real quickly to the other comments.
I think there is a conversation that can be had about
specialized services, particularly if you go back to much of my
testimony about adoption and relevance. If we look at the case
of zero rating programs, for example, for low-income minority
communities that are not engaged, there is some space to
actually have some discussion on how those could be used for a
public interest. I think it comes back to a legitimate consumer
concern, and questions related to who is to say today that
tomorrow we won't be looking at telemedicine delivery and our
ability to get our health records in real time not being
important to us.
I think there is some room for conversation, and with the
FCC as the expert agency to help us guide that discussion as to
what is important to consumers.
Mr. Cramer. Well, and that brings me to another point that,
again, maybe I am not understanding clearly, but we have heard
a lot of bemoaning of the 706 authority, Title II authority
being stripped away, and that somehow that leaves the FCC
powerless, and we haven't talked a lot about their ancillary
authority, which is there to deal with a lot of these issues.
And the ones that aren't there, we are here. I mean, Congress,
there is a new one every couple of years. I feel like for too
many years Congress has sort of just let the agencies become
Congress. And I think that is the balance we are trying to
strike. And I don't know if somebody has a few seconds to add
to that.
Mr. Gonzalez. I can respond to that, Mr. Congressman.
Mr. Cramer. Sure.
Mr. Gonzalez. The reason we are concerned about the
stripping of the 706 and the Title II is because of court cases
in the past, you know, four decades that have really stripped
the FCC of much of its ancillary authority and have whittled it
away over the years. And so that to us feels like a less
certain solution.
Mr. Cramer. Chairman Powell, has the Commission's ancillary
authority been stripped away?
Mr. Powell. There are two quick things that I think are
important. Number one, the Commission has authorities that come
from a range of statutes. It is not exclusively governed by
just the Telecommunication Act. The Commission has been very
aggressive in the protection of disability access for
communities because this body passed the CCVA, which authorizes
them to apply disability protections to Internet services, and
is aggressively doing so. The Commission has authority under
CALEA to protect surveillance and other kinds of issues. There
is a whole host of authorities. And some, yes, are ancillary.
The Commission, I would argue, has lost ancillary when it has
abused that power. It has also frequently used ancillary
effectively to do any number of social-positive regulations.
Mr. Cramer. I thank you all. This has been fascinating.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Cramer.
I think that brings to a close the participation by our
members. I have a series of letters that I ask unanimous
consent be added in, letters and op-eds and things. One from
Joel White, executive director of Health IT Now Coalition,
opposing Title II; Bradley Merrill Thompson, general counsel,
mHealth Regulatory Coalition; and Robert B. McCray, president
and CEO, Wireless-Life Services Alliance. Without objection, we
will put that one in.
An opinion piece by our former colleague Rick Boucher on
net neutrality being low hanging fruit for Congress, and urging
action. Without objection, we will put that in the record.
From the Telecommunications Industry Association opposing
Title II and supporting legislative action from Scott Belcher,
chief executive officer, Telecommunications Industry
Association. A letter from the Application Developers Alliance,
Mr. Jon Potter, president, Application Developers Alliance,
agreeing regarding legislation applied in the debate. And then
there is a coalition of economic groups, from TechFreedom to
Americans for Tax Reform, and a whole bunch of others, and
individuals representing educational institutions and
elsewhere, in support of our legislative initiatives in whole
or part. So without objection, we will put that in the record
as well.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Walden. And, again, we want to thank all of our
witnesses, and especially grant some forbearance to the two
that have to go now on to the Senate and repeat this. We thank
you for your endurance and your participation. To all the
witnesses, we are very sincere about following up with you
sooner rather than later on language to deal with these issues.
The principles that we have outlined in the legislation we feel
strongly about. We are not in the business of creating
loopholes to go around something we feel strongly about. So we
look forward to collaborating with you on that, on the appeals
process, and these various things.
So thank you all. And we stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:12 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Steve Scalise

The importance of today's hearing and the issue before us
cannot be overstated. Simply put, the Internet has positively
changed the world and transformed our economy in ways
previously unimagined. How we communicate, work, get our news,
shop or even watch television have all changed, and improved
drastically in just a few years.
Even President Obama stated the ``Internet has been one of
the greatest gifts our economy--and our society--has ever
known.'' That is why I continued to be baffled by this
president's belief that the Federal government needs to now
swoop in and ``fix'' the Internet.
Last night the president talked about infrastructure. Well,
mobile and fixed broadband networks are the infrastructure of
the 21st century. They are the keys to the future of our
economy and the ability of individuals to improve their
economic well-being.
But apparently the president and the Chairman of the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) believe our 21st
century infrastructure must be ``fixed'' by applying outdated
laws and regulations from the 1930s.
Reclassifying broadband under Title II represents a
complete paradigm shift in how our government treats the
Internet. The long-standing and successful ``light touch''
regulatory model has ensured the Internet's success.
Why would we want to introduce more government regulation
and bureaucratic micromanagement from Washington that would
harm a vibrant, successful, well-functioning global set of
networks? It makes no sense.
Since its inception, the Internet has been driven by market
forces. Consumers have picked winners and losers, and
innovators have thrived. My fear is that under Title II, the
government--specifically the FCC--would be in the driver's seat
dictating the market while consumers--and innovation--suffer.
The impacts of Title II will be profound, and the imminent
regulatory uncertainty under reclassification will drag on for
years and kill billions of dollars in private investment. We
must proceed deliberately. I urge the FCC to do the same and to
take its direction from Congress rather than bow to political
pressure from the White House.
I commend Chairmen Walden and Upton for putting forward
this bill. I urge Chairman Wheeler and the other FCC
Commissioners to work with Congress on a broadband policy
framework that works for hard-working taxpayers and innovators
and ensures a vibrant Internet for generations to come. We do
not need the Federal government to ``fix'' the Internet!
----------

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
