- STRATEGIC PETROLEUM RESERVE DISCUSSION DRAFT AND TITLE IV ENERGY EFFICIENCY

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

STRATEGIC PETROLEUM RESERVE DISCUSSION
DRAFT AND TITLE IV ENERGY EFFICIENCY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 30, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-36

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

______________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
96-166                       WASHINGTON : 2015

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan

Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                     Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               JERRY McNERNEY, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        PAUL TONKO, New York
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREGG HARPER, Vice Chairman          GENE GREEN, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     LOIS CAPPS, California
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             KATHY CASTOR, Florida
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   PETER WELCH, Vermont
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILL FLORES, Texas                   FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma               officio)
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................    10
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................    13
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................   135

Witnesses

Christopher A. Smith, Assistant Secretary for Fossil Energy,
Department of Energy...........................................     3
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Christopher Peel, Corporate Senior Vice President and Chief
Operating Officer, Rheem Manufacturing Company (on behalf of
the Air-Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Institute)....    34
Prepared statement...........................................    37
Kateri Callahan, President, Alliance to Save Energy..............    45
Prepared statement...........................................    47
John W. Somerhalder II, Chairman, President, and CEO, AGL
Resources (on behalf of the American Gas Association)..........    57
Prepared statement...........................................    59
Frank Thompson, President, Sweetwater Builders, Inc. (on behalf
of the National Association of Home Builders)..................    65
Prepared statement...........................................    67
Elizabeth Noll, Energy Efficiency Advocate, Natural Resources
Defense Council................................................    80
Prepared statement...........................................    82
Answers to submitted questions...............................   186
Rona Newmark, Vice President, Intelligent Efficiency Strategy,
EMC Corp. (on behalf of the Information Technology Industry
Council).......................................................   100
Prepared statement...........................................   102
Mark Wagner, Vice President, U.S. Government Relations, Johnson
Controls, Inc. (on behalf of the Federal Performance
Contracting Coalition).........................................   107
Prepared statement...........................................   109

Submitted Material

Discussion draft of the Strategic Petroleum Mission Readiness
Plan \1\.......................................................     3
Discussion draft of Title IV--Energy Efficiency and
Accountability \2\.............................................     3
Statement of the American Public Gas Association.................   136
Statement of the Business Council for Sustainable Energy.........   143
Statement of the Geothermal Exchange Organization................   148
Statement of the National Consumer Law Center....................   149
Statement of NiSource, Inc.......................................   151
Statement of ASHRAE..............................................   154
Statement of the Alliance to Save Energy and the American Council
for an Energy-efficient Economy................................   162
Statement of the United States Chamber of Commerce...............   164
Statement of the Leading Builders of America.....................   165
Statement of the Retail Industry Leaders Association.............   169
Statements of the American Council for an Energy Efficient
Economy, et al.................................................   170
Statement of the Center for American Progress....................   171
Statement of 500 architectural firms.............................   177
Statement of Window & Door Manufacturers Association.............   184

----------
\1\ Available at: http://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF03/
20150430/103401/BILLS-114pih-
Strategicpetroleumreservediscussiondraft.pdf.
\2\ Available at: http://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF03/
20150430/103401/BILLS-114pih-
TitleIVenergyefficiencyandaccountabilitydiscussiondraft.pdf.

STRATEGIC PETROLEUM RESERVE DISCUSSION DRAFT AND TITLE IV ENERGY
EFFICIENCY

----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 30, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:16 a.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed
Whitfield (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Whitfield, Olson, Barton,
Shimkus, Latta, Harper, McKinley, Kinzinger, Johnson, Long,
Ellmers, Flores, Mullin, Hudson, Rush, McNerney, Tonko, Engel,
Green, Doyle, Sarbanes, Loebsack, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Nick Abraham, Legislative Associate, Energy
and Power; Charlotte Baker, Deputy Communications Director;
Will Batson, Legislative Clerk; Allison Busbee, Policy
Coordinator, Energy and Power; Patrick Currier, Counsel, Energy
and Power; Tom Hassenboehler, Chief Counsel, Energy and Power;
Brandon Mooney, Professional Staff Member, Energy and Power;
Caitlin Haberman, Democratic Professional Staff Member; Rick
Kessler, Democratic Senior Advisor and Staff Director, Energy
and Environment; and John Marshall, Democratic Policy
Coordinator.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Mr. Whitfield. Today the committee is going to continue its
work on the discussion draft of our energy bill that we have
been working on with the Democrats. We began the dialogue last
week with a hearing on the energy work force title to the bill,
and today we are going to be focusing on the Strategic
Petroleum Reserve and the energy efficiency part of the
legislation.
The current debate over the SPR is a familiar one to those
who have witnessed how America's dramatically changing energy
landscape has rendered many existing policies out of date. The
Strategic Petroleum Reserve was created under the Energy Policy
and Conservation Act of 1975, and has since served as an
insurance policy in the form of an emergency stockpile of oil.
However, much has changed over the last 40 years, and there is
bipartisan agreement that we are overdue to update the SPR to
reflect the needs of 2015 and beyond.
One of the problems that we are having, of course, relates
to infrastructure issues associated with the SPR. Specifically,
the oil boom is underway near the SPR's location in Louisiana
and Texas, and is already stretching the local infrastructure
to its limits. This raises questions whether there is
sufficient infrastructure available to successfully draw down
the SPR in the case of an emergency. DOE and others have found
that the 40 year old stockpile is in a poor state of repair,
raising doubts about whether it is ready to be utilized in a
timely and efficient manner. There are also questions about the
legal trigger tapping the SPR, and whether it constrains the
President from anticipating problems justifying a release. So
we are going to be looking at lot at the SPR, and we appreciate
our witness here today, who will address that issue.
The bill also will contain a number of energy efficiency
provisions. Many of them certainly deal with the way the
Federal Government, by far the nation's largest energy user,
can do more for less. This includes provisions that would
certainly emphasize the importance of energy savings
performance contract for Federal facilities. There are also
requirements for DOE to look into potential energy savings from
Federal data centers, and through the use of thermal
insulation, as well as other ideas that may help reduce Federal
energy expenditures.
So we have two panels of witnesses this morning. On the
second panel I think we have five or six witnesses. The first
we have our guest from the Federal Government, who I will
introduce in just a minute, but with that, I will yield back
the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Ed Whitfield

Today, this subcommittee continues its work on the
discussion draft of our bipartisan energy bill. We began the
dialogue last week with a hearing on the energy workforce title
to the bill. And now, we move on to the provisions dealing with
the Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR) and energy efficiency.
The current debate over the SPR is a familiar one to those
who have witnessed how America's dramatically-changed energy
landscape has rendered many existing policies out of date. The
SPR was created under the Energy Policy and Conservation Act of
1975, and has since served as an insurance policy in the form
of an emergency stockpile of oil. However, much has changed
over the last 40 years, and there is bipartisan agreement that
we are overdue to update the SPR to reflect the needs of 2015
and beyond.
For one thing, fears of increased dependence on oil from
unfriendly producers and unstable regions has been replaced by
the reality of growing American production as well as rising
imports from Canada. The risk remains of a supply disruption
necessitating an SPR release, but the nature and extent of the
risk has changed.
In addition, as noted in the Department of Energy's recent
Quadrennial Energy Review, there are many infrastructure issues
associated with the SPR. Specifically, the oil boom is underway
near the SPR's locations in Louisiana and Texas and is already
stretching the local infrastructure to its limits. This raises
questions whether there is sufficient infrastructure available
to successfully draw down the SPR in an emergency. Further, DOE
and others have found that the 40-year old stockpile is in a
poor state of repair, raising doubts about whether it is ready
to be utilized in a timely and efficient manner. There are also
questions about the legal trigger for tapping the SPR and
whether it constrains the President from anticipating problems
justifying a release.
The SPR provisions in the discussion draft require DOE to
conduct a strategic review of the SPR with an eye towards
reforming the program for the near and long-term. This review
will address issues about the proper size, configuration, and
location of the SPR, as well as any necessary repairs and
infrastructure additions to the system. It will also explore
potential legal changes regarding what triggers an SPR release.
This review will help Congress as we consider the next steps in
updating the nation's emergency oil stockpile.
The bill also contains a number of energy efficiency
provisions. Many of them deal with ways for the federal
government, by far the nation's largest energy user, to do more
with less. This includes provisions that would help expand the
use of energy savings performance contracts for federal
facilities. There are also requirements for DOE to look into
potential energy savings from federal data centers and through
the use of thermal insulation, as well as other ideas that may
help reduce federal energy expenditures. It also eliminates the
potentially costly and unrealistic requirement that federal
buildings use no fossil fuel generated energy by 2030.
The draft bill also contains measures affecting the private
sector, which has been the source of most energy efficiency
breakthroughs over the years. This includes greater legal
certainty for the Energy Star program, the inclusion of Smart
Grid capability on Energy Guide labels, and voluntary
verification programs for several appliances. It also clarifies
DOE's role in setting model building codes, and prevents a
proposed residential gas furnace efficiency standard from being
finalized until the agency gathers more evidence on whether it
is technologically feasible and economically justified.
Both SPR and energy efficiency are two topics on which we
should be able to agree on the path forward. I look forward to
a discussion on these critical components of our energy bill.

[The discussion draft of the Strategic Petroleum Mission
Readiness Plan is available at: http://docs.house.gov/meetings/
IF/IF03/20150430/103401/BILLS-114pih-
Strategicpetroleumreservediscussiondraft.pdf.]

[The discussion draft of Title IV--Energy Efficiency and
Accountability is available at: http://docs.house.gov/meetings/
IF/IF03/20150430/103401/BILLS-114pih-
TitleIVenergyefficiencyandaccountabilitydiscussiondraft.pdf.]

Mr. Whitfield. Mr. McNerney, are you going to be making a
statement for your side, or is Mr. Rush going to----
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. No, I don't have a
prepared statement at this point.
Mr. Whitfield. Sorry?
Mr. McNerney. I don't have a prepared statement----
Mr. Whitfield. OK. All right. Is there anyone else on our
side that would like to make a statement this morning? OK. I
will tell you what we will do, when Mr. Rush gets here, we will
give him an opportunity to make an opening statement. But, at
this time, I would like to introduce our only witness on the
first panel, and that is Christopher Smith, who is the
Assistant Secretary for Fossil Energy at the Department of
Energy.
Mr. Smith, thank you very much for being with us again, and
I would like to recognize you for 5 minutes for your opening
statement. So be sure the microphone is on, and, as you know,
the red light will come on when your 5 minutes is up, so thank
you very much.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER A. SMITH, ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR
FOSSIL ENERGY, DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY

Mr. Smith. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for
giving me the opportunity to appear before this Committee.
Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member Rush, and members of the
Committee, it is my pleasure to appear before you today to
discuss the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. The Strategic
Petroleum Reserve provides strategic and economic security
against foreign and domestic disruptions in the oil supply by
an emergency stockpile of crude oil. It also fulfills United
States obligations under the International Energy Program,
which avails the United States of International Energy Agency
assistance through its Coordinated Energy Emergency Response
Plan.
As you know, earlier this month the Department announced
the award of contracts for the purchase of crude oil sold
during last year's sale. Under terms of these contracts, which
were funded by the $239 million in receipts from the test sale,
BP Products North America and Noble Americas will deliver more
than two million barrels to the reserve's Bryan Mound site in
Freeport, Texas. Deliveries are expected to be completed by
July 31.
I would like to elaborate on the 2014 test sale, because it
did a couple of important things. First, it resulted in the
delivery of nearly five million barrels of crude oil over a 47
day period, and brought in more than $460 million in receipts.
A portion of those receipts was used to fund the Northeast
Gasoline Supply Reserve, which was established as a result of
Superstorm Sandy in 2012. This reserve consists of one million
barrels of government owned gasoline stored in three locations
in the Northeast. At the same time, the test sale evaluated
drawdown and sales procedures, and validated the operational
capability to draw down the Strategic Petroleum Reserve.
I would like to talk about that drawdown capability for a
moment. The Strategic Petroleum Reserve is a network of 60
operational caverns at four sites in Louisiana and Texas, with
a total design capacity of 713 million barrels of crude oil,
and currently holding 691 million barrels available for release
in the event of a supply disruption. The infrastructure and
equipment to support drawdown, including storage caverns and
well bores, is both large and complex. This aging
infrastructure, which has performed capably to meet every
emergency release throughout the SPR's history, requires
progressive--requires progressively more maintenance every
year, and is in need of modernization.
With regard to modernization, the Department has initiated
work on a comprehensive long term strategic review of the
Strategic Petroleum Reserve in response to changing market and
energy security dynamics. This review will be guided by the
recommendations contained in reports conducted by the GAO and
the Department's Inspector General. It will also be informed by
the recommendations from the Administration's recently released
quadrennial energy review.
The QER underscores the Administration's support for an
effective Strategic Petroleum Reserve modernization program
that would address infrastructure issues, and reflect current
market and energy security concerns. Specific recommendations
include investing as much as $2 million to increase the
incremental distribution capacity of the Strategic Petroleum
Reserve, and implementing a life extension program for key
Strategic Petroleum Reserve components, including surface
infrastructure and additional brine drive caverns. The QER also
recommends that Congress update the Strategic Petroleum
Reserve's release authorities in the Energy Policy and
Conservation Act to expressly include disruptions in the global
oil market as release triggers to revise release requirements.
Finally, the QER recommends the integration of the President's
authorities to release products from the refined petroleum
product reserve into a single unified authority. These release
authorities should be tailored to the purpose of a product
reserve, which may differ in some respects from the purposes of
a crude oil reserve.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I would be happy to answer any
questions that the subcommittee may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smith follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Smith, thank you very much, and at this
time I would like to recognize Mr. Rush for his opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, and, Mr.
Chairman, I want to welcome our esteemed witness. Thank you for
holding this hearing today on two very important, but yet
completely unrelated issues, the SPR and the energy efficiency
standards.
Mr. Chairman, I agree with the underlying assumption that
it is time to engage in a comprehensive review of the SPR,
which was originally authorized under the Energy Policy and
Conservation Act of 1975 in order to reduce the domestic impact
of a disruption in supplies of petroleum products due to
unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances. And I commend
Secretary--for initiating the process to conduct a
comprehensive review of the SPR, following both in July 2014
DOE Office of Inspector General report, and the GAO office
study issued in September of last year, recommending that the
Department do so.
Mr. Chairman, circumstances have changed significantly
since the SPR was established back in the 1970s, so it makes
sense to examine future SPR requirements regarding size,
composition, and geographic location to make sure that the
country is better suited to deal with any potential and future
disruptions. Additionally, what little funding comes from--I
think it also behooves us to consider the resources necessary
to operate the SPR, and to ensure its long term sustainability
in order to preserve the infrastructure and the maintenance of
these sites.
Mr. Chairman, as for the other panel, regarding a
completely different topic, I must say that I hope that we will
hold an additional hearing on DOE energy efficiency standards,
where members will have an opportunity to hear from the agency
in a direct manner. While engaging industry and other
stakeholders as we will do today should be a part of the
process, that should not preclude having agency officials come
before this Committee to inform members on the reasoning, and
the justification, behind promulgating the very standards that
are under discussion.
Mr. Chairman, many of the energy efficiency measures
contained in the draft bill are non-controversial, and are
bipartisan in nature, such as Section 4114, which modifies the
definition of renewables to include thermal energy under the
Federal renewable energy purchase requirements established in
Section 203 of EPAC 2005. This language represents an example
of DOE, industry, and energy efficiency advocates all working
together to come up with a legislative fix that all sides have
agreed to.
However, there are other provisions, similar provisions, as
a matter of fact, of this bill that are not bipartisan, and do
not reflect agreement on the part of the various stakeholders.
For instance, Section 4115, which would repeal a key portion of
Section 433 of the Energy Independence and Security Act, the
provision that requires Federal buildings to be designed to
result in decreased consumption of fossil fuels by 2013, is one
section, among others, that we will definitely have to examine
further and continue to work on before we reach bipartisan
consensus.
Mr. Chairman, as this is only a discussion draft, and will
undergo significant changes, I am satisfied with engaging
today's expert witnesses so that we may be better informed on
how to improve this draft as we move forward through the
legislative process. But, Mr. Chairman, we need to have
additional hearings and additional work. I know that you will
agree with me, Mr. Chairman. With that, I yield back the
balance of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentleman yields back the balance of his
time, and at this point, Mr. Smith, we once again thank you for
your statement, and I will recognize myself for 5 minutes for
questions.
Back in 2014, GAO issued a report entitled ``The Changing
Crude Oil Markets'', allowing exports has price and other
implications, and the size of the strategic reserve should be
re-examined. In the letter that you had sent to us, you
indicated that DOE has initiated the process for conducting a
comprehensive re-examination of the appropriate size of the SPR
in light of current and future market conditions. I was just
curious, what is the status of that review, and do you have a
timetable of when you all might complete that?
Mr. Smith. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for the
question. So indeed, we think it is very important to undertake
a comprehensive strategic review, which I believe is the
position of the Committee, and we have already started that
process. As we know, and as was noted in your statement, there
are many factors that have changed since the Strategic
Petroleum Reserve was initially created in the '70s. So our
comprehensive review is looking at a very wide range of issues.
Looking at modernization, looking at distribution capability,
looking at issues that are driven by the appropriate size of
the reserve.
So we are already started on that process, we are working
on that, and we believe that the total review will take several
months to complete, towards a year for the culmination of that
report.
Mr. Whitfield. Are you personally concerned--I talked a
little bit about the infrastructure issue, and because of the
shale boom, and the capacity limitations that we have, are you
concerned at all about the infrastructure aspect of this?
Mr. Smith. Well, I am, Mr. Chairman. One note, I imagine
that our team who is managing this process would bristle at the
characterization of the SPR being in a poor state of repair. I
think we have got a tremendous team that is doing all the
things that they need to do to make sure that the SPR is ready.
And, indeed, every time we have had a test sale, or we have had
to use the SPR, that team has performed admirably.
That said, it is an aging asset. We have well bores that
have been in place for decades. And as you drill into these
salt structures, they move over time, and it causes issues. So
not only are we concerned about ensuring that we are funding
this in a way that allows it to keep up with deferred
maintenance, but also many infrastructure issues, such as the
direction of the pipelines, the inflow of crude, the types of
crude that are coming into the refineries in the Gulf of Mexico
has changed, and we think it is important for us to consider
all these things. So we think these, you know, we agree with
the Committee's conclusion that these are critical things to
study and analyze.
Mr. Whitfield. I think you had indicated there is something
like 691 million barrels of crude oil, in storage.
Mr. Smith. Right.
Mr. Whitfield. Is most of that heavy sour crude, or is
there light sweet as well?
Mr. Smith. So we have got a total of 691 million barrels of
crude in storage right now. That is split between sweet and
sour, so we have got approximately 260 million barrels of
sweet. We have about 430 million barrels of sour, so we have a
split between----
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
Mr. Smith [continuing]. Sweet and sour.
Mr. Whitfield. And do you happen to know the number of
gallons of crude that are in public storage in our country
today?
Mr. Smith. I don't have that number off the top of my head,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. I was told that it was in the neighborhood
of 500 million barrels. Does that sound right to you, or have
you heard about----
Mr. Smith. That might be a reasonable number, Mr. Chairman.
I don't know what the figure is off the top of my head.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Well, thank you very much. And, Mr.
Rush, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary
Smith, in your testimony you stated that the SPR is a network
of 60 operational--at four storage sites in Louisiana and
Texas, with a designed capacity of 713.5 million barrels, and
115 operational well bores. I would imagine that these
facilities see a lot of wear and tear over the years, and
require quite a bit of upkeep and maintenance. What is the
state of these facilities, and how are they maintained? Is
there a funding stream dedicated to the upkeep and maintenance
of these facilities? And what can we, as members of Congress,
do to assist you in maintaining these facilities?
Mr. Smith. Well, thank you very much, Ranking Member Rush,
for that question. We request appropriation every year that we
use to maintain the SPR, and ensure that the Strategic
Petroleum Reserve is ready for a drawdown. In our budget
request that the President recently released, we did ask for a
total of $257 million for the Strategic Petroleum Reserve,
which was an increase over budget requests in previous years. I
guess the marks we are seeing right now would result in a $45
million decrease in the amount that we requested, which does
impact our ability to tackle some of the deferred maintenance
that we think is important.
As I briefly noted, some of these well bores are 20, 30
years old. As you are drilling through the cap rock, and into
these caverns, you do have movement over time that compromises
the well bores. There are lots of above ground issues that you
have to deal with to ensure that all of your pumps, your
compressors, your valves, corrosion issues are taken care of.
So it is our intent to ensure that we are chipping into some of
this deferred maintenance backlog, and, indeed, that was
reflected in the request that we made in this budget submission
and the Congressional justification that we submitted.
So we do have a plan to ensure that we are ready to
execute. Historically we have always been able to accomplish
the mission, and I think that is a testament to the folks that
we have working down in Louisiana and Texas, on these sites.
But there is work that has to be done on an ongoing basis, and
we think that funding that at appropriate levels is very
important.
Mr. Rush. What were some of the most important lessons that
we learned from the operational test sale, in terms of
evaluating the drawdown and sales procedures, as well as
analyzing potential commercial infrastructure investments?
Mr. Smith. So we learned a number of things. First of all,
it was a $5 million test sale. We were successful in getting
all five million barrels pushed to market. We did learn some
things about some shortcomings. We noticed some issues with
the--distribution group--or pipeline system that probably needs
to be addressed. We also specifically identified a metering
skid at one of the sites that, if--anything sold has to go
through a single metering skid, so if you have two
opportunities to move crude out of that site, you would have to
do it sequentially, one after the other.
That is a significant bottleneck, and something that we
could address, and--just by putting in a new metering skid,
would be able to significantly increase the capacity of that
site. And these were things that we noted in our Congressional
justification for the 2016 budget that we recently submitted.
Mr. Rush. Now, the reduction in the 2016 budget, can you
project the ramifications of that? Is that going to
significantly affect, or drastically affect, your ability to
achieve your mission?
Mr. Smith. Well, we think that these things are important.
One of the reasons why we did the test sale was to identify
areas of improvement, bottlenecks, things that we had to do to
improve the distribution capabilities of the Strategic
Petroleum Reserve. It is a valuable asset, but you do have to
maintain it, you do have to manage it, so we think that it is
critically important to not only take care of the deferred
maintenance that we are concerned about, but also to make
specific upgrades, such as the additional metering skid, that
would increase our ability to serve more than one offtake at a
time. And that would, as a result, increase the Strategic
Petroleum Reserve's ability to push crude into the market in
the case of an emergency.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentleman's time has expired. Mr. Pallone,
did you want to make an opening statement?

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Sure. Sorry that I was late, I was at the
other hearing, on 21st century cures. I will try to cut back on
it, but I did want to yield a minute to Mr. Welch, so, Mr.
Chairman, I just want to say that I think I have made it clear
that I am interested in working with you and Chairman Upton on
energy legislation, but I am concerned about the format of
today's hearing. I can't recall a time when this subcommittee
has crammed two completely unrelated topics into one hearing,
and I think it does a disservice to members, and to the subject
matter, because both of these subjects are important, and
really warrant not only separate legislative hearings, but also
they should be preceded by more oversight.
With regard to the specific proposals before us, I
recognize they do not represent anything more than discussion
drafts of potential legislative language that could go into an
energy bill. However, as this efficiency title is currently
constituted, I would not be in a position to support it, or to
recommend that others support it. In particular, I am opposed
to language in the discussion draft that repeals Section 433 of
the Energy Independence and Security Act signed into law by
President George Bush. Section 433 established groundbreaking
energy efficiency performance standards for the design of new
Federal buildings, and those Federal buildings undergoing major
renovation, rightly ensuring that new Federal buildings be
designed to result in decreased consumption of fossil fuels.
The draft would prohibit from promulgating a final rule
updating efficiency standards for gas furnaces until an
advisory group completes an analysis and determination.
And I certainly understand that there are concerns out
there, but stakeholders have been working toward a resolution
mutually agreeable to all parties. Now, however, some
stakeholders apparently decided to try to do an end run by
proposing this language, halting DOE's efficiency efforts from
moving forward, and the draft sets up an opponent dominated
advisory panel, and gives more weight to the anti-efficiency
factors being examined in the analysis. In my opinion, this
greatly sets back any progress made toward good faith efforts
to sincerely resolve concerns with the DOE's proposal.
The building code efficiency provisions in the draft is
another area of great concern to me. As currently outlined,
changes to DOE standards authority in this area would do great
harm to what has been a very successful and impactful program.
That said, I do want to make clear I do believe there is a
sincere effort on both sides to try to find common ground, and
I remain optimistic that we can develop a bipartisan energy
package. We are early in our process, and there are many ideas
from both sides of the aisle that have not yet been considered.
In raising these issues up front, I hope that we can have a
more concerted bipartisan collaboration moving forward.
Mr. Chairman, last week the Obama Administration released
its first installment of the quadrennial energy review. I know
it was mentioned at a previous hearing by Mr. Doyle, and this
is a great government-wide effort to look at key aspects of the
Nation's energy infrastructure that contains many useful
insights, including some recommendations that would require
legislation. We need to review that report carefully, because I
think it provides us with an opportunity for our committee to
work closely with the administration to put together meaningful
energy legislation that addresses the four areas of your
architect of abundance framework, and that the President, I
think, ultimately would sign.
So let me thank you again for holding this hearing, for
your hard work in bringing these provisions forward, and for
your willingness to work with us to make this into a product
that we might all be able to support. And I would like to yield
the remainder of my time to Mr. Welch.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much, Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr.
Pallone and Mr. Rush, for your leadership on energy efficiency,
and I really am grateful to our chairman, Mr. Whitfield, and
Chairman Upton, for their focus on this.
Energy efficiency is such an area where we can work
together and make real progress. It saves money, creates jobs,
it is better for the environment. We have made progress, Mr.
McKinley and I, in other sponsored legislation that President
Obama is going to sign into law this afternoon, and it is only
a beginning.
What we know is that energy efficiency is literally the
lowest cost electricity resource for utilities, and from 2008
to 2012 new efficiency improvements from utility programs and
appliance standards have avoided the need for more than 275
power plants. So we have got an opportunity to focus on the
common ground where, whatever the fuel source, less is more. It
can be nuclear, it can be coal, it can be solar, if we find
efficiency, we are going to put people to work retrofitting our
homes and our commercial buildings. We are going to save on
fuel bills, and we are going to do a significant improvement of
the economy. So I am grateful to the bipartisan approach we
have got, and there is work to be done, and I am glad this
committee is going to do it. Thank you, Mr. Pallone, and I
yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentleman yields back. At this time,
recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Barton, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. Am I asking questions or giving a statement?
Mr. Whitfield. Questions.
Mr. Barton. Questions. OK, I didn't know. I just got here.
I have got two hearings going on, and I am still asleep because
Mr. Doyle's baseball team is so good that we are getting up now
before dark to start practicing to try to be competitive with
them.
Mr. Doyle. Got to get up earlier than that.
Mr. Barton. Yes. Well, that is probably true. But arrogance
sometimes leads to its own downfall, so Honorable Mr. Smith, we
are glad to have you here today.
I think you know that I have introduced a bill that would
repeal the current ban on crude oil exports. It also has a
section that requires the Department of Energy to conduct a
study, and to send the results of that study to this Committee,
and the Senate Energy Committee, within 120 days about the
status of the SPR, what we should do with it. Do you know if
the Department of Energy supports that part of the repeal bill?
Mr. Smith. So, just to understand the question,
Congressman, do we support the issues on export, or just
support doing the study on the----
Mr. Barton. The study. The study on the--I can make it a
two part question.
Mr. Smith. OK.
Mr. Barton. Unless you just want to say yes, yes, which I
will yield back to the Chairman.
Mr. Smith. I want to make sure I understand the question.
Mr. Barton. Yes. No, I have had some discussions off camera
with the Secretary of Energy about repealing the crude oil
export ban. My question to you, since this hearing is on energy
efficiency, and what to do with the Strategic Petroleum
Reserve, is whether the Department supports that part of the
bill repealing the ban on crude oil exports that requires a
study of the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, and that that study
be reported to the Congress within 120 days?
Mr. Smith. Yes. Well, thank you for the question,
Congressman, and the clarification. So we certainly do support
the idea of doing a comprehensive review of the Strategic
Petroleum Reserve. In fact, that is a process that we already
have underway. We, of course, will comply with the law as
written. I would say that a comprehensive study that looks at
infrastructure issues, that looks at subsurface issues, that
looks at geologic issues, that looks at market issues, all the
things that would help us come to some conclusions over the
appropriate size and the scope of work that it needs to do to
modernize the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. It would be
difficult to do that in 120 days. That is----
Mr. Barton. Do you have a timeframe that you would prefer?
We wanted to get it back fairly quickly, but since our bill
hasn't had a legislative hearing yet, we are very flexible.
Mr. Smith. Right.
Mr. Barton. Would 180 days be better? Would you like a
year? What is the magic number?
Mr. Smith. Well, 180 days would be better than 120 days. I
think the estimate that we would make for doing a piece of work
of that magnitude was several months, so it would be
considerably longer than the current 120 days that you have
proposed. But that said, we have got a great team, and we will
accomplish what we can in the time that we are given. But in
order to address what we think are fundamentally, and
comprehensively a different set of conditions than we had when
the Strategic Petroleum Reserve was initially put in place,
back in the '70s, but that is actually a big piece of work----
Mr. Barton. Right.
Mr. Smith [continuing]. And we would like to make sure that
we have time to get that right.
Mr. Barton. When we put the SPR in place, we were importing
lots and lots of oil, and oil production in the United States
was going down. Today we are increasing our production, oil
imports are going down, refined product exports are going up.
Current law precludes the President from using the Strategic
Petroleum Reserve, except in times of national emergency. He
has some discretion in declaring that emergency, and Congress
has had issues with past Presidents when they have declared it.
What is your opinion of giving the President, or the
Secretary of Energy, the discretion to perhaps actually make--I
won't say routine sales of crude oil, but make it easier to
sell crude oil in the world market when there is not a national
emergency, given the fact our oil production is increasing like
it is, and we have the potential--I am not saying we will ever
do it, but we have the potential to be totally energy
independent, and not import any crude oil at all?
Mr. Smith. Right. Well, thank you for that question,
Congressman. So the authorities to export crude to other
countries would fall under the purview of the Department of
Commerce, and of the Office of the President, so I dont demur
answering on their behalf. What I can say is that we think it
is extremely positive that we are, for the first time in
decades, producing more oil domestically than we have to import
from other countries. That has been I think a tremendous
improvement, in terms of our energy security and economic
development.
I would note that we are still importing----
Mr. Barton. Right.
Mr. Smith [continuing]. 7.6 million barrels per day, so we
still are importing significant quantities of oil here in the
present time. But in terms of the authorities to export, I
mean, that would be a question for Congress. We follow the
statute, in that there are exceptions and waivers that have to
be handled by Department of Commerce, and by the Office of the
President.
Mr. Barton. My time has expired, but it is refreshing to
know that at least the Department of Energy wants to do what
the Congress tells it to do.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes, we are excited to hear about that.
Mr. Barton. I am honored to hear that. With that, I yield
back.
Mr. Whitfield. Where would Mr. Pallone--Chair at this time,
will recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr. Tonko, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Assistant Secretary Smith,
in your testimony you indicated that DOE has started a review
of the SPR, and you mentioned a few of the issues that DOE will
examine, including the size, the composition, and the
geographic location of the reserve. It sounds as if the reserve
assumes it would largely keep the present overall structure in
place, with perhaps some modifications. And maybe that is what
we should do, but is the Department also going to re-evaluate
whether maintaining a Strategic Petroleum Reserve is the best
way to promote energy security?
And might I just say, I don't doubt the need for emergency
planning, and specific authorities for action in case of an
emergency, given the importance of this resource to our
economy, but with the changes in our oil markets, and private
investment in infrastructure for oil and gas, and the changes
in demand for different refined products, I am wondering
whether the SPR, which we conceived in the midst of a very
different environment, is still the proper overall structure.
So can you address whether or not we are going to re-evaluate,
whether we maintain that SPR?
Mr. Smith. Well, thank you, Congressman, for that question.
So, if you look at global oil prices right now, you see markets
are currently very well supplied, and--as was noted by
Congressman Barton from Texas, we are producing more oil
domestically than we have in the past. We are producing more
barrels domestically than we import from other countries, so
some of those situations have changed.
However, we do believe that the Strategic Petroleum Reserve
does still provide a critical element of energy security for
our nation. It is the largest energy stockpile in the world. It
is, I think, an important tool that we have to handle not only
disruption of physical barrels, but also the impacts that price
increases might have on the U.S. economy.
So in our study we will look at the size of the SPR. I
think that is important to consider, what the appropriate size
of the Strategic Petroleum Reserve would be. And we will look
at infrastructure issues, we will look at fundamentally how the
Strategic Petroleum Reserve operates. But I would say that it
is certainly our conclusion, and my personal conclusion, as the
official who oversees the site, that this is an important
resource for national security, and we think that its core
mission remains vital.
Mr. Tonko. And in terms of its structure, you believe it
will best serve us in the event of an emergency?
Mr. Smith. Well, Congressman, that is something that we
will evaluate in the study. I mean, there are structural issues
that we can tackle, in terms of what infrastructure needs to be
in place. We have made changes, in terms of, for example,
setting up the Northeast Gasoline Reserve last year as a
response to weaknesses that we saw in the aftermath of
Superstorm Sandy in 2012. So there are steps that we are taking
to say, well, we understand what the statute says, and we
understand the design of the Strategic Petroleum Reserve.
We are making steps as we go forward to ensure that we are
using authorities that we have to ensure that the reserve
remains relevant, and we will try to think broadly, in terms of
doing a strategic review, so that we consider what other
changes might be appropriate.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you for that. And you also recommend that
Congress update the definition of a severe energy supply
interruption, to include criteria focused on disruptions in the
global oil market, whether those disruptions result in a
problem with U.S. oil imports or not. Would you elaborate on
that thinking, please?
Mr. Smith. Well, it is tied to a--I guess an observation
has already been made. The Strategic Petroleum Reserve was
created back in the '70s in a very different environment than
the environment we have now. We operate under EPCA, and over
the years, over the decades since the early '70s, the statute
that we have now is a patchwork of changes, and addendums, and
amendments that have been put in place over the years. So there
are some ambiguities about authorities. There are some issues
of regional resources perhaps being deployed in a way that is
more appropriate for a national resource.
And so it is our view that, as we look at the language that
authorizes us to use the reserve, given that that has been
changed piecemeal, bit by bit, over decades, starting from a
point which is very structurally different than the global
markets right now, we do think it would be judicious and
appropriate to take a look at--all of the language that gives
authorization, and streamline that, and make it suitable for
today's markets.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much, and with that, I will yield
back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chair?
Mr. Whitfield. Sorry, Mr. Rush?
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to--the Committee,
and all the--there is a gentleman in the room, on the left side
there, white hair, very handsome gentleman, that is former
member Dave McCurdy from Oklahoma. He is the president of the
American Gas Association, and I just didn't want him to sit in
this room without us giving him his due. He was a fine
gentleman, and true friend, and just an outstanding member of
Congress. So he is there. The handsome guy with the white hair.
Mr. Whitfield. And we know he was an outstanding baseball
player as well for the----
Mr. Rush. I don't know why--is there a provision that he
can join your side and be on your team?
Mr. Whitfield. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Rush. Because you are going to need him. And----
Mr. Whitfield. He looks like he is getting younger, to me,
every single day. No, we are glad you are here. Thank you so
much, and thank you for reminding us of that.
At this time I would like to recognize the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Olson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the Chair. And good morning, and
welcome, Mr. Smith. I know you are a fellow Texan, grew up in
Fort Worth. You served our country, a West Point graduate, in
the Army. Thank you for your service. I promise I won't talk
about the state of affairs between your Army and my Navy, and
that big football game that happens every year, but I do want
to talk about the state of affairs of the SPR.
It is a big part of my home life. The Bryan Mound is about
20 miles down the road from my home, and the Big Hill is about
an hour east in Winnie. In your QER, DOE talks about some big
changes for the SPR. You want billions of dollars more spending
to fix the system. And, as has been mentioned, our world has
been turned upside down these past years with this energy
production. We have plenty of crude here in parts of the
country where we usually have to import or anticipate a
shortage. I would like to delve into some of those issues, but
I first have a question on the specific type of crude in the
SPR.
These days we are barely exporting light crude. Much of the
crude we do import--I am sorry, importing light crude. Much of
the crude we do import is heavier. It seems that this crude is
most at threat of a supply disruption. And with the huge amount
of oil we have here at home, are you happy with the current
balance of light versus heavier crudes in the SPR, as you
mentioned, I think, the balance is between 260 billion barrels
of light crude, sweet crude, and then 430 barrels of sour,
heavier crude. Are you happy with that balance, and how would
you adjust it if you are not happy with it?
Mr. Smith. Well, thank you for the question, Congressman.
So, indeed, our balance between sweet and sour is 260 for sweet
barrels, and then 430 for sour. As we go through our process of
looking at our long term strategic review, I think that is
something that we will be considering, along with
infrastructure. There are issues of cavern storage, and how we
blend different types of crudes, and what caverns we would
place them into. So, as you note, the mix of crude that
refiners are using in the Gulf of Mexico has changed over the
years.
You know, late '90s, early 2000s, refiners put lots of
money into upgrading refineries to run heavier crudes. Now we
are seeing that there are more light crudes that are becoming
available here as the Bachman in South Texas comes online.
These are all things, I think, that we have to consider. I
wouldn't categorically state that right now we think we have
the right balance. In fact, the very reason why this Committee
is encouraging us to do the study, and--that we have already
embarked on that path is that we think that we need to address
these issues. We think they are very important.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. This is not news, but our crude
supplies, and even the direction of some pipelines, have
changed in recent years. For refined products, we are a major
global supplier now, and at the same time some allies remain
very reliant on imports. In some scenarios, an SPR release
might not be as effective as it was in the past. My question is
this, with this new market reality, should we be focused on the
SPR here at home, and making sure our allies upgrade their
reserves overseas? Allies like South Korea, where you served
during the Army. Anything we should do with our allies to make
sure they have their own SPRs?
Mr. Smith. Well, thank you, Mr. Congressman.
Mr. Olson. I will take the promotion.
Mr. Smith. OK. Apologies to the Chairman. So I--just 2
weeks ago--so we work very closely with the IEA, the
International Energy Agency, that helps us align petroleum
reserves throughout the world. I will make a couple of notes on
that. Just 2 weeks ago I was in Szechuan Province, Chengdu,
China at an IEA event, and then a few days later I was in New
Delhi, India at a separate IEA event. We have also spent time
in China looking at, you know, creating a stronger
communication between ourselves and the officials in China who
manage their reserves. So we have a very strong understanding
that, you know, we can't do this by ourselves. We wouldn't
endeavor to do it by ourselves. I think it is a more powerful
tool when we are part of the potential to use the Strategic
Petroleum Reserve as part of a collective action.
So indeed we are taking steps along those lines. We think
these are important steps to take. And, in fact, we have, just
last year, signed a historic agreement with China to create a
greater sense of transparency between ourselves and China so
that we understand issues there, with regard to their energy
stockpile. We think these are important steps, and they are
ones that we continue to push on.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. Out of time.
Mr. Whitfield. Chair recognizes at this time, Mr. Doyle of
Pennsylvania for 5 minutes.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Smith, thank you
for testifying before our Committee today. We all know how much
the landscape has changed since 1975, when we first passed the
legislation to create the SPR. And I was glad that you
mentioned the recently released QER in your testimony. It
suggests that energy security should be more broadly defined
than just oil security. What other sources do you think should
be included, and how should we protect them?
Mr. Smith. So, to make sure I understand the question,
Congressman, I have spoken to recommendations in the QER that
had to deal with the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, and you are
thinking how do we think about energy security more broadly?
Mr. Doyle. Yes. The report suggested that we shouldn't
think of it as just oil security, but we should think of it
more broadly. So is it suggesting security measures, or how we
view other sources, natural gas, or whatever?
Mr. Smith. Well, with regard to the petroleum reserve, the
scope of the study that we have discussed here would be
specific to the petroleum reserve, including crude and refined
products. So the scope of that discussion wouldn't change. What
I will say is that we do work very closely across offices
within Department of Energy. So there are four applied offices
within DOE. I run the Office of Fossil Energy, which includes
oil, natural gas, clean coal, carbon capture and sequestration,
the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. There is a separate office
that looks at energy efficiency and renewable energy.
Mr. Doyle. All right.
Mr. Smith. A separate office that looks at--Office of
Electricity, and a separate office that looks at nuclear
energy. So we do work very closely. In fact, one of the things
that Secretary Moniz has integrated since he has come to the
Department are cross cutting teams to ensure that, in our
budgeting process, we are very explicitly creating teams that
break down those silos. So when we are thinking about energy
security, and we are thinking about job creations, when we are
thinking about all the important things about energy
reliability, and reducing greenhouse gas emissions, that we are
breaking down those silos, and we are thinking across borders.
So that is something that is already in place, and we think is
being expressed in the way that we are putting together our
budgets and executing our programs.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you. In your testimony you also
highlighted the QERs recommendation to consolidate the
authority for the Northeast Home Heating Fuel Reserve and the
Northeast Gasoline Supply Reserve into a single unified
authority. And, additionally, you suggested that these release
authorities should be aligned and tailored to the purposes of a
product reserve, rather than that of a crude oil reserve. Can
you expand upon why you think this consolidation is beneficial,
and how the release authority would be different for a product
reserve, rather than a crude oil reserve?
Mr. Smith. Well, thank you, Congressman, for that question.
So Part B, Title 1 of EPCA dictates the steps we would have to
take in order for the Northeast Gasoline Reserve, which is part
of the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. That language is very much
geared towards a national shortage, and very much geared
towards crude oil. It is not geared towards a regional event,
the type of event that we saw in the aftermath of Superstorm
Sandy, and it is not geared toward the needs of communities who
are suffering shortfalls or shortages in a supply of products.
So we think it would be appropriate to amend that so that the
triggers for releasing the gasoline reserve would be
appropriate for the types of emergencies you might see there,
so that, we bought this insurance policy against shortages. We
want to make sure that we are able to deploy that insurance
policy in ways that are appropriate for the types of
emergencies that it is meant to cover.
With the NEHHOR, the Northeast Home Heating Oil Reserve,
there are a couple triggers that might trigger these with
NEHHOR. One is that a differential in the current price, that
it had to exceed a moving average by 60 percent. We think that
is a tremendously difficult bar to make. And, in fact, once you
have gotten to that point, you have probably gone beyond the
point which the reserve would be useful. There is also language
that says a regional supply shortage of significant scope and
duration would trigger the ability to use NEHHOR, which we
think is probably a bit more appropriate.
But between the NEHHOR, the Northeast Home Heating Oil
Reserve, the crude reserve national resource in the Gulf of
Mexico, the SPR, and the Northeast Gasoline Reserve, and any,
you know, future thing that we might have for products, we do
think that we need to go back and, you know, again, as we
mentioned, this patchwork of legislation that has been created
over the years, we think it would be appropriate to look at all
of that, and make sure that it is streamlined for the markets
of today, as opposed to the markets of yesterday.
Mr. Doyle. Great. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time the Chair recognizes the
gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Latta, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, I thank the Chairman, and I thank you for
having this hearing today, and I appreciate our witness and his
testimony this morning. If I could just kind of go back to a
question that the Chairman asked initially, and then I think
part of the answer was dealing with the infrastructure side.
Did I understand you said something about the direction of the
pipeline? Did I understand you to say that?
Mr. Smith. Yes, Congressman. So, as we have created a lot
more crude--so we mentioned that we are producing more crude
domestically than we import, and that is for the first time in
many years. We have a lot more crude that is coming from North
Dakota, so it is going from north down south. We have a lot
more crude that is being produced in South Texas, out of the
Eagle Ford Shale. And so previously you had pipeline networks
that--you had the Strategic Petroleum Reserve in the Gulf of
Mexico, and you could push oil from the SPR in the Gulf of
Mexico up to the rest of the country. Now you are seeing some
of those pipelines have reversed because they are bringing
crude from new sources of production, in North Dakota and in
Texas, and it has come into the Gulf of Mexico.
And so that complicates the original construct of the SPR,
which was to have this centrally located large stockpile of
hundreds of millions of barrels that you could simply, through
pipelines, push out to the rest of the country. Given that some
of those pipelines were reversed, it makes us re-think some of
those things, and also makes the waterborne transport of crude
a lot more important than it probably was back in the '70s.
Mr. Latta. Now, when you look at your strategic overall
plan that you are looking at into the future, is that something
that you are really going to emphasize, then, on the direction?
Mr. Smith. Indeed, Congressman. When we think about what
infrastructure you need, what marine transport you need, what
pipeline systems you might be employing, what should be the
balance of crude, what should be the size of the Strategic
Petroleum Reserve, what types of crude the refiners are using,
those are all factors that we will be considering when we
undergo this comprehensive review. And it will help us
crystallize these issues, and make very specific
recommendations about investments that we need to make to make
sure that we have got the reserve that is suitable for the
markets of today, as opposed to the markets of the early '70s.
Mr. Latta. Thank you, because--and also you had mentioned
earlier, in your response, that we have about 7.6 million
barrels of oil that we are importing every day today, and also
we all know it has been alluded to this morning what has
happened with our shale development in this country, and really
what we have been able to do in this country to help ourselves.
But in light of all that, if something would happen on an--if
there would be an international supply disruption at this time,
are we prepared to meet that with the current setup of what we
are with the SPR?
Mr. Smith. Well, thanks for the question, Congressman. So,
we have noted many of the shortcomings, the market has changed,
some of the pipelines go in different directions, but, one
thing I can say is that, not only through the test sale, but,
through the release that we had for the disruption that came
from the unrest in Libya, that the team of professionals we
have running the Strategic Petroleum Reserve down in the Gulf
of Mexico, and Texas, and Louisiana, have always been
successful at pushing oil into markets, and in doing the things
that the SPR was meant to do.
Now, that is not to say that, going forward, we don't have
some concerns. We do think that there is some modernization
that needs to occur. We do have some deferred maintenance that
we are concerned about, and we want to make sure that that
mission readiness continues. But we are focused on remaining
ready. We utilize the resources that we have in our disposal.
But going forward, we do have some serious concerns, which is
the reason why we have asked for some increase in budgets in
this Congressional justification for the 2016 budget, and that
the study that we are going to be undertaking will be looking
at issues of modernization. We think those are important
points.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back the
balance of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time the Chair recognizes the
gentleman from California, Mr. McNerney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Assistant Secretary, for testifying this morning, and for your
work in this area, and for all the constant field work that you
do. Now, one thing you mentioned in your opening remark was the
aging drawdown infrastructure by saying that it needs more
maintenance--what specifically would be the best actions to
take, how much would they cost, and could that be paid for by
drawdown profits?
Mr. Smith. So I will talk a bit about the first part of the
question, which is what we think needs to be done, and then I
will try to address the second part of your question. So in
terms of deferred maintenance, I think every year we get an
appropriate, we take that appropriate, we do what we need to do
to in order to remain mission ready. And mission readiness is--
this is an energy security asset, and so the team in the Gulf
of Mexico is focused on mission readiness.
So what we need to do in the immediate term, for the budget
that we are requesting for 2016, there are issues with valves,
there are issues with compressors, there are issues with pumps.
There are some well bore work-overs that need to be
accomplished. We have included funding in our request for the
transfer metering skid at Big Hill, which would allow them to
push oil in two different directions to two different buyers at
the same time, as opposed to the one bottleneck that they have
currently, where they can only move oil to one buyer. We think
in the immediate term that these are important things to
undertake, in terms of ensuring that we are taking care of that
deferred maintenance, and that we continue to be ready.
Going forward, we have a modernization effort that is
referred to in the Quadrennial Energy Review. That would have
to do deal with further surface infrastructure for life
extension. So again, this was an asset that was put in place
decades ago. If you are going to move decades into the future,
there are lots of things you have to do to make sure that
equipment that is getting to its sell by date is getting
renovated, it is getting fixed, it is getting replaced, in some
cases.
So that would be surface infrastructure, everything we need
to move oil around the surface, and that is the pumps, and
valves, and all that equipment to move oil around. It would
include brine disposal caverns, so we use brine to push oil and
out of the caverns, and so there would probably be some new
brine drive caverns that we would have to work on. And then
disposal wells as well. So, brine has to be disposed of when it
is utilized, and so those are things that would be included in
the life extension.
Beyond that, there are some other issues to deal with,
marine capacity, marine distribution. That is also envisioned
in the Quadrennial Energy Review, and will be considered in the
strategic study that will be undertaken.
Mr. McNerney. OK. Well, last year it said you grossed $468
million by your test sale. What was the average price per
barrel in that sale?
Mr. Smith. Congressman, I don't know that number off the
top of my head. I would be happy to respond for the record. But
it was consistent with whatever the market price was at the
time. It was higher than it is today.
Mr. McNerney. Higher than today, but is it higher than it
was when the oil was purchased and put into the reserve?
Mr. Smith. Well, the oil is purchased over time, right, so
the----
Mr. McNerney. Right.
Mr. Smith [continuing]. Comparison that I can make is that
when we did the test sale we sold 5 million barrels. Receipts
from that sale were somewhere in the order of magnitude of $500
million. We took part of those funds and used them to create
the Northeast Gasoline Reserve, which is a million barrels of
gasoline that we have in three sites in the northeast. That was
the reserve that we created to respond to Superstorm Sandy. We
had enough left over after that to replace almost all of the
oil that we had sold in the first place.
So we sold at a much higher level than we bought back,
which means we sold the oil, and created a new reserve,
including all the storage, and paying for the maintenance and
operation on a go forward basis, and still had enough left to
buy back all the oil that we sold in the first place. So it was
good timing, and good execution on----
Mr. McNerney. OK. Well, that sort of answers the second
part of my first question that you didn't answer the first time
through. OK. So, with that, I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentleman yields back. At this time
recognize the gentleman from West Virginia, Mr. McKinley, for 5
minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you. Let me get the first question out
of the way as quickly--I want to hear from you whether or not
you support what Secretary Moniz came and testified to us back
in January, I believe it was, that the operation of the Nettle
facilities at Morgantown and Pittsburgh will remain as is into
the future. In fact, we talked about a 10 year time period. Do
you agree with that?
Mr. Smith. Yes.
Mr. McKinley. OK. So I don't need to go to part two
question on that. So the other issue is, building back off the
question having to do with the gasoline storage in the
northeast, I am just curious about that, because I know the
crude can be stored for some period of time, but there is a
shelf life for gasoline. Can you share with us a little bit
about how often you are turning that over? Because that
gasoline can't stay there forever.
Mr. Smith. Right. Thank you, Congressman, for that
question. So we didn't go and construct new tankage. We rented
tankage that is in place, and so these are in existing
commercial facilities, so part of our maintenance that we are
paying for all the time includes ongoing turnover over that
product, so----
Mr. McKinley. So it is being refreshed, is what you are
saying?
Mr. Smith. Yes, Congressman.
Mr. McKinley. OK, that is fine, so we don't have that
issue. Because I know there are serious problems with gasoline
over a period of time if it is not turned over. So let me go to
the next question, that has to do with this storage of the
crude in the salt minutes, primarily down, I guess, in the Gulf
region, having faced a lot of the pushback, and understandable,
the pushback of the brine discharge from the operation, and the
Marcellus and the Utica operation that the environmentalists--
and understandably. I would share the concern, what are we
doing with this brine reserve that is coming back up again?
So I am curious, since you have produced somewhere in the
neighborhood of close to 700 million barrels of brine, what
would you do with it?
Mr. Smith. Thank you for that question. So we have got a
very experienced team of environmental professionals that are
part of the Strategic Petroleum Reserve that ensure that we are
complying with all state, local, and Federal regulations in
terms of disposal of brine. We do have brine drive caverns in
place that we use to manage the brine. We need the brine to
push the oil out of the caverns.
Mr. McKinley. So when it comes back up, you are putting it
someplace--mechanically, I want to be able to be clear, not
talk in 30,000 feet. When it comes back out, where does it go?
Mr. Smith. It probably would be good to answer that
question for the record, Congressman, because I want to make
sure that we get all the details correct. But what I can say is
that that is an operation that we have got decades of
experience managing, that we are managing consistent with all
the state and local regulations.
Mr. McKinley. How do you deal with--apparently there are
some issues in the salt mines with structural integrity that is
breaking down, in some cases, and obviously, as you know, crude
is not typically found in a salt environment, so you are going
to have some interaction between the chemical composition of a
crude oil and the salt in the walls of the container. How does
this work in the breakdown? What are we doing to assure us that
we have long term stability in our storage with our reserves?
Mr. Smith. Well, we do have an extensive testing program
that is looking at sampling from a statistical sample of the
caverns on an ongoing basis, so we have a very granular and
fine understanding of the quality and the state of the crude
that we have in all of the caverns. Generally the reason why
you store crude in the salt caverns is the sale is not soluble
in crude, whereas it is soluble in water, right? So you use the
water to actually create the space in the cavern, and then you
fill that with crude, so you have got essentially these
enormously large pressure vessels that are full of crude, but
the salt itself is not soluble in crude, which is what makes it
very appropriate for storage.
Mr. McKinley. So you are indicating there is no chemical
interaction between the two?
Mr. Smith. What I am saying is----
Mr. McKinley. Careful with that.
Mr. Smith. I am saying that salt is generally not soluble
in crude, and that we have an extensive testing program so that
we have a very fine understanding of the state of the crude,
sweet and sour, all the various caverns, 60 caverns throughout
four different sites, so that, on an ongoing basis, we always
understand exactly what crude we have in the caverns, we know
what refineries they are suitable for, and that we are
consistent with all the standards for delivering those
refineries, both----
Mr. McKinley. OK. In the timeframe that I have left on--is
that apparently, as I said earlier, we are finding some
developing structural integrity problems--can you give us a
sense of how many of those--if we are storing close to 700
million barrels in crude, how much of that is in areas that are
questionable?
Mr. Smith. Well, what I can say is that every cavern that
we have crude in right now is certified. It is understood it is
safe, all right? We have had to decommission a couple caverns
over the last few years. Our biggest challenge is that you are
drilling through cap rock into these salt structures, and that
over time they do move, so they pinch the well bores, they
compress the well bores, they deform the well bores. And so, on
an ongoing basis, we have got a program of remediation where we
are having to inspect the well bores on an ongoing basis. And
part of the funds that we had requested for this budget period,
increasing funding from last year to this year, was to ensure
that we are able to do the appropriate number of work-overs.
One final thing I will say is that if there is an issue of
safety in any cavern, it means we don't operate that cavern. So
we don't operate any cavern that is going to create an
environmental issue. We don't operate any cavern that is going
to be a--create a safety issue. We decommission those caverns
if they create a----
Mr. McKinley. OK. If you can get back to me on--I am over
on time. If you could get back to me on those two answers that
left--one was percent, and the other question.
Mr. Smith. All right. I would be happy to.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you very much.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time the Chair recognizes the
gentleman from Vermont, Mr. Welch, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Smith,
thank you. The Strategic Petroleum Reserve has been with us for
a while, and can perform a number of very useful functions,
including taking some of the pressure off the spike in gas
prices when consumers are getting hammered. In fact, we passed
a law, that I was one of the co-sponsors of, to suspend
shipments, this is back in '08, suspend shipments to the SPR
because gas was 3.73 a gallon. And, in fact, the evidence
indicated that it was about--adding about a quarter at--of a
cost--a quarter a gallon at the price of the pump. Obviously,
we are in a different situation now, and as we have re-filled
it, we are paying less than we were paying then. What has been
the experience of SPR with respect to how it can have an impact
on the price that consumers pay at the pump? I know that is not
its primary objective, but it is an incidental effect.
Mr. Smith. Well, thank you, Congressman, for that question.
So I guess--two separate issues. So one of the things that the
Strategic Petroleum Reserve, just its existence, but also its
utilization in a crisis, can do is have an impact not only on
ensuring that we have appropriate supply in a disruption, but
also on global oil markets. I will note that global oil markets
and global crude markets are different. You do have an
internationally fungible global crude market, and an
internationally fundable global product market. We import and
export product. In fact, we are a net exporter of refined
products.
So if the question is, when we are filling the caverns, do
we have an impact on prices, we just bought five million
barrels to replace the barrels from the test sale. We kept an
eye on that as we made that announcement, and we didn't see an
appreciable impact on prices. We are concerned about impacts on
consumers, so that is something that we keep an eye on.
Mr. Welch. One other question. The quadrennial energy
review mentions that Congress should update the SPR release
authorities to allow it to be used more effectively to prevent
economic harm in emergencies. Do you recommend any specific
legislative steps that are needed in order to accomplish that?
Mr. Smith. Thank you for that question, Congressman. So,
indeed, one of the disconnects well, first of all, to reiterate
a point that I had an opportunity to make earlier, we operate
primarily under EPCA, which is, right now, after decades, is a
patchwork of amendments, and addendums, and changes. So we do
see a disconnect between the market of today and the market
that was perhaps foreseen back in the early '70s. So changes in
the legislation and authorities, that would allow us to be more
proactive with the petroleum reserve would be welcome. Changes
that would centralize some of the authorities so that, right
now we have different authorities for regional product
reserves, and the Strategic Petroleum Reserve.
And, importantly, they are in some cases, for example, the
Northeast Gasoline Reserve is managed under Title B, Section 1,
and that is a national standard, so you have a regional reserve
for products that would be released based on a standard that is
set for a national reserve that has crude in it. And so we
think that addressing all those issues would be positive to
make sure that that is its effect.
Mr. Welch. Well, we would welcome your specific
recommendations on how best to do that.
Mr. Smith. I really look forward to the opportunity to work
with the Committee on that.
Mr. Welch. All right. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Chair recognizes the gentleman from Ohio,
Mr. Johnson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Assistant
Secretary Smith. Thank you so much for being here with us
today. A couple of quick questions on a little bit of a
different subject, then I will get back to some questions about
the QER. Are you confident that your department is treating
applications by Canadian LNG companies consistently with NAFTA
obligations?
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much for that question,
Congressman. So we currently have two applicants for--two
Canadian applicants before the Department for authorization to
export liquefied natural gas. To be clear, what we authorize
is--we give the applicant the authorization--or we rule on
their application to export the molecule. Other entities look
at environmental issues, including the FERC. So we have got two
applications that are before us right now. So the commitment
that we have made is that we are going to treat applicants in
Canada, applicants in Mexico, and applicants in the United
States in a way that is open, it is transparent, it is fair, it
is consistent.
So under Section 3 of the Natural Gas Act, we are compelled
to make a public interest determination for any natural gas
that is exported from the United States. It is our reading of
that statute that that applies to natural gas that might be
exported via Canada, via Mexico, or via the United States. So
whether you are a mile north or a mile south of that border, we
have to do that public interest determination.
Mr. Johnson. I understand that, but it--I guess I am a
little confused, because it is my understanding that that is
not being applied in the case of Mexico, but it is being
applied in Canada. And are you concerned that Canada could, in
fact, exercise jurisdiction over the export of LNG derived from
Canadian natural gas for U.S. projects, such as Jordan Cove and
Oregon LNG? And the reason that I ask this question is because
they are experiencing the same slow rolling, slow moving
process for liquid natural gas export permits that American
companies are.
Mr. Smith. Right.
Mr. Johnson. And it is going to come to a head at some
point.
Mr. Smith. Well, I won't speculate on what the Canadian
government is going to do. I think Canadian government is going
to do what is appropriate for the citizens of Canada, just as
we are doing what is appropriate for the----
Mr. Johnson. Yes, but it could have dire implications for
here at home, because a lot of the gas that we have here at
home, in the Marcellus and other places, are destined to go to
places like Canada. And so it does have economic implications
here at home.
Mr. Smith. Well, indeed, Congressman, and as we make
these--well, first, I wouldn't concur with the characterization
of this process, slow rolling. I mean, we have already----
Mr. Johnson. We can debate that, because they have been
sitting there for years, and there are 38, only five of them
had been addressed. We were assured by Secretary Moniz that
these were going to be looked at more quickly, and we are not
seeing LNG export permits being granted.
Mr. Smith. Well, indeed, Congressman, we are. We have
authorized 5.7 billion cubic feet of natural gas----
Mr. Johnson. How many permits have you authorized?
Mr. Smith. For four different----
Mr. Johnson. Four out of 38. Mr. Smith, in my view, that is
slow rolling, when America's economy is dependent upon the
jobs, and the energy independence that this brings.
Mr. Smith. Well, Congressman, right now there are zero
applicants sitting in front of us for a decision right now.
There is an important process that these companies have to go
through that----
Mr. Johnson. Well, you know why that is, right? You know
why that is? They are not going to put the hundreds of millions
of dollars into doing the environmental assessments and the
FERC process when they know these permits are going to sit in
the Department of Energy for extenuating periods of time. They
have got to have some idea that they are going to get a return
on their investment. But----
Mr. Smith. In fact, they are spending millions of dollars
to go through those process, because they are going through
that FERC process. So we work very closely with FERC. As those
applicants have finished that process, then they come to
Department of Energy. The last application that we got that
came out of FERC, we turned that around in 1 day.
So the companies will make the decision whether to either
spend the money on the environmental work or not, and that is
up to the companies. The market will decide that. As the
companies make those investments, as they get financing, as
they sell the gas, they will then come to the Department. Once
that work is done, it puts us in a situation where we can make
that----
Mr. Johnson. My time is expired almost. Point of
clarification, then. Are you telling me that the roughly 33
permitting applications that are sitting in the Department of
Energy, that none of that has gone through the FERC process,
and that none of that is waiting on the Department of Energy
for action?
Mr. Smith. Those applicants that have gone through FERC,
that have completed the re-hearing process, have come to us,
and we have made decisions on those applicants.
Mr. Johnson. So you are saying that none of those other 33
are waiting on the Department of Energy?
Mr. Smith. The rest of those 33 are doing all the other
work that they have to do to complete these decadal multi-
billion dollar projects. They are big projects, and they do
take some time, but we are moving expeditiously on this. We are
getting these applications out as we are ready to make the
decisions because they have done the work. They come to us, and
we write the orders.
Mr. Johnson. Sorry for exceeding my time, Mr. Chairman. I
yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time the Chair recognizes the
gentleman from New York, Mr. Engel, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Engel. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Mr.
Secretary. New York and the northeast region of the U.S. are
particularly vulnerable to gasoline disruptions as a result of
hurricanes and other natural events, and Hurricane Sandy, or
Superstorm Sandy, in 2012 was a good example of that. It caused
widespread issues related to the availability of gasoline.
In response, to help build a more secure and resilient
energy infrastructure, the Energy Department did establish the
first Federal regional refined petroleum product reserve,
containing gasoline. The reserve, I am told, currently holds
one million barrels of gasoline to help strengthen regional
fuel resiliency in the northeast. So let me ask you if you
could please talk about efforts related to the setup and
operation of the northeast reserve. Did you have to overcome
any unforeseen challenges, and are there any issues that have
yet to be resolved?
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Congressman, very much for that
question. So, as you pointed out, the establishment of the
Northeast Gasoline Reserve was an important step that we took
after some of the disruptions that we noted in Superstorm
Sandy. So, as a result of that, we created a reserve in the
northeast that would have gasoline in place. That includes
700,000 barrels that are stored in the New York Harbor area,
and that is in two separate facilities. We have 200,000 barrels
that are in a terminal in Massachusetts, and then 100,000
barrels that are stored at terminals south of Portland, Maine.
So those three different geographic locations make up the
Northeast Petroleum Reserve. The funding that we used for
purchasing the gasoline, we also used to procure storage
capacity, and maintenance, and ongoing expenses for the
reserve. So that the resources are in place. We have put in
place all of the IT, and the procedural systems that we would
need to have in place in order to actually move those barrels
out into the market in the case of a disruption.
We worked very closely with potential buyers of gasoline
out of those reserves to ensure that we are, on an ongoing
basis, exercising the capabilities to make sure that not only
have we purchased this insurance policy, but we are ready to
use it, and to deploy it in case of a future emergency. So that
is the steps that we have taken to date.
Mr. Engel. It is also my understanding that the DOE
operates a network of pipelines as part of the Strategic
Petroleum Reserve, including the Northeast Reserve, so I would
like to know a bit more about that. Do you have available
information on how many miles of pipelines does DOE operate as
part of the SPR?
Mr. Smith. I don't have that number off the top of my head,
Congressman, but I would be happy to take that question for----
Mr. Engel. And get back to me? How is that system managed?
Can you help me understand a little more about----
Mr. Smith. Al right.
Mr. Engel [continuing]. Management of that system?
Mr. Smith. So the Strategic Petroleum Reserves--our Deputy
Assistant Secretary, Mr. Bob Corbin, is based here in
Washington, D.C. He works very closely with me. We have the
management office down in the Gulf of Mexico that has a center
in New Orleans that oversees those operations. And so, between
that operational center in New Orleans, and our center here in
Washington, D.C., we oversee all the activities of the
Strategic Petroleum Reserve, including the Northeast Home
Heating Oil Reserve, and the newly created Northeast Gasoline
Reserve, is all managed by the SPR.
Mr. Engel. Is the safety of the pipeline network subject to
oversight by DOT's Office of Pipeline Safety?
Mr. Smith. So one clarification I will make, because there
is not an extensive pipeline network that is actually owned and
maintained by the SPR. Again, I will be happy to give some
details of that question for the record, to ensure that we are
being clear on that. But we certainly are complying with all
state and Federal regulations for all assets that we manage.
Mr. Engel. But help me to understand who is responsible for
regulating those pipes.
Mr. Smith. So if the strategic petroleum has a release that
goes into an existing commercial pipeline network, then that
pipeline would be operated and regulated by whatever the
appropriate Federal and State statutes oversee that
infrastructure. Just like if we put crude into a barge, and we
sell it to someone who is going to take that water-borne to
another location, then there would be a federal, state, and
local regulations for those transportation assets, even if we
don't own them.
Mr. Engel. OK. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time we will recognize the gentleman
from Texas, Mr. Flores, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Smith, thank you
for your testimony today. Going to the QER for a minute, the
QER recommends that Congress authorize an additional $1 \1/2\
to $2 billion to increase the incremental distribution capacity
of the SPR. That request hasn't appeared in front of Congress.
Can you tell me why?
Mr. Smith. Well, thanks for the question, Congressman. So
in our 2016 budget request, you know, we did have some funds
for maintenance issues within the Strategic Petroleum Reserve.
It did not include these recommendations from the QER. And,
indeed, as you note, the QER was just released, right? So, we
look forward to working with Congress to refine further details
on that, but the QER literally is hot off the presses as of
last Tuesday.
Mr. Flores. OK. Thank you. And the QER also says that the
DOE will analyze the need for additional or expanded regional
product reserves, in particularly like the one you talked about
in the northeast. These will be in the southeast and on the
west coast. Will the DOE formally request funding from Congress
in advance in an annual budget submission?
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Congressman. So we are undergoing
these studies now, in real time, so I will demur from making
any specific predictions about when we would make a
recommendation, or even what the review will state. So the
whole purpose of going through this comprehensive review,
looking at everything from subsurface issues, to market issues,
to infrastructure, to need for regional reserves will help us
flesh out what needs to happen. And, indeed, future efforts
certainly would have funds appropriated, and we will be working
with Congress, based on the results of the study.
Mr. Flores. OK. So we can assume that if the DOE study
indicates that you should have these regional product reserves,
then you will formally ask Congress for the appropriation?
Mr. Smith. So, Congressman, certainly, if we do determine
that there is new work that needs to be done that requires
appropriation that would require us to work with Congress, yes.
Mr. Flores. OK. Good. Will you provide to the Committee for
the record the September 2011 DOE study that is entitled
``Refined Petroleum Product Reserve, Assessment of Energy
Security Needs, Cost and Benefits'' that is referenced on Page
2-34 of the QER?
Mr. Smith. We can provide that.
Mr. Flores. OK. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, that is all I
have. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentleman yields back. At this time I would
recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and, again, good to see
you again, Assistant Secretary Smith. First of all, I would
like to talk to you about LNG permitting exporting, and thank
you for coming last Congress to our natural gas caucus to talk
with us. Of course, expansion of exporting of natural gas is
important to our producers in our area, but also to our friends
and allies around the world. But today we are talking about the
Strategic Petroleum Reserve, which is also important.
In March 2014 Department of Energy conducted a test sale
from the SPR to demonstrate drawdown and distribution capacity.
In November the DOE reported that pipeline capacity is limited,
and drawdown of significant scope may post a challenge. The
same issues were addressed in the quadrennial energy review,
and the budget that was submitted was for $51 million for
operations and flexibility, and the QER recommends 1.5 to two
billion increase in distribution capacity. Obviously 51 million
is relatively low, compared to the 2 billion, and I am going to
see how we can get you some of those funds. Does the DOE
anticipate using funds from additional test sales to fund
requirements laid out in the QER? Do you have that ability?
Mr. Smith. Yes. Well, thank you for the question,
Congressman. First of all, we don't have plans for a future
test sale. The last test sale we felt was very important in
order to exercise the operational and procedural capabilities
of the SPR, and so that is why we undertook that sale. We don't
have plans for a future sale.
Mr. Green. OK. But does the Department have the ability, if
you have a sale, to utilize that funding for your budgetary
needs?
Mr. Smith. There is----
Mr. Green. It may not be appropriated by the
appropriations.
Mr. Smith. So under statute we have got a fairly limited
number of things that we could use those funds for. We could
use them to buy other petroleum products. We could use it for
storage or transit of petroleum. But under statute, there are
some limits to----
Mr. Green. OK.
Mr. Smith [continuing]. What we could use those funds for.
But, again, to reiterate, the test sale was driven by the need
to exercise the operational capabilities of the----
Mr. Green. Well, and I am glad you do it, because what you
found out, that there were some issues that needed to be dealt
with. During an emergency, what actions or authorities are
available to alleviate those issues you found out?
Mr. Smith. So some of the issues that we found out were
drivers for the 2016 Congressional justification for the budget
that the President issued for the 2016 budget, including the
additional metering skid at that Big Hill. So in terms of major
kind of infrastructure issues, I mean, that was probably one of
the main things that we were already kind of moving to address,
but, obviously, we need funding to do that.
Mr. Green. OK. Does the DOE support additional pipeline
construction and tank storage to deal with the constraints that
you found?
Mr. Smith. Congressman, I think that the specific answer to
what we would recommend to do next, with regards to
infrastructure, will be driven by the strategic review. We do
know that, as we noted, we have got aging infrastructure, and
so the life extension program that we have thought through
would include some surface infrastructure thing, including
tankage, including pipelines to move things around the SPR,
including pumps and compressors, brine drive caverns, brine
disposal wells. So those would all be things that we would have
to put in place as part of the life extension.
So we have got a rough outline of what we think that would
look like, and you have seen some rough numbers in the QER. I
think there was an estimate of between 700 and $900 million for
that piece of work. The details of what that would look like
are--that is what we are going to be driving towards in this
review that we are undertaking.
Mr. Green. OK. I know a significant part of the SPR is
actually just east of Houston, between Houston and Beaumont.
Mr. Smith. Indeed.
Mr. Green. Was that where the test was done, or was it
other locations that we have the reserve?
Mr. Smith. The test sale was out of Big Hill, and brine
Mound was where the crude came from, for that sale.
Mr. Green. OK. Because I always joke that if we have
infrastructure problems in Texas with oil and gas, then the
rest of the country really must be in bad shape, because we
have a lot, and we still need to build more. Mr. Chairman, I am
out of time, and I appreciate the time. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. I am sorry to say, Mr. Smith,
there are no more questions for you today. But we do appreciate
your being with us, and talking about this important issue. And
I just wanted to also bring to your attention that Mr. Rush and
I, and Mr. Pallone, and Mr. Upton had sent a letter to
Secretary Moniz sometime in March, just asking about four or
five questions about the SPR review process that you are
undertaking now. And if you see him in the hall, or at the
coffee table, would you ask him if he could give us a reply? We
would appreciate it.
Mr. Smith. I will do that, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much, and thanks again for
being with us. We look forward to working with you on this
issue. And at this time I would like to call up the second
panel of witnesses. And we will have you all come up, and then
what I am going to do is just introduce each one of you before
your 5 minute opening statement. So you all just have a seat,
and then we will get started.
In the second part of this hearing, we are going to be
focused on the energy efficiency aspect, and I want to thank
each and every one of you for joining us this morning, and
thank you also for your patience. And, as I said, I am going to
introduce you individually, and then you will make your opening
statement.
So our first witness this morning is Mr. Christopher Peel,
who is the corporate Senior Vice President and Chief Operating
Officer for Rheem Manufacturing Company, on behalf of the Air-
Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Institute. So, Mr.
Peel, thank you. You are recognized for 5 minutes. Just be sure
to turn your microphone on, and get it up close enough, because
somehow it is difficult to hear in this room. So, thank you.

STATEMENTS OF CHRISTOPHER PEEL, CORPORATE SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT
AND CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER, RHEEM MANUFACTURING COMPANY (ON
BEHALF OF THE AIR-CONDITIONING, HEATING, AND REFRIGERATION
INSTITUTE); KATERI CALLAHAN, PRESIDENT, ALLIANCE TO SAVE
ENERGY; JOHN W. SOMERHALDER II, CHAIRMAN, PRESIDENT, AND CEO,
AGL RESOURCES (ON BEHALF OF THE AMERICAN GAS ASSOCIATION; FRANK
THOMPSON, PRESIDENT, SWEETWATER BUILDERS, INC. (ON BEHALF OF
THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF HOME BUILDERS); ELIZABETH NOLL,
ENERGY EFFICIENCY ADVOCATE, NATURAL RESOURCES DEFENSE COUNCIL;
RONA NEWMARK, VICE PRESIDENT, INTELLIGENT EFFICIENCY STRATEGY,
EMC CORP. (ON BEHALF OF THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY
COUNCIL); AND MARK WAGNER, VICE PRESIDENT, U.S. GOVERNMENT
RELATIONS, JOHNSON CONTROLS, INC. (ON BEHALF OF THE FEDERAL
PERFORMANCE CONTRACTING COALITION)

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER PEEL

Mr. Peel. Thank you, Chairman. Chairman Whitfield, Ranking
Member Rush, and members of this subcommittee, I appreciate the
opportunity to be here with you to talk about some energy
policy issues that are important to manufacturers and our
customers. I would like to begin by thanking you for your work
on the recent passage of S-535, which included language
providing regulatory relief for grid enabled water heaters that
are positive for the environment and our customers in rural
America. I would also like to thank you for inviting me to
testify this morning.
My name is Chris Peel. I am the Chief Operating Officer for
Rheem Manufacturing Company. Rheem was founded in the 1920s, is
headquartered in Atlanta, and is a global industry leader, with
seven U.S. based factories and distribution centers. Rheem
designs and manufactures furnaces, air conditioners, water
heaters, and refrigeration equipment. We have a proud history
of developing innovative high efficiency products which reduce
energy consumption, and help customers save on their utility
costs. I am here on behalf of AHRI, a trade association that
represents 315 manufacturers of HVAC, refrigeration, and water
heating equipment. AHRI's members employ over 100,000 people in
the U.S.
I am here today because we care about serving our
customers, enhancing safety and reliability, supporting our
employees, and improving the environment. With these priorities
in mind, I ask the subcommittee to address three issues that
are vitally important, transparency in stakeholder engagement
in the rulemaking process, the expected impact of the DOE's
proposed efficiency standards for residential furnaces, and the
value provided by voluntary independent verification programs.
The DOE is planning to issue 23 new regulations affecting
our industry between now and 2018. This ambitious schedule has
caused a reduction in the constructive interaction between
stakeholders and DOE, resulting in oversights involving
economic assumptions and technical issues. Rather than working
together to achieve what are very common objectives, we find
ourselves in a situation where we need to ask for congressional
intervention.
In my view, new efficiency standards achieve the greatest
public benefit when industry, interested NGOs, and government
officials work together to create consensus drive standards. We
also believe this is the goal envisioned by DOE's own process
rule, which involves early input from stakeholders as a means
to achieve successful regulations through the appropriate
analysis and utilization of real world inputs. The outcomes
will be better balanced, and achieve the intended benefits for
the economy and the environment.
A recently proposed residential gas furnace standard is an
example of a rule created with insufficient input from
industry. DOE is poised to finalize a new energy efficiency
standard for residential furnaces that would raise the national
minimum efficiency from 80 to 92 percent. To achieve the higher
efficiencies of a 92 percent furnace, both the product and the
installation become significantly more complex and costly for
the consumer.
DOE estimates that replacing an existing 80 percent furnace
with a 92 percent furnace will cost the majority of consumers
an average of $660 more. This could rise to $2,200, depending
on the installation. Out of the more than 20 million 80 percent
furnaces currently installed, the majority are in the South,
where the customer payback will seldom be realized. Therefore,
we recommend consideration of legislative efforts that would
give time and space to finalize this rule until all
stakeholders are able to work together to ensure the proposed
regulations will achieve our efficiency objectives without
needlessly penalizing families and small businesses.
I also wish to thank Representatives Latta, Cooper, and
Blackburn, who have introduced H.R. 1785, the Volunteer
Verification Program Act, which will assure consumers that the
HVAC and water heating products they installed in their homes
truly meet the applicable Federal efficiency levels, while
conserving taxpayer resources, and providing certainty for
manufacturers. This is the proverbial win-win-win scenario, and
I thank you and the staff for including this measure in the
draft bill.
Under H.R. 1785, DOE and stakeholders would work
collaboratively on negotiated rulemaking to establish criteria
under which the Federal Government would certify independent
programs and rely on such VIVPs to verify efficiency ratings.
DOE would, of course, retain its enforcement authority to
periodically inspect and test products to ensure compliance. As
DOE budgets and priorities can fluctuate year to year, we
believe that industry and our customers are best served by
VIVPs. Our industry spends millions of dollars, and thousands
of employee hours, every year to certify and verify that our
efficiency ratings are accurate. VIVPs, such as AHRI's program,
has, for 50 years, successfully held manufacturers accountable
to the high standards that our customers deserve and expect.
Finally, Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member Rush, and
members of the Subcommittee, I appreciate the chance to appear
this morning, and I look forward to answering any questions you
might have, and to working together with you and your staff on
these priorities.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Peel follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Peel. And our next witness is
Ms. Kateri Callahan, who is the President of the Alliance to
Save Energy, and you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KATERI CALLAHAN

Ms. Callahan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member,
and members of the subcommittee. I really appreciate the
opportunity to testify today. The Alliance to Save Energy is a
bipartisan, non-profit coalition of about 140 businesses and
organizations that span the entire economy. Our sole mission is
to advance energy efficiency, and we do this to drive economic
growth, to preserve the environment, and to enhance our
national security. We have a proud 38 year history of
bipartisan leadership from House and Senate lawmakers who serve
as honorary members of our board, and I am delighted that, of
the 16 congressional leaders, we have five who are members of
this committee, Congressman McKinley, Congressman Welch,
Congressman Tonko, Congressman Burgess, and Congressman
Kinzinger. These forward-thinking leaders demonstrate clearly
that energy efficiency is truly the sweet spot in our our
national debate over energy policy.
Since the founding of the alliance, our country has made
huge strides in driving energy efficiency into our economy, and
a lot of this progress can be traced directly to the work of
Congress over the past 4 decades. Since Congress began
lawmaking on efficiency, we have actually doubled our country's
energy productivity. That means that we are getting twice as
much gross domestic product from each unit of energy that we
consume, as we did in the 1970s. And this translates into huge
savings. ACEEE is announcing today that Americans, just last
year, will save $800 billion on their collective energy bill.
The policies now on the books are going to continue to deliver
gains. The EEIA estimates and forecasts that our energy
productivity will increase 50 percent or more just on a
business as usual case. But we believe that we can, and must,
do better if we are going to remain globally competitive. And
since we still waste about half of the energy that we consume,
there is ample room for improvement.
The Alliance has a goal to again double our energy
productivity in this nation by 2030, and if we do this, we see
that American families could see their utility bills fall by
over $1,000 a year, and we could create 1.3 million new jobs.
But we can only deliver these benefits to Americans if Congress
provides a policy infrastructure to support aggressive energy
efficiency implementation.
We are very encouraged by action in the 114th Congress
today. We were thrilled that the first energy bill that went to
the President, and will be signed today, is S-535, and we thank
the Chairman and the members of the Committee who worked so
hard to move this bipartisan bill through the full House. We
view S-535 as a strong indicator that the comprehensive energy
legislation you are creating will include meaningful efficiency
policies. And the draft title already does contain some of
these policies, but, like the Ranking Member, we are deeply
concerned that some of the provisions will actually impede or
roll back progress that we are making.
So first let me run through quickly those provisions that
we support. We support all the provisions in Chapter 1 which
deal with improving Federal energy efficiency, with the
exception of the repeal of the fossil fuel consumption
requirements. We could support this repeal if it were coupled
with strong efficiency goals, as it is in other legislation
pending before the Congress. We also support the provisions in
Chapter 2 that safeguard the integrity of the Energy Star
program, and require energy guide labels to include information
on the smart grid capability of products. We support all the
provisions included in Chapter 4, as these enable energy and
water efficiency measures in Federal buildings. And finally, we
support Chapter 5, which enable schools to make efficiency
upgrades.
As much as we support these provisions, we have very, very
strong objections to the provisions included in Chapter 3.
Building energy codes are a critical policy tool for advancing
energy efficiency in the largest consuming sector of our
economy, and they have been very effective. As a result of a 38
percent improvement in the codes that we have seen in recent
years, we have seen a reduction of $44 billion annually in the
energy bills of American families.
The Department of Energy has played a key and critical role
in delivering improvements in the building energy codes, and we
believe that it is imperative that the Department continue to
engage in every step of the code making process, from
development, to adoption, to implementation. The Alliance,
therefore, urges the committee to strike the current provisions
in Chapter 3 and to replace them with the building energy code
provisions that are contained in the newly reintroduced
McKinley-Welch Energy Savings and Competitiveness Act. These
provisions actually strengthen model building codes to make new
homes and commercial buildings more energy efficient, and they
also work with the states and the private sector to improve the
transparency of the code writing process.
The McKinley-Welch bill was carefully developed to address
concerns of both advocates, builders, and code making bodies.
In addition, their bill deals with the up-front cost of
efficiency by ensuring that the upgrades are valued in the
appraisal and the mortgage underwriting process. The provision,
known as the Save Act, enjoys the support not only of advocates
like me, but also of the National Association of Realtors, the
Chamber of Commerce, and many, many others. So as the Committee
continues its work, we urge members to review the many
bipartisan energy efficiency bills that are emerging, or being
reintroduced, and in particular we ask the Committee to
consider not just the building energy provisions in the
McKinley-Welch bill, but all of the provisions in that bill
which have broad-based bipartisan support.
So I commend the Chair and the committee for seeking to
include energy efficiency as a pillar of national energy
policy, and we are hopeful that, as the committee continues its
work, the energy efficiency title will be made much more robust
so we can achieve that goal, and we can offer, as the Alliance
to Save Energy, our full throated support. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Callahan follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you, Ms. Callahan. I was
wondering why Congressman McKinley was asking us to pay
particular attention to your testimony, but when you refer to
him as a forward-thinking leader, I mean, I understand.
Our next witness is Mr. John Somerhalder, who is the
Chairman and President and CEO of AGL Resources, and he is
testifying on behalf of the American Gas Association. So you
are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOHN W. SOMERHALDER II

Mr. Somerhalder. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman
Whitfield, Ranking Member Rush, and members of the committee.
Again, I am John Somerhalder, both the past Chairman of AGA,
and Chairman, President, and CEO of AGL Resources. I am proud
that my company serves many of the states represented on this
Committee, including New Jersey, Illinois, Virginia, Texas,
Florida, California, and Maryland. We support the Committee's
discussion draft because it will remove inappropriate barriers
to the use of clean, energy efficient, cost-effective natural
gas.
Gas utilities have shared your focus around greater energy
efficiency for a long time. Sixty-eight million residential gas
consumers today use the same amount of gas that 38 million
customers used in 1970. Every year gas utilities spend about
$1.5 billion on energy efficiency, and help customers save 136
trillion BTUs of energy, and reduce about 7.1 million metric
tons of carbon dioxide. We are proud of what we do as a company
as well. Since 2011, our AGL utilities have invested $188
million in energy efficiency programs. We have helped 45,000
customers purchase high efficiency furnaces. We have helped
save enough energy to--and natural gas to heat 80,000 homes for
a year, and we have delivered the highest 1 year energy savings
by a gas only utility in the U.S. history just last year.
We support your efforts to find a common sense standard for
residential furnaces. Under DOE's own analysis, only a third of
homeowners will be better off under its proposed rule, and
about a third of low income customers will be worse off. We
think DOE's assumptions are also too rosy. They don't fully
reflect the cost to consumers. Our data shows that an average
customer would be forced to pay an additional $350 in the unit
cost for the furnace, and an additional $1,500 up to $2,200 for
the installation of that unit. The Gas Technology Institute
predicts that the proposed rule would impose an additional
$44.9 million in energy costs, and produce an additional
348,000 tons of CO
2
per year. We cannot support an
efficiency standard that imposes higher costs, requires more
energy, and provides more emissions.
Section 4124 of the discussion draft would require DOE to
stop its rulemaking and start a negotiated rulemaking involving
a broader group of stakeholders. As discussed--have discussions
between AGA and other stakeholders have shown over the past
several months, there are alternatives that would meet our
shared goals for energy savings and consumer benefits. The
negotiated rulemaking process included in the discussion draft
will help us reach that consensus.
As you know, Section 4115 would repeal Section 430 of the
Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007, a provision that
bans all fossil fuel generated energy use in new and renovated
Federal buildings by the year 2030. The fossil fuel ban was
passed when the government thought U.S. supplies were
dwindling. It had good intentions, but DOE's own analysis shows
the cost to taxpayers would jump from $30 million today to over
$500 million in 2019, and over $1.1 billion in 2030, almost a
4,000 percent increase from today's cost. It simply is not
practical.
We also support a provision sponsored by Representatives
Blackburn and Schrader, H.R. 1273. Model building energy codes
are developed by private organizations. States and local
governments choose to either adopt the new standards, or to
maintain their current standards. DOE has too often taken on an
inappropriate advocacy role in co-development. The provisions
would introduce greater transparency in the Department of
Energy's technical support of co-development, specifically
prohibiting DOE funding or personnel from involvement in any
advocacy related to code adoption.
Finally, Section 4142 clarifies that the term of a utility
energy service contract can extend beyond 10 years, but not
exceed 25 years, correcting a Department of Defense
interpretation. A 10 year term severely limits a utility's
ability to help the DOD reach its energy security, energy
efficiency, and renewable energy goals. At AGL Resources, we
understand the importance of these types of projects. Since
2003 we have worked on 10 projects, totaling roughly $31
million, in Georgia, Virginia, and Florida to provide these
vital energy efficiency programs.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to testify
today. I look forward to questions from the Committee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Somerhalder follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much. And our next witness is
Mr. Frank Thompson, who is President of Sweetwater Builders and
he is testifying on behalf of the National Association of Home
Builders. And you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF FRANK THOMPSON

Mr. Thompson. Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member Rush,
members of the committee, I am pleased to appear before you
today on behalf of the 140,000 members of the National
Association of Home builders, and to testify in support of the
Strategic Petroleum Reserve discussion draft, and Title 4 on
energy efficiency. My name is Frank Thompson. I am a home
builder from Western Pennsylvania.
As a longtime leader in the drive to make new and existing
homes more energy efficient, while prioritizing housing
affordability, NAHB, is uniquely positioned to analyze the
impact of this legislation on home building, remodeling, and
rental housing industries. NAHB supports this discussion draft.
Of importance to NAHB, this draft includes provisions from H.R.
1273, introduced by Representatives Blackburn and Schrader,
that use model building energy codes to encourage meaningful
energy savings for residential construction that are achievable
and cost-effective.
As a single family home builder in Western Pennsylvania, I
deal with energy codes, the baseline energy efficiency
requirements for buildings every day, and I understand how
different energy efficient features impact the performance of a
home. I also participate in the development of these codes
because they so intimately affect the way I build. The earlier
versions of these codes focused on consumers, helping them
reduce their utility bills with affordable improvements to
their home. Over the last few years, however, I have seen
negative trends.
First, while it does not write or publish the codes, the
Department of Energy participates in the development of the
codes by providing technical assistance, needed building
science research, energy modeling, and analysis that only DOE
can provide. But NAHB has concerns that technical assistance
has been broadly interpreted to allow representatives from DOE
to advocate for or against certain technologies, picking
winners and losers, and seeking aggressive and costly
requirements.
Another unfortunate trend in energy codes is the failure to
consider the true economic costs when seeking further energy
reductions. We know how valuable the energy savings are to the
consumer, but even with these savings there is a significant
upfront investment. The 2012 version of the residential code
had such significant cost increases that it would take the
average family 13.3 years to recoup those costs through utility
savings. Some parts of the country, including the entire State
of Kentucky, and parts of Illinois, saw payback periods in
excess of 16 or 17 years. Meeting an energy code is a
requirement for every single home, including low cost housing--
or, excuse me, low income housing. Increasing housing costs for
all homebuyers will have the unintended consequence of reducing
housing affordability. For every $1,000 increase in the price
of a home, 246,000 households will be priced out of a mortgage.
This proposed legislation will drastically improve the
manner by which model building energy codes are developed by
establishing guidelines for DOE that increase transparency, and
ensure an open and fair process. This legislation will also
require any code supported by DOE to be cost effective,
allowing homeowners to recoup any investment in 10 years or
less. NAHB strongly supports the discussion draft, and urges
the Committee to swiftly pass this as legislation.
NAHB would also like to weigh in on Section 4124 of this
draft, which addresses a flawed DOE rule on non-weatherized gas
furnaces included in any final legislation. This provision
would require DOE to convene a representative advisory group of
interested stakeholders to help analyze the impacts of the
proposed rule, and determine whether it is technically
feasible, and economically justified, and if not, participate
in a negotiated rulemaking.
I thank you for this opportunity, and welcome your
comments.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Thompson follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Thompson. And at this time
our next witness is Elizabeth Noll, who is an energy efficiency
advocate for the Natural Resources Defense Council, and you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ELIZABETH NOLL

Ms. Noll. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, members of
the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to participate
in today's hearing. My name is Elizabeth Noll. I am an energy
efficiency advocate at the Natural Resources Defense Council,
here to share our views on national policies and programs that
lead to increased investments in energy efficiency.
What would you say if I told you today we can save
Americans money, promote job growth, cut pollution, with a
solution that is affordable, easy to implement, proven
effective, and what your constituents want? That solution is
energy efficiency. And states across the country are seeing job
growth, broad public support for energy efficiency. Take
Illinois, \2/3\ of clean energy jobs--clean energy workers are
employed in energy efficiency, and a recent poll showed 70
percent of likely voters strongly support increased energy
efficiency to meet the state's energy needs.
In state after state, support for using efficiency to meet
future energy needs is the same or higher. Pennsylvania, 97
percent, Virginia, 95 percent, Ohio, 94 percent, and Michigan,
92 percent. Meanwhile, Federal programs, like the Department of
Energy's Appliance Efficiency Standards Program, first
authorized by Congress in 1987, will save American 1.8 trillion
on their utility bills through 2030, and just last year those
standards avoided more pollution as comes from nearly 500
million cars.
Let me take a moment now to thank the Committee for their
leadership in helping pass the Energy Efficiency Improvement
Act of 2015 just last week. It shows once again that efficiency
has bipartisan support. And let us not forget that Ronal Reagan
signed the first efficiency standard legislation almost 30
years ago. The bill now on the President's desk was a good
start, but we must go further. Every American home, building,
and appliance that we make more efficient saves money, cuts
pollution, and moves our nation closer to a more sustainable
and prosperous future.
Some of the provisions before you today will bring energy
savings to your constituents, and others will increase the
Federal Government's leadership, leading to innovation in the
private sector as well. However, I would like to highlight
three troubling provisions that we would strongly oppose, which
are further detailed in my written testimony.
First, Section 4124 would block the Department of Energy
from finalizing a much needed update to the efficiency
standards for non-weatherized gas furnaces. If Congress blocks
the standard, it will only hurt your constituents, especially
moderate and low income families struggling to pay their energy
bills. As proposed in March, these standards would save the
average consumer $600 over the life of the furnace. Renters,
who are often low income customers, especially benefit from
minimum standards. Without an improved standard, property
owners are likely to continue to buy cheaper, less efficient
models, which means higher bills for those tenants. Congress
needs to strengthen existing programs and policies, not delay
or weaken them.
Next, Section 4115 is counterproductive to cutting
pollution in Federal buildings. Phasing out fossil fuels has
enormous potential to reduce pollution, and that is a place
where the Federal Government can show leadership, and leverage
the enormous benefit of efficiency to reduce the $6 billion it
spends on its own buildings. And finally, Section 4131 would
hamstring the process for adopting model building energy codes
that deliver valuable savings for homeowners and renters in
your districts, and across the nation. Smart Federal policies
are essential to achieving the energy efficiency progress that
consumers want, and America needs. And we know manufacturers
will continue to innovate and rise to meet these efficiency
standards, while delivering the same or better performance and
options, as they have done.
In closing, Congress should reject any proposal to delay,
weaken, or repeal the clean energy programs that have proven
effective, and instead continue passing meaningful energy
policies that Americans want. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Noll follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. And our next witness is Ms. Rona
Newmark, who is Vice President, Intelligent Efficiency Strategy
at EMC Corporation, and she is testifying on behalf of the
Information Technology Industry Council. And you are recognized
for 5 minutes, Ms. Newmark.

STATEMENT OF RONA NEWMARK

Ms. Newmark. Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member Rush, and
members of the committee, thank you for inviting the
Information Technology Industry Council, also known as ITI, to
testify today on the important issue of energy efficiency
legislation, and specifically the Energy Efficient Government
Technology Act. I am EMC Corporation's Vice President of
Intelligent Energy Efficiency Strategy. EMC is a leading IT
company providing products and services to enable customers to
move to cloud computing, and to gain value through analysis of
big data, all within trusted computing environments. The
company is headquartered in Massachusetts, and supports a broad
range of customers.
At EMC I am charged with reviewing EMC's products and
strategies in the areas of energy efficiency and energy
efficiency standards. I also help lead efforts within the
company, and the industry, to view efficiency at a system level
to provide the best net energy savings to accomplish particular
results.
As you know, ITI is the global voice of the technology
sector. The 60 companies in ITI are leaders and innovators in
information and communications technology, including hardware,
software, and services. These companies, including my own, are
committed to innovation, to developing the energy efficient
solutions demanded by our customers, and to helping drive
sustainable economic growth, and energy independence across our
nation's economy. ITI has had a fruitful history of working
with the Committee on energy efficiency and productivity.
Enactment of the bipartisan Energy Efficient Government
Technology Act, Sections 4111 and 4112 of the discussion draft
would be another important milestone in this regard. EGTA is
not a regulatory approach. Rather, ITI believes the Federal
Government can be a useful partner and leader in leveraging
information and communications technology for increased energy
efficiency and productivity, giving taxpayers improved ROI.
Data centers and the Internet of things will be essential
to future U.S. sustainable growth. We are only beginning to
learn what opportunities lie ahead for smarter buildings,
smarter manufacturing, and smarter transportation systems, not
to mention the smarter fill in the blank we have yet to invent.
EGTA recognizes this, and emphasizes the right role for the
Federal Government in encouraging further progress and
innovation. ITI thanks Representatives Eshoo, Kinzinger, Welch,
McKinley, and Tonko for introducing EGTA again this year. We
also thank the Committee for EGTA's inclusion within the
discussion draft as Sections 4111 and 4112, and we strongly
urge EGTA's adoption this year.
Thank you. I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Newmark follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Ms. Newmark, thank you. And our next witness
is Mr. Mark Wagner, who is Vice President and U.S. Government
Relations for Johnson Controls, and he is going to be
testifying on behalf of the Federal Performance Contracting
Coalition. And you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARK WAGNER

Mr. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Rush, and members
of the Committee. I am Mark Wagner of Johnson Controls, and
representing 10 energy service companies that form the Federal
Performance Contracting Coalition. We work to help the Federal
Government reduce energy consumption through energy saving
performance contracts, or ESPCs. I would like to briefly
discuss the benefits of ESPC, and outline our coalition's
support for pending legislation that would improve the program.
ESPCs are a tremendous tool for the Federal Government
because agencies can get energy efficient equipment, such as
new lighting, building controls, HVAC equipment, chillers,
boilers, renewable energy assets, at no upfront cost to the
government. The energy service companies leverage private
sector capital to make the investment. We design and install
the equipment, and put in place a plan to measure and verify
the savings.
Three important parts of this deal. As you can see from the
slide, first the agency gets a facility upgrade, with new
building equipment, and they lower their energy consumption.
Second, the agency pays off the investment with the savings on
its utility bill, but never pays more than it was already
paying for its utilities. Thirdly, then it realizes all the
savings after the investment is paid off. Most importantly,
these savings are guaranteed by the energy service company.
Let me give you an example of an ESPC project that Johnson
Controls is doing at Fort Bliss in Texas. We have installed
building controls at 120 buildings, put in energy efficient
lighting, electric motors, chillers, building insulation, and a
4.7 megawatt photovoltaic array with 5,500 solar panels. It is
a $100 million investment of private sector capital which will
save the installation $150 million. We are also working with
the base on technology for a micro-grid to improve energy
security in the event of an adverse occurrence on the grid.
This is just one example of the many ESPCs that provide
multiple benefits to the Federal Government, and to taxpayers.
ESPCs are a well-established program. According to the
Department of Energy, approximately 600 performance contracts,
worth $5.3 billion of investment, have been awarded to 25
agencies in 49 states, with a net savings of $3 billion to the
Federal Government.
Let me now talk about several legislative provisions
designed to improve the ESPC program. We have been very
supportive of the energy savings through Public-Private
Partnership Act of 2015 that was introduced by Representatives
Kinzinger and Welch, thank you very much. This legislation will
ensure that the Federal agencies are utilizing, to the fullest
extent possible, all cost effective measures for energy
conservation measures. It streamlines the ESPC statute,
providing consistency and clarification, and it promotes
transparency and accountability across the government. This is
now Section 4141 of your bill.
Specifically, it would require reporting on the progress of
ESPCs. It would encourage agencies to act on their required
audits. It would clarify that agencies cannot arbitrarily limit
the terms and use of energy related operation and maintenance
savings. It would make the definition of Federal buildings
consistent with provisions in the law, and it would clarify
other important provisions for ESPC, such as the sale, transfer
of energy incentives, rebates, or credits, as well as the type
of projects for which ESPC can be used. These are all important
details to update and clarify the existing statute, which will
make ESPCs an even more powerful tool for the Federal
Government.
In addition, we support clarifying the use of ESPC for
efficiency gains in data centers, which are extremely energy
intensive. We are supportive of the repeal of the Federal
building fossil fuel reduction, as long as it is packaged
together with extended energy efficiency goals for the
government, which currently expire at the end of this year. We
are supportive of long term utility energy service contracts,
as long as they include measurement and verification of energy
savings, as well as guarantee or assurance of savings.
Other important provisions that we hope the Committee will
consider, in--Section 432, changing may to shall showing--would
ensure that the government would act on cost-effective savings,
extending energy efficiency goals for the Federal Government,
which expire at the end of this year, as I mentioned, ensure
that agencies set ESPC goals on an annual basis, and report on
their progress, and add alternatively fueled vehicles in their
infrastructures measures allowed under ESPCs.
Finally, many of you are aware that the Congressional
Budget Office scores any attempt to update the ESPC statute.
Members of this--members of the Energy and Commerce Committee
have tried to resolve the situation, and we are appreciative of
that. The Senate budget contains a fix to the scoring problem
for the Senate--in Senate legislation. We encourage the House
to continue to pursue annualized scoring for ESPC to fix the
CBO scoring problem.
Thank you for your support of ESPC, and the opportunity to
testify today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wagner follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Wagner. Thank all of you for
your testimony, we appreciate it very much. And I will
recognize myself for 5 minutes of questions.
As you know, we have this draft legislation, and we hear a
lot in Congress today around the country about lack of
bipartisanship. In this bill, there are 14 titles in the energy
title of this bill--or 14 sections, and on 12 of those sections
we do have Democratic support. So the three areas that there is
not agreement on relates to the furnaces, relates to the fossil
fuel, and relates to the building codes. Now, if you have
bipartisanship for 12 out of 14 titles, that is pretty good, I
would say. So I want to address those three areas that there is
some disagreement on, and I want to tell you why we put those
in there.
I think Mr. Thompson, Mr. Somerhalder, and Mr. Peel all
touched on it, but first we will focus a little bit on Mr.
Thompson's remarks. DOE, obviously, has been a leader in
recommending and promoting efficiency, and originally they were
really good ad providing technical assistance. But many people
around the country, I don't care where you live, or what part
of the country you live in, are saying they were becoming more
of an advocate. They are getting closer to dictating and saying
what will and will not be done.
And one example of that was the--recently they came out
with the standards on the hot water heaters that were being
used in demand response programs by rural electric cooperatives
around the country. And the cost would double under those
standards, so Congress came together and delayed the
implementation until some further refinements could take place.
That passed the House, passed the Senate, sent to the
President. Now we are hearing the same thing about furnaces.
And we all know that efficiency--we all know this, that, you
can promote good jobs because you promote industries to
manufacture new products that are better, you save energy
costs, you help improve the environment.
But if you also are significantly increasing the upfront
cost, the furnaces--I hear you are talking about $600, but then
installing it is even more. So, we are just trying to buy a
little balance here. I don't think DOE, as much as they have
expertise, they don't have all of the answers, and so that is
why we are having these hearings. And manufacturers--it really
creates--and you, Mr. Peel, in your testimony you were asking--
you were saying we need congressional intervention here. And I
think you specifically talked about 23 new regulations coming
by EPA in appliance sector. Would you elaborate on that a
little bit, about what it does mean to you and your employees?
Mr. Peel. Well, first of all, we have had some positive
experiences along the way with DOE when we go through a process
that involves stakeholder input along the way, and we have got
recent examples of that as well. We also appreciate that the
DOE is under pretty intense pressure to complete a bunch of
regulations in a compressed timeframe. The unfortunate
consequence for manufacturers is we have to react to those. One
makes the rules, the other has to implement the rules.
So the important thing for us is to be at the table, and
make sure that that information, if there are challenges, for
example, on gas furnaces, that those get brought to bear in the
discussions, and that we end up with what is the best overall
solution----
Mr. Whitfield. Right.
Mr. Peel [continuing]. For the industry, for consumers, and
they make sense economically.
Mr. Whitfield. And you think that this draft, with the
advisory council, basically does provide that additional
protection----
Mr. Peel. I do.
Mr. Smith [continuing]. And input? Which should benefit
everyone in America that certainly has to buy an appliance.
Mr. Thompson, the building codes, would you elaborate just
a little bit on why this building code issue is so important?
Mr. Thompson. I think there are several important factors,
and it starts with creating model building codes that are
affordable and adoptable by states. And we are seeing continued
growing resistance by states to adopt building codes. If we
look at a map, and I think that was included in my written
testimony there, we see about \1/3\ of the states that have
adopted the 2012 or 2015 IECC, about \1/3\ on 2006 and earlier,
or they don't have a state energy code.
Much of the discussion is about the cost increases that
come along with adopting those codes, and so we do need to
strike a balance that represents the significant impact that
these codes have on housing affordability, the 10 year
requirement that would be included in the bill, with also the
3, 5, and 7 year analysis would go a long way to providing
transparency in the process as to what the real simple payback
cost is going to be to people. Get states to have codes
presented before them that they can adopt, and then we can also
talk about the compliance component, which DOE is in the midst
of a pilot program currently that will start to help us better
understand just what true rates of compliance we have, and that
perhaps there is a significant amount of energy to be saved by
increasing those compliance rates, and focus on that.
Mr. Whitfield. And you all do support the building code
section that is in this draft?
Mr. Thompson. Absolutely.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. And I know my time is expired, but one
other thing I just want to mention. We have many members of
Congress that are really focused on energy efficiency. Peter
Welch has been one of those. David McKinley has been one of
those. And we do want to come up with a good product here, but
we want some balance as well.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Illinois for 5
minutes.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman,
one of the more contentious issues before us today that has
been included in this discussion draft, as you well know, is
Section 4124, which would prohibit the Department of Energy
from promulgating a final rule amending efficiency standards
for non-weatherized gas furnaces and mobile home furnaces. Mr.
Chairman, my office has held several meetings with stakeholders
on both sides of this issue, and I think it would be most
beneficial for members to hear directly from DOE on these
issues, and other issues, before we settle on language in any
final draft.
Today, however, we have some of the interested stakeholders
that have been taking part in discussions with DOE to try and
build consensus and come up with language that all sides could
agree with, as was done in previous cases, including most
recently the water heaters provision that Congress passed just
last week with bipartisan support. As I understand it, Mr.
Chairman, the language in today's discussion draft has not been
agreed to by the very stakeholders, and the conversation is
continuing.
My view is that there would be a much better chance of
getting bipartisan support for Section 4121 if the interested
parties would follow the example set by the Water Heaters
Coalition and come up with language that DOE, industry, energy
efficiency advocates, and consumer groups could all support.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I have a couple of questions that
I want to ask both Mr. Somerhalder and Ms. Noll. To the both of
you, we have received conflicting testimony from the two of you
regarding the impact that this rule would have on low income
consumers. Mr. Somerhalder, can you give us your perspective on
this issue, and then I would like to hear from Ms. Noll for
your perspective as well.
Mr. Somerhalder. Yes. Ranking Member Rush, what we see from
our low income customers is the decision to repair, replace
their furnaces, when they make those decisions, if they have
limitations in their ability to use an 80 percent versus a 92
percent furnace, because of venting requirements, and other
requirements that are unique to the higher efficiency furnaces,
they have to make a tough decision about what to do. That can
be everything from not replace, to use electric resistance
heaters, or some other form of heating.
So what we see is that, because of the limitations, there
can be a decision to go with a product that is more costly, if
they do replace this. I mean, you heard the numbers of $350
more for the unit itself, up to around $2,000 to install that
won't pay off because of the use of energy, and how quickly
that would pay off. And the end result is they either would
need to make a decision to replace a unit, and then incur
higher costs, or they may make a decision to switch to another
form of energy that is less cost effective, and could produce
more emissions. So we do see that impacting the low income----
Mr. Rush. Ms. Noll, would you respond, please?
Ms. Noll. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Rush. First I would like to
begin by saying that all Americans benefit from standards,
particularly the low income, who oftentimes are renters, and
pay the higher portion of their energy bill, and the property
owner is the one that is choosing the furnace, or the water
heater, whatever appliance is going into that home.
I would also like to say that this is a proposal right now.
It has tremendous benefit in energy savings, in consumer
savings, and environmental benefit, and that we recognize a
small percentage of installations that would face challenges,
and incur a higher cost. But we have also seen that, just in
this last year, new technologies and solutions have entered
into the market, and helped overcome these challenges. And as
we see those increasingly deployed, we think that that has a
great opportunity to help provide solutions to these customers
that are going to be facing these challenges.
So we think the Department needs to move forward with their
open and transparent process, and get input from stakeholders
on this rule, and find ways of making it even better. And I
think that, from our perspective, this is not an either/or
situation, this is an and/also. We also support the great
utility programs, and the state programs, and bolstering those
programs to help these vulnerable populations get into the high
efficiency furnaces, have improved weatherization that is going
to have benefits to them, and improved comfort, and improved
indoor air quality.
And we commend the gas utilities, like AGL Resources and
others, that serve their customers well through these utility
programs. And those are the kind of things that complement the
minimum standards, and ensure that all Americans have at least
a minimum level of cost-effective efficiency that will serve
them, and they can count on. Thank you.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Olson. As fate would have it, I have the gavel at the
time I am speaking, so I give myself 5 minutes for a couple of
questions.
My first one is for you, Mr. Somerholder. One provision of
the discussion draft would scrap Section 433 of the Energy
Independence and Security Act. It would allow Federal buildings
to use fuels like natural gas past 2030, something currently
being phased out. In essence, current law bans one of our most
efficient and affordable resources of energy right now. Can you
talk about some benefits that we would lose if natural gas is
phased out from Federal buildings, and do you believe that
tackling Section 433 is important?
Mr. Somerhalder. We believe the provision to reduce 433 is
very important, because natural gas is American, it is
affordable, as you pointed out, and it is very efficient.
Heating a building, as an example, with a high efficiency
furnace, or an 80 percent efficiency furnace, is a very
efficient way to heat that building, with very affordable
natural gas, American natural gas. So the ability to use
natural gas, not limit that option, does provide customer
benefit, savings in those buildings, savings for taxpayers. So
we very much support a way to continue to use clean American
natural gas in Federal buildings.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. Next question is for you, Mr.
Thompson. As you know, the draft bill touches on the issue of
DOE's involvement in model building codes. The draft talks
about transparency and about public comment. I am interested in
your thoughts on how we reach consensus there. What caught my
attention, though, was the issue of payback periods and cost
effectiveness. Before the private sector even thinks about
making an investment, they have to know when, and if, they
would get into the black. I have heard some complain that this
isn't always true with energy savings. I would like to talk to
you about the cost and benefits.
Again, Mr. Thompson, today's draft bill says that when DOE
supports a change to the model building code, that change must
pay itself back in under 10 years. Do you think that is
important, and is that realistic?
Mr. Thompson. Thank you for that very thoughtful question.
I think it is absolutely important, and if we intend to move
families from less energy efficient homes to more energy
efficient homes, we need to do it in a way that is affordable
to them. And in a number of polls that have been conducted, and
one in particular by the National Association of Home Builders,
it really tried to identify, by demographic groups, how long
they were willing to wait for a payback of that investment. All
of them fell short of the 10 year requirement. So it is a bit
of a stretch, from a home buyer perspective, to be willing to
wait that long to get a simple payback on their investment
there.
If we are going to continue to drive people to more energy
efficient homes, let us remember we need affordability. And
this is in a marketplace that is currently very limited by
financial limitations on qualifications to buyers, and
limitations on appraisals, and how they recognize the values of
energy efficient improvements to that home.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. Mr. Peel, to follow up on that, do
you think the government has done a good job of considering
whether energy efficiency standards are cost effective? If not,
what can improve that process?
Mr. Peel. I think the results are mixed. I think we have
seen some good analysis, and those have made it through the
process through a collaborative effort, and many of them signed
into law. We also see, with the furnace rule that is on the
table today, some differences in views around what the actual
costs would be, and what the payback periods would be. Again,
all we are asking for here is a seat at the table so we can
openly discuss those issues, make sure everyone is aware, and
build the consensus that we think we can get on this.
Mr. Olson. So the key is a seat at the table, not some law
parts of the bill, but just to actually have some voice in this
process? That is what you would be happy with?
Mr. Peel. Yes. Yes, Congressman.
Mr. Olson. And my final question again is for you, Mr.
Somerhalder. There seems to be a great deal of concern about
DOE's gas furnace rule. A number of groups say it is too
expensive and hard to meet, and this is an issue we touched in
today's discussion draft. Are there some ways we can avoid
conflicts like this in the future?
Mr. Somerhalder. We agree that there are benefits to reach
consensus on this, because we all do want higher energy
efficiency as we move forward. We need to do that in a way that
is not only affordable, but we need to do that in a way certain
customers really can't even convert because they don't have
access to side walls for the venting requirements. And products
are becoming available, but there are still limitations to how
those products can be used. So we absolutely need to work
together to come to consensus so that all the customers can
find a way to continue to lower their costs, and to help
improve the environment. So we very much support a consensus
process. As Mr. Peel has pointed out, we have had good success
with that in the past. There are certain pieces of information
that need to be considered now, and we will be able to find a
way, we believe, to reach consensus.
Mr. Olson. Well, thank you. My time has expired. We now
recognize Mr. Tonko from New York for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I am often stating that
energy efficiency should be recognized as our fuel of choice,
so I was very pleased when I heard that the Committee would be
legislating in this area. But this draft, I have to state, is a
real disappointment. There are a few worthy provisions, but
there are many others that undermine advances that we should be
taking in efficiency.
The provision on DOE's pending gas furnace rule in the
discussion draft is of great concern to me. About 40 percent of
the energy delivered to the residences is used for space
heating, and natural gas and propane furnaces account for
nearly \1/2\ of that. It may be higher now, since prices may
have enticed some to switch heating fuels. Either way, that is
a lot of energy, and gas prices may be low now, but experience
tells us that is likely to change.
So DOE's new rule on gas furnaces would save consumers a
great deal of money on their annual outlays for fuel costs, and
the furnaces that deliver these savings are already on the
market, and make up a significant part of the current furnace
market. The comment period is still open, and this rule appears
to be well justified, very well justified. I am not persuaded
there is any reason to delay these standards.
So, Mr. Peel, you state that DOE's rule is based on,
``errors involving economic assumptions and technical issues''.
But later in your testimony you cite DOE's analysis in support
of your position that this rule should be delayed. Do you have
information other than DOE's analysis that supports your
position that ``the additional cost of installation cannot be
economically justified''?
Mr. Peel. I do have access to information. I don't have it
here today. I used DOE's numbers as a conservative estimate.
They are consensus numbers from--DOE would agree to those
numbers. There are concerns beyond just the payback. The
installation complexity is a big issue as well. These are all
issues that we would bring to the table in a consensus building
session.
So, once again, to reiterate, we are not opposed to energy
efficiency increases for weatherized gas furnaces. We want to
make sure that the realities of the market are understood when
we set these standards. So, for example, most appliances have a
range of efficiencies that you can progress through, a
continuum. Gas furnaces actually change technology between 80
and 90 percent, and so it is actually a different installation.
It is not like installing a more efficient air conditioner,
which is very similar to installing a less efficient air
conditioner.
So those are the kind of things that we want to be
communicating with the DOE and other stakeholders to make sure
that it is understood so we can really understand what the
payback numbers are. And my feeling is that, with the data we
have, with the data DOE has, and other data that we have heard
today, somewhere in there lies the answer. And----
Mr. Tonko. OK.
Mr. Peel [continuing]. Getting together to communicate it
is the key.
Mr. Tonko. Well, I would appreciate you sharing any of that
information with the committee. These are durable goods. They
last a long time, and I think we should implement standards
that save energy at this level as early as possible. And given
these furnaces, as I stated, are already in the market, there
are clearly possible savings there.
To Ms. Noll and Ms. Callahan, there seems to be some
disagreement about the provision of this bill on building
standards. Again, residences and commercial buildings stand for
a long time. Is the provision on building codes consistent with
having DOE do all it can to support the adoption of progressive
building codes for energy efficiency?
Ms. Callahan. You want me to go first?
Mr. Tonko. Sure----
Ms. Callahan. Thank you----
Mr. Tonko [continuing]. Please.
Ms. Callahan [continuing]. Congressman, I appreciate that
question. Let me say, as I said in my testimony, that we
believe that the building code provisions that are in the bill
currently should be struck. And I have an easy answer for the
Ranking Member of where you find bipartisan agreement on
building energy codes that will provide more transparency, and
will ensure that DOE plays an appropriate, and a strong role in
delivering its model energy codes, and that is the bill by Mr.
McKinley and Mr. Welch. We have negotiated those provisions
over a number of years to address the concerns of the
stakeholders, and the concerns of builders, and the concerns of
all the folks that are involved in this process. So we think
that is where you can get broad bipartisan support.
I want to address a couple of points, I think, where there
is perhaps some obfuscation in the testimony that you have
heard. Model energy codes are not set by DOE. They are set by
independent code making bodies. These are people from all
across the United States, city officials, builders like Mr.
Thompson, code officials, elected officials. They come
together, and they establish the code. Once that code is
established, DOE certifies it, if it saves energy, and then the
states adopt it, and the localities implement and enforce the
codes. So I think that that process, DOE has played an
important role, but they cannot control the process. It is
handled in other places.
I also want to state that 39 states right now already
either the 2009, the 2012, or the 2015 code in place. This is
working. And with respect to the the simple payback, I think
one thing that is very important to note, NAHB's own surveys
show that 9 out of 10 Americans will pay two to three percent
more for energy efficient homes. That translates on a $100,000
home to $2,000.
Most people mortgage their homes, and so when they add in
the efficiency upgrade to that mortgage, it is 30 years to pay
it off. And the savings that they get on their energy bill day
one, when they move in, are greater than that additional cost.
So I think that the codes are there, the codes need to keep
going. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Tonko. We wanted to hear from Ms. Noll, though. It was
addressed to both.
Mr. Whitfield. All right, go ahead.
Mr. Tonko. If we could, please?
Ms. Noll. I will be very brief. I would just say that we
achieve better model codes when the Department of Energy is
able to contribute their expertise, and these model codes do
increase the efficiency that can save Americans an enormous
amount of money in our nation.
Mr. Tonko. I thank you for that, and Mr. Chair, as I yield
back, I suggest that we have got a ways to go before we live up
to the title of our bill. And with that I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentleman from
Ohio, Mr. Latta, for 5----
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and,
again, I appreciate the panel for being here today, and I also
appreciate the Chairman for including two of my bills in this
efficiency discussion draft: the Energy Star Program Integrity
Act and the Voluntary Verification Program Act. Both of these
pieces of legislation will help manufacturers and consumers,
while strengthening the Energy Star program. I would also like
to ask the Chairman for unanimous consent to enter into the
record two letters in support of the Energy Star Program
Integrity Act: one from the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, and the
other from the Retail Industry Leaders Association.
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Latta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that.
Mr. Peel, if I could ask, why does the IVP give you more
predictability than a DOE run program?
Mr. Peel. There are really three reasons why the IVP helps
us. The first is that the predictability you mentioned is all
about consistent funding. We know, as an industry, we are going
to fund the program year over year. It is not subject to budget
cuts, or other DOE priorities, so we can count on resources
being available to test our equipment to make sure that it
complies with energy efficiency regulations.
It is also cost effective. There is no taxpayer burden for
this, and it has been proven effective. We have been doing it
for 50 years, and we get better and better and better at it. It
would be very difficult to duplicate. And what makes it work so
well is that competition is the driver, is what keeps the
integrity of the program. Each manufacturer competes with each
other, but it is a common system that allows us to verify that
everyone plays on a level playing field, and abides by the
rules.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. And, Ms. Callahan, if I could ask--
why do you believe the Energy Start Integrity Act, which the
gentleman from Vermont and I introduced, is important?
Ms. Callahan. Well, the Energy Start program itself is
very, very important. It has proven very effective in saving
consumers money, and in drawing in investment from
manufacturers, bringing new technologies forward. We are
concerned that if there is a continuation of class action suits
that are not necessary, in our opinion, that that will cool the
sort of fervor of manufacturers for participating in this very
important program. And the savings that have been coming
through it since inception in the '90s are very, very
significant, and we have got great consumer products now with
the Energy Star label, and we don't want to see that program
diminish in any way.
Mr. Latta. I just want to follow up, I want to make sure I
heard that correctly, that without the Energy Start Integrity
Act, that--you believe that the manufacturers would stop
participating?
Ms. Callahan. I don't know that--whether they would stop or
not, but I think certainly it would be an impediment to them to
continue because of the extra cost, and the risk involved. So I
wouldn't say that it would stop all manufacturers, but I
certainly think that it would cool their attraction to the
program, and cause some concern.
Mr. Latta. And let me just follow up briefly, then, also,
do you think that the Act would prohibit all lawsuits against
non-compliant Energy Star products?
Ms. Callahan. Absolutely not. I mean, it is very narrowly
crafted so that if a product has been certified, and then found
not to be in compliance, and there are corrective measures put
forward by EPA, and those corrective measures are taken, that
is where the protection comes. But if somebody is not in
compliance, if somebody is not following the EPA guidelines,
and refusing to cooperate, and come under the framework of EPA,
they could still be sued.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I will yield
back.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentleman yields back. The reason we were
having a discussion up here, we have a vote on the House floor.
It is just one, so we are going to keep this process going, but
some people have gone to vote, and they will come back.
At this time I will recognize the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, Mr. Doyle, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to all the
panelists. I think it is very helpful to hear from a range of
industries and stakeholders on these issues. This is a draft
document, and I do think we have some work to do on it, but the
goal here is to see how we can use technology to save energy,
but it has to be affordable too, and I think that is a key
ingredient. I want to especially say hello to Frank Thompson, a
gentleman that I have known I think my entire 21 years in
Congress, and have worked with in the Pittsburgh area for a
long time, so, Frank, it is good to see you.
Let me just first ask quickly, Mr. Somerhalder, in your
testimony you talked about how Section 433 of the Energy
Independence and Security Act of 2007, the fossil fuel ban, is
deeply flawed, and this current discussion draft eliminates the
ban. But as Mr. Wagner mentioned, Senator Hogan and Manchin
have a bill that would repeal this requirement, but also
strengthen several existing Federal energy efficiency
provisions to ensure large energy savings in the coming years.
I am just curious, is the Hogan-Manchin bill something that you
could support, or is there a way to make sure we use this as an
opportunity to focus on more efficiency?
Mr. Somerhalder. Yes. Our major priority is clearly to make
natural gas available to these buildings because of the
attributes I talked about. But we have been involved in the
energy standards, and, in a consensus process, looking at what
you talked about, those standards that could be put in place.
So replacing it with a set of standards that we have been
involved in, we can support that as a way to move forward, and
make sure natural gas is used in those buildings as well.
Mr. Doyle. Good.
Mr. Somerhalder. And that is a good example of where
consensus can reach compromise.
Mr. Doyle. Right. That is great. And that is----
Mr. Whitfield. So is he saying that they do support the
Senate bill?
Mr. Somerhalder. Yes. We have already officially made
comments that we can support that, because we were involved in
a part of that process, and involved in those standards.
Mr. Doyle. Good. That is something that is good to know as
we work on the discussion.
Frank, let me ask you--you know the district I represent. I
don't have a lot of new homes being built. We know the new
homes are pretty energy efficient, but a lot of the older homes
that are built before the '90s aren't so energy efficient, and
the homes in my neck of the woods, in the Mon Valley, and parts
of the city of Pittsburgh, were built in the 1920s and 1930s,
and I have a lot of row houses in my district. And I have a lot
of senior citizens in my district that aren't going to be re-
mortgaging their houses, or doing anything like that. When
their furnace goes, they have got to pay.
And so we want to have a system--and I just want to express
this, I am all for energy efficiency. I have been a big
proponent of it my entire time in Congress, but I also worry
about a little bit about some of the older residents that I
represent in the Allegheny counties that--probably second only
to Dade County, Florida in the number of senior citizens that
live in these older homes that, if they were told that they had
to replace the furnace, and then do some structural changes to
these older homes, I just worry what that does to them, cost-
wise.
And I just want to know what are, we have had a lot of
successes with new housing, and making them more energy
efficient. What do you think are some of the major successes
that we have in making older homes more efficient, aside from,
we have tax credits in the Tenant Star Program, but what other
ways do you think we can encourage energy efficiency in these
older homes? And maybe you could just speak a little bit to
these urban areas like mine, that have houses that are stacked
together in rows, and how that works if you have to change
venting systems and that?
Mr. Thompson. Well, I think there were three questions
there, so let me start with the furnace provisions there. And I
think some of the flaws in what DOE has presented, and why we
need to get this advisory group together, and get the
stakeholders at the table, and improve on what they have
proposed are the exact circumstances you described there, and
the consequences there of trying to bring that new technology,
that condensing furnace, into a structure that wasn't built
that way. And it could be thousands of dollars that they aren't
going to go out and take a mortgage. They are going to have to
come out of pocket for it, so we need to find some alternatives
that are going to address those situations there.
In terms of how we best address continuing to improve
energy efficiency in older homes, I think we need to continue a
lot of the programs, the tax incentives, that have been in
place. They work. We need to make sure that they are going to
continue to be there, because the reality is that the greatest
energy users, the gas guzzlers, so to speak, amongst houses are
those older homes.
Mr. Doyle. Right.
Mr. Thompson. And it is very costly to come in and retrofit
them. So let us keep some programs out there that are going to
help temper those costs.
Mr. Doyle. Great. Thanks, Frank. I see my time is up, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you.
Mr. Olson. The Chair recognizes Mr. McKinley from West
Virginia for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and given the
timeframe, I am not going to be able to get to all my questions
that I had, but let us just see if we could focus on--when I
came to Congress 4 years ago, that was--the thing I left was an
engineering practice that dealt deeply into energy efficiency.
So we have some working knowledge that we are bringing to the
table, and what we have done the first few years was nibble
around the edges of energy efficiency as we try to educate the
public, and the other members, about what we have to do.
And one of the most important things that I think we are
about--Tonko and I are embarking on is now we are going to try
to dive deeply into the issue of turbines, and look at that.
When we are talking about single turbines at 35 percent, and
combined capacities of maybe 60 at best, more likely at 45 or
50 percent. So we are looking at what we can do with that.
We know that this bill that we have, that we are putting
forth, is going to provide some form of demonstration project
that we can look at the steam injection, raising lit
temperatures. We can increase pressure ratios. We know all
these things are going to improve so it is probably the most
efficient bill that we could pass on efficiency, is looking at
how we create electricity.
So is it too early? I am going to ask that to you, Mr.
Somerhalder. Coming from the Gas Association, do you think this
Congress is ready to take on such a huge subject as to reduce
and improve the efficiency of our turbines and our electric
generation? Because we know that China and Japan are very
actively out there, participating in a robust fashion, and we
are going to wind up playing second fiddle.
Mr. Somerhalder. Exactly, and, as an association, and as a
company--we supply today combined cycle turbines at central
stations that have efficiencies of around 60 percent. They have
been engineered that well, so we know the industry is capable
of finding a way to continue to improve efficiencies. And we
have seen the benefit of distributed generation, from micro-
turbines, to combined heat and power, to fuel cells. And so we
do believe that we need to put in place research and incentives
to continue to make progress on that, because those are
additional ways to make sure that we are the most efficient and
the most cost effective for the consumers in the long run.
So that, in addition to using very efficient furnaces,
whether they are 80 percent or 92, for heating, all that
together can produce a very good result. So we support
additional effort in those areas.
Mr. McKinley. Well, we are going to make an all-out effort
to see if we can't get--if nothing else, just to get the
dialogue going to educate the American public as well as--what
the problems are, because just imagine, what other entity would
be acceptable at 60 percent efficiency? If we let the Post
Office off at 40 percent of their deliveries weren't
appropriate--so, having said that, let me go back to Mr.
Thompson on homes.
A component of my practice had been designing and building
homes, and I knew that one of the issues we were facing there
was indoor air quality. And, again, it is a process of
education. I don't think Congress and the American public
understand a lot of these issues that we are dealing with on
Clean Air Act really have a genesis back in their home. Because
we know that we spend 90 percent of our time indoors, and 60
percent of our time in our homes. But yet we are not addressing
some of those problems. So I am curious, you, as a home
builder, and the Home Builders'--what are you doing, from an
association, to address these issues of indoor air quality?
Mr. Thompson. As the building codes have continued to
tighten up, the air changes per hour in a house, and we saw
that in the 2012, and reinforced in the 2015 codes of reducing
those air changes per hour. That potential is increased. It has
got to be resolved through mechanical ventilation, which is a
requirement in the building code, if you are less than five air
changes an hour.
Interestingly enough, a number of the states that adopted
the 2012 IECC chose to move that number that was in the IECC
from three air changes an hour back up to five or over. I
believe only one of those states kept it at that because it is
a danger level there, and we are getting into a lot of
uncharted territory that we need more building science to best
understand how we can maintain air quality, minimize mold, and
continue----
Mr. McKinley. Right.
Mr. Thompson [continuing]. To have energy efficiency.
Mr. McKinley. And in the time I have, my concern is that
what we are seeing is SO
x
and NO
x
gases
have been decreasing, and CO
2
emissions have--but
yet we are seeing more asthma attacks, and as a result--it is
not because of the coal fired power plants. We believe there is
science--justify, from the American Lung Association and
others, that a lot of this is having to do with our indoor air
quality.
Mr. Thompson. Yes, sir.
Mr. McKinley. So the asthma increase is not because of coal
and gas fired power plants.
Mr. Thompson. Yes, sir.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you very much for you time, and I
apologize for----
Mr. Olson. Thank you. And I apologize, the vote has popped
up--so we will have a brief recess. Members who come back might
have some questions, so please stand by for maybe 5 minutes or
so. I apologize so much for this, but we stand in recess.
[Whereupon, at 1:07 p.m., the subcommittee recessed, to
reconvene at 1:11 p.m. the same day.]
Mr. Olson. Order. So please bear with us, patience.
Mr. McNerney. Mr. Olson, I move the bill. There have been a
few changes around here.
Mr. Olson. Well, I was called Chairman the previous panel,
so good changes. Don't tell Mr. Rush. And the Chair recognizes
the gentleman from Vermont for 5 minutes, Mr. Welch.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much. It is really tremendous to
be here, and to be with people that a lot of us but me very
much have been working with on this question of energy
efficiency. It is also very reassuring to me to see how, in my
view, Congress has really come a long way. You know, we have
been locked down in this important debate about climate change,
and tough challenges about our energy policy that have a lot of
very valid issues to them, but they shouldn't get in the way of
us making process in this space of energy efficiency that is so
vital.
Because even if we are going to achieve climate change
goals, 40 percent of those, and this was under the Waxman-
Markey bill, were going to be achieved through energy
efficiency. And that common ground that we have, Mr. Olson, of
saving money, I am kind of cheap in Vermont, motivates me, but
it also creates jobs. Lot of folks out there doing work to put
good people to work building homes, doing retrofits. That all
matters. So I am delighted about that.
I am also delighted about all the energy efficiency bills
that are going to be part of this, that I and our colleagues
have had a part in. Mr. Cartwright, who is not on our
committee, but his Streamlining Efficiency for Schools Act has
been great. Mr. Kinzinger just came in, and--working with him
on energy savings through public/private partnership, and the
Utility Energy Service Contract Improvement Act. Mr. Latta, who
was speaking a little bit earlier, and I have been working on a
number of bills. So there is a lot of momentum.
And I was just talking to one of the people here, who was
telling me that he just came from the Senate, and there is a
lot of discussion over there. It is hard to believe, but they
are actually acknowledging the work that we are doing over here
in the House. So they are pretty slow over there, but they are
kind of catching up, so we are happy about that. And we have
got a lot to do.
And this afternoon, as I mentioned, Mr. McKinley and I, we
are going to be at the White House for a bill signing. Now,
from my perspective, we probably should do more, but I think we
are really making real progress, and it is bipartisan. And, by
the way, it feels a lot better to be getting something done
instead of just fighting all the time, you know what I mean?
OK. So let us keep it up.
But on that topic, there are a couple of issues that are
tough. Mr. Whitfield had mentioned this before. You know, there
were a number of areas, 12 areas, where there is bipartisan
agreement, a few where there aren't. My hope is we can work
those out. Building codes is one. You know, building codes, I
think, can be very helpful. They have got to be reasonable. So
how you address that should be with a focus on what is
practical. But I don't think we just say no building codes. I
think there have got to be some standards that make sense, but
they have to fit what is realistic in the real world. And that
is a judgment call. It is not a right or wrong kind of
situation, so let us see that as a tool, but pledge to work in
a practical way, dealing with people who are in the field,
dealing with some of our regulators who have the interest of
energy efficiency.
And also there is a question here about repealing Section
433 of the Energy Independence and Security Act. That was
designed to move our government buildings away from fossil fuel
usage. It does have some implementation challenges. Let us work
to figure out how we can square that circle, not have that be
something we just don't resolve, and I think we can do it. But
I do have a couple of questions for Mr. Somerhalder, who is out
in the field. And I want to know about this rule with the DOE,
and I assume you have expressed your concerns to the DOE, and I
am wondering what their response has been.
Mr. Somerhalder. Yes. We have a part of expressing concerns
and comments. To this point, even though we have expressed
those concerns, we still need more understanding of some of the
data, and some of the technical information, and some of the
models that had been used to come up with these cost estimates.
Mr. Welch. OK. I only have a little more time, so let me
just follow up on that. If we pass the time out on the FERS
rule, are the gas utilities committed to increasing the
efficiency of the units, and will they work quickly to get that
rule finalized within a year?
Mr. Somerhalder. Yes. We have spent the last several months
as well in very detailed discussions on how to do this. The
units are very efficient, either the 80 percent or the 92 plus
percent. It is really some of the retrofit venting issues that
have to be resolved to see where they can cost-effectively be
applied. And so----
Mr. Welch. OK.
Mr. Somerhalder [continuing]. A lot of those issues, we are
committed to work with DOE and the other stakeholders to reach
consensus.
Mr. Welch. OK. I appreciate that. Thank you very much. I
yield back.
Mr. Olson. Gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Kinzinger, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Kinzinger. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and, to
Congressman Welch, it is great working with you on all this,
and you have been a leader not just in this Congress, but
Congresses prior, and it is an honor to join you in a lot of
this, and so I just want to personally congratulate you on all
this hard work, and I want to thank the Chairman for holding
the hearing today. I want to thank all of you for being here. I
know it is a time commitment, a travel commitment. And, again,
as Peter said, this is a real opportunity to show that
Washington, D.C. works sometimes. And we get all the news for
when we fight, and when we go back and forth, but there are a
lot of things where people get to work together.
And this is such an open process, and I want to thank the
Chairman for bringing forward the draft. And I understand that
some members have taken issue with certain provisions in the
draft, but, given the bipartisan nature of the vast majority of
the text, it is my hope that we are going to be able to work
with each other to produce a final product that most, if not
all, of this committee can support.
I would also like to thank a number of members from across
the aisle for working with me on getting some really good
efficiency related provisions into this draft. I mentioned
Peter Welch. I also want to specifically mention Congresswoman
Eshoo's work on the Energy Efficient Government Technology Act
to update Federal data center efficiencies, and Congressman
McNerney for his help in drafting and introducing the Thermal
Insulation Efficiency Improvement Act. I would also like to add
quickly that insulation is, in many cases, the unsung hero in
improving the energy efficiency of our homes and buildings.
Just a few questions, and then I will yield back my time.
Mr. Wagner, you mentioned in your testimony the scoring of
ESPCs and UESCs has caused consternation in the industry for
quite some time. Lately there has been some work by the House
and Senate budget conferees to fix the issues, although we
haven't quite made it to that point yet. Given the inclusion of
ESPC and UESC language in the discussion draft, would you mind
explaining in a little further detail what savings guarantees
ESPCs and UESCs offer the Federal Government, and also the
potential impact a scoring change will have, saving the Federal
Government the badly needed funding?
Mr. Wagner. Well, thanks for that question, Congressman,
and, first of all, let me thank you, and Congressman Welch, for
your leadership, particularly on the performance contracting
coalition. Your bipartisan leadership is really appreciated.
You know, the scoring problem has really been vexing us for
over a decade, and it seems to have only gotten worse. In a
nutshell, we basically have the problem where CBO cannot
reconcile the savings on the discretionary side of the ledger
with the ESPC contract, which is mandatory spending in their
mind. They don't give the offset, if you will, for the savings,
even though the savings are guaranteed by the contractor. And
that has just been problematic under the scoring rules.
So the Senate legislation will fix that, and I know the
House has been looking at that, and we appreciate everyone on
this Committee who has been diving into try to solve this
problem. So what happens is, when you have a number of the
provisions that we have in the discussion draft here, they
actually hold--CBO will score them, because they assume that
ESPC will be used to implement those provisions, and therefore
a score. And it is sometimes not just the ESPC legislation per
se, it might be other things, like trying to extend a Federal
goal for energy reduction overall. So this has really hampered
your ability in the past to try to pass legislation in this
Committee.
So if we can crack that nut on the scoring problem, and fix
it, then you will have a pathway to clearly be able to amend
the statute--as I said in my testimony earlier, to update it,
to make those clarifications, and maybe even expand the scope
of what we can do under ESPC.
Mr. Kinzinger. Yes, hopefully we can get there. And do you
believe that the FPC member companies have the ability to meet
the $4 billion directive issued by the President, and also, on
top of that, what else can we be doing to get the Federal
Government to be----
Mr. Wagner. Absolutely we can meet that goal, and even do
more, and I think agencies are trying hard to do that, and I
know the Administration is committed. And, with your help and
leadership, to continue to prod agencies to do that. But I will
say that some of these legislative provisions will help because
it will unlock some of the things that agencies are trying to
do, and clarify some of the things that have been causing them
confusion. So that is why the legislation here that you are
working on is very important.
Mr. Kinzinger. Ms. Newmark, I am not going to ask you a
question because I am running out of time, but I do want to
point out that you touch on the use of intelligent efficiency,
and I gather you believe that the Federal Government could play
a larger role in the use of intelligent efficiency, and more
specifically in data centers. I guess maybe in 10 seconds do
you want to elaborate on that?
Ms. Newmark. Sure. I think the point I was trying to make
is that the whole is often greater than the sum of the parts. A
one percent, or half a percent improvement in efficiency in
every piece of equipment still only gives you a half a percent
improvement. If we can look at how those systems work together
and get a 10 percent improvement, we all win. And in this case
we use less energy, and spend less money.
Mr. Kinzinger. Great. And I wish I could have given you
more time, but thank you all for being here, and I will yield
back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Olson. Gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes the lady from California, Ms. Eshoo, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
the subcommittee holding this important hearing, and I want to
thank you, and Mr. Whitfield, and the minority for extending
the legislative courtesy to me to come here and join you today,
since I am not a member of the subcommittee, but a member of
the full committee. So thank you to all the witnesses. We
always depend on really highly informed witnesses to enhance
our work, so I appreciate the inclusion of my bill, the Energy
Efficient Government Technology Act, in the discussion draft of
the subcommittee. I appreciate it very much. I have been at
this for a while, as some of you know.
Sections 4111 and 4112 of the discussion draft are nearly
identical to the provisions of the legislation that I just
mentioned, and it is wonderful to introduce--and he is leaving,
Mr. Kinzinger. Maybe he can hear me. Introduced with him, and I
am grateful to him for his leadership, and there are three
other members of this subcommittee that are also co-sponsors of
the legislation. It is really a non-controversial bill. I know
everyone would like to say that about their legislation, but I
think the test was on the floor in the last Congress, when 375
members in the House of Representatives voted for the
legislation last year, so I think the proof is in the pudding.
I think it is important to appreciate, as Ms. Newmark just
said so succinctly, some of the facts that surround this issue.
Today the world generates more data in 12 hours than was
generated in all of human history prior to 2003. That is really
something to digest, isn't it? And we should all have enormous
pride in that, because we really are the mothers and fathers of
the generation of that data, in terms of the technology. And,
of course, I always have to brag and crow about my Silicon
Valley congressional district. So these billions of gigabits of
data have to be stored and processed at data centers, which are
really the backbone of the 21st century economy, and they can,
and should be, highly efficient.
The Federal Government is our nation's largest land owner,
employer, and energy user, and the Federal Government, I think,
should lead by example by improving energy efficiency of its IT
infrastructure and data centers, and we have them across the
entire enterprise. We have lots of it. We have lots of it. So
the legislation would require the agencies to develop plans to
implement best practices, purchase more energy efficient
information and communications technologies, and submit to
periodic evaluation, which I think is really important--we
don't always do that in the government--of their data centers
for energy efficiency. So Congress can track, and the American
people can track the progress that we are making.
And the bill also requires the agencies to formulate
specific performance goals, which I think is really important
as well, and a means to calculate the overall cost savings from
the improvements. So I think that if we get this in place, we
have the opportunity, by reducing the government's data center
energy bill anywhere from 20 to 40 percent. I really don't know
who could ever be against this, honestly. It is like walking
past a $1,000 bill on the sidewalk and not picking it up. So I
think that--and it has been estimated that we could save $5
billion, that is with a B, in energy costs through 2020, which
is not too far away from us right now.
So I appreciate the support that has all of the support,
not only groups and organizations, advocates, industry groups,
the American Council for an Energy Efficient Economy, the
Alliance to Save Energy, the Information Technology Industry
Council, people that I work with all the time, U.S. Green
Building Council, which is really very important as well, all
of them, as well as the sponsors. And I think that we have a
real opportunity to do something that I think everyone across
our country would say, you know what, Congress, bravo. It makes
sense, and it is going to save taxpayer money, and, for a
change, the Federal Government, as an entity, will be
instructive to the rest of the country, and--because we adopted
a very smart policy. So I thank all of you.
Ms. Newark, thank you for what you said in your written
testimony, and--pointing out that we began this effort in 2006,
but sometimes the gestation period is longer. So I am willing
to wait for that. I thank all of you. And, again, Mr. Chairman,
thank you for your legislative courtesy, I appreciate it very
much, and kudos to Mr. Kinzinger. I will make sure I find him
on the floor and thank him. And Mr. Whitfield, thank you, my
friend. I appreciate it. I yield back.
Mr. Olson [presiding]. Thank you. No more speakers--I ask
unanimous consent that the following statements and letters be
submitted for the record: number one, American Public Gas
Association letter; number two, the Business Council for
Sustainable Energy letter; number three, Geothermal Exchange
Organization letter; number four, Consumer Federation of
America, and the National Consumer Law Center; number five,
NiSource; number six, ASHRAE; number seven, Alliance to Save
Energy, and American Council for an Energy Efficient Economy;
number eight, U.S. Chamber of Commerce; number nine, Leading
Builders of America; number 10, Retail Industry Leaders
Association; number 11, Alliance for Individual Efficiencies;
number 12, a Center for Progress report entitled, ``Buildings
of Tomorrow are Here Today''; and finally, number 13, a letter
from nearly 500 architectural firms in support of Section 433.
I would like to put that in the record without objection.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Olson. And thank you so much to all the witnesses. On
behalf of Chairman Whitfield, who is from Kentucky, watch the
Kentucky Derby this weekend, the biggest event there in
Kentucky, and without objection, we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:29 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

We have made significant progress in recent weeks as our
bipartisan energy bill is beginning to take shape, and today we
address two key components--updating the Strategic Petroleum
Reserve (SPR) and improving the federal government's energy
efficiency initiatives.
It has been a full 40 years since the SPR was created in
the aftermath of the Arab Oil Embargo as an emergency stockpile
of oil. Fortunately, we never had the occasion to use the
nearly 700 million barrel reserve except for relatively small
withdrawals. Nonetheless, it continues to serve a useful role
just in case we ever do have a major disruption in oil
supplies.
The Department of Energy's Quadrennial Energy Review has
highlighted the fact that the SPR is showing its age. In fact,
DOE and others are concerned that it is currently in no shape
to respond to an emergency and that many upgrades are needed.
We agree, and need to consider how to modernize the SPR.
But before we draw conclusions about what to do, our draft
bill requires DOE to build on the work in the Quadrennial
Energy Review and conduct a long-range strategic review of the
SPR and recommend a plan of action.
On energy efficiency, we believe the federal government
should first take all sensible steps to minimize its own energy
use. Energy Savings Performance Contracts are one vehicle that
allows the private sector to apply its energy efficiency
expertise to federal facilities at no cost to the taxpayer.
Provisions in the draft bill facilitate wider use of Energy
Savings Performance Contracts throughout the federal
government. There are other steps the federal government can
take to reduce energy use, and the draft bill contains measures
directed toward that end.
The bill also has provisions dealing with energy efficiency
in appliances and buildings, including improved information for
consumers about energy use and more rigorous analysis of
efficiency standards.
Though we may not agree on all the provisions discussed
today, this hearing continues a very useful discussion that I
hope will lead to bipartisan energy legislation.
----------

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
