- HOME APPLIANCE ENERGY EFFICIENCY STANDARDS UNDER THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY: STAKEHOLDER PERSPECTIVES

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HOME APPLIANCE ENERGY EFFICIENCY STANDARDS UNDER THE DEPARTMENT OF
ENERGY: STAKEHOLDER PERSPECTIVES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 10, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-152

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

_____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
21-381 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016
____________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               JERRY McNERNEY, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        PAUL TONKO, New York
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            GENE GREEN, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     LOIS CAPPS, California
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             KATHY CASTOR, Florida
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   PETER WELCH, Vermont
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILL FLORES, Texas                   FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma               officio)
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     4
Hon. John Shimkus, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Illinois, opening statement....................................     5
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7

Witnesses

Sofie E. Miller, Senior Policy Analyst, The George Washington
University Regulatory Studies Center...........................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Joseph M. McGuire, President and Chief Executive Officer,
Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers....................    21
Prepared statement...........................................    23
Elizabeth Noll, Legislative Director, Energy and Transportation,
Natural Resources Defense Council..............................    51
Prepared statement...........................................    53
Kevin J. Cosgriff, President and Chief Executive Officer,
National Electrical Manufacturers Association..................    71
Prepared statement...........................................    73
Tom Eckman, Director, Power Division, Northwest Power and
Conservation Council...........................................    82
Prepared statement...........................................    84
Stephen R. Yurek, President and Chief Executive Officer, Air-
Conditioning, Heating and Refrigeration Institute..............    89
Prepared statement...........................................    91

Submitted Material

Letter of June 10, 2016, from Cindy V. Chetti, Senior Vice
President of Government Affairs, National Multifamily Housing
Council, et a., to Mr. Whitfield and Mr. Rush, submitted by Mr.
Olson..........................................................   133
Letters of June 9 & 10, 2016, from Dr. David Woodward, Standards
and Regulations Manager Americas, Philips Lighting, et. al, to
Mr. Whitfield and Mr. Rush, submitted by Mr. Olson.............   139
Statement of Spire Energy by Mark Krebs, Energy Policies and
Standards Specialist, June 10, 2016, submitted by Mr. Olson....   153
Statement of the American Public Gas Association, submitted by
Mr. Olson......................................................   163
Letter of June 8, 2016, from Christopher M. Jessup, Corporate
Compliance Manager, Sub Zero Group, Inc., to Mr. Whitfield and
Mr. Rush, submitted by Mr. Olson...............................   169
Statement of the National Association of Home Builders, June 10,
2016, submitted by Mr. Olson...................................   173
Statement of the American Gas Association, June 10, 2016,
submitted by Mr. Olson.........................................   177

HOME APPLIANCE ENERGY EFFICIENCY STANDARDS UNDER THE DEPARTMENT OF
ENERGY: STAKEHOLDER PERSPECTIVES

----------

FRIDAY, JUNE 10, 2016

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:34 a.m., in
room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed Whitfield
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Whitfield, Olson, Shimkus,
Latta, Harper, McKinley, Johnson, Long, Flores, Mullin, Hudson,
Rush, McNerney, Tonko, Castor, Sarbanes, Welch, and Pallone (ex
officio).
Staff present: Will Batson, Legislative Clerk, Energy and
Power; Tom Hassenboehler, Chief Counsel, Energy and Power; A.T.
Johnston, Senior Policy Advisor; Ben Lieberman, Counsel, Energy
and Power; Tim Pataki, Professional Staff Member; Annelise
Rickert, Legislative Associate; Chris Sarley, Policy
Coordinator, Environment and the Economy; Dan Schneider, Press
Secretary; Dylan Vorbach, Deputy Press Secretary; Jeff Carroll,
Democratic Staff Director; Jean Fruci, Democratic Energy and
Environment Policy Advisor; Rick Kessler, Democratic Senior
Advisor and Staff Director, Energy and Environment; John
Marshall, Democratic Policy Coordinator; Jessica Martinez,
Democratic Outreach and Member Services Coordinator; Alexander
Ratner, Democratic Policy Analyst; Timothy Robinson, Democratic
Chief Counsel; Andrew Souvall, Democratic Director of
Communications, Outreach, and Member Services; and Tuley
Wright, Democratic Energy and Environment Policy Advisor.
Mr. Whitfield. I would like to call the hearing to order
this morning, and I want to thank our panel of witnesses for
being with us. I am going to introduce you right before you
give your opening statements, so I will just introduce you
individually at that time. I would like to recognize myself for
5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Today's hearing is entitled ``Home Appliance Energy
Efficiency Standards.'' Since 1987, we have had energy
efficiency standards for certain appliances. It came about
because back in 1975, there was a Federal Energy Policy Act
that established that format. The Reagan administration was
sued because it was not being implemented, and as a result that
lawsuit, we now found ourselves in about the fifth or sixth
gyration of these energy efficiency standards, which apply to
almost anything that plugs into the wall in your home, whether
it is an air conditioner, refrigerator, washer, dryer, furnace,
oven, dishwasher, water heater, lighting, whatever it might be.
And the argument was initially that you would save energy bills
over time. Because of the efficiency, you would use less
electricity, and the small amount of additional cost, you would
end up saving money.
Now, some people today are questioning that because we are,
as I said, we are about the fifth, sixth, or seventh round of
these efficiency standards, and some people say that you reach
a point of diminishing returns, and some people say that the
additional costs now is at such a rate that you really don't
have any savings over the long term because the energy
efficiencies are simply not that great.
Now, other people say that is not the case. And of course,
additionally, now, everybody is talking about global warming,
and so there is additional emphasis being placed on this
because of that.
One of the problems that we have is, in America, we feel
like we are doing more than any other country in the world on
these types of issues. I was reading an article the other day
that said there are 3 billion people in the world who use open
flames to cook today, and in the developing world, by 2040,
they expect that 65 percent of energy consumption will come
from the developing world.
We also hear a lot today about people being concerned about
the cost of living. And we know that in California and New
York, they are trying to raise the minimum wage, and many
people are urging that we raise the minimum wage. Some people
agree with that and some people don't, but it is interesting
that those strong advocates for raising the minimum wage, they
don't want to consider the additional cost caused by
regulations. And it is one thing to say, OK, we need to raise
the minimum wage, but to a low-income, middle-class family, if
these appliances are going to cost additional money, what does
that mean to their pocketbook?
And then, we are even hearing now from some of the
appliance makers that some of these new appliances really don't
work as well as the old ones, and so it is a situation where I
think no one really expected that the Department of Energy and
this administration would be as aggressive as they have been on
so many different fronts.
Now, the good news was that in 1975, when they were
considering these efficiency standards, they were supposed to
consider that the technology was really feasible and that there
was an economic justification for it. But today, that is
beginning to be blurred, and we know certainly at EPA, when
they consider--they certainly don't consider whether it is
technologically feasible or economically justified.
So if we wanted to have a more balanced approach, what we
are trying to do is hear from people who are involved in this
on a daily basis because the American public, when they go to
the appliance store to buy an appliance, they don't understand
all about this efficiency, they just know what the price is,
and then some people are telling them, well, you going to save
money even though it is a lot more because the electricity will
go down, and other people make the other argument.
So one of our objectives today is to just try to get a
better understanding of what is the reality of this, and that
is why we are here. So I want to thank all of you for joining
us, and at this time, I would like to introduce the
distinguished gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Rush, for his
opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Ed Whitfield

This subcommittee has cast a critical eye on several major
regulations--such as the ozone rule and the Clean Power Plan--
that threaten billions of dollars in costs and thousands of
jobs. But today, we focus on regulations that are significant
for another reason--they directly impact the daily lives of
every American. Done right, appliance standards can help us
save on energy bills, but done wrong they can cause appliance
prices to skyrocket while also undermining product quality and
freedom of choice. And lately, we have seen many appliance
standards done wrong.
Air conditioners, refrigerators, washer/dryers, furnaces,
ovens, dishwashers, water heaters, lighting and many others--
just about everything that plugs in or fires up around the
house has been subjected to these rules since 1987. The first
round of standards may have been ok, and maybe even the second,
but DOE is now onto the 3rd of 4th or even 5th round of
successively tighter requirements for many appliances, and
there is no end in sight. It is as if the agency is out to
prove the law of diminishing marginal returns.
According to DOE, the higher up-front costs of compliant
products are earned back in the form of energy savings, but a
number of outside analysts are not so sure. Furthermore, some
of these standards compromise product choice, features,
performance, or reliability. In my view, an appliance that
saves a few dollars per year on energy but doesn't work as well
is being penny wise and pound foolish.
And, like so many other energy-related programs, DOE's
appliance standards are being made even more consumer-
unfriendly by the inclusion of global warming considerations.
Although the statutory provisions never specify that global
warming should be a factor, DOE now includes the social cost of
carbon in its analysis of every rule. In fact, the President's
Climate Action Plan calls for appliance regulations to reduce
carbon emissions by 3 billion tons, and I might add that this
arbitrary target was set without any regard to whether
consumers will benefit from these new standards. In order to
meet its global warming goals before the end of the
administration, DOE is now rushing the pace of these
rulemakings and cutting corners on stakeholder input.
According to the administration, DOE has 15 more home
appliance standards in the regulatory pipeline, including ones
for computers, light bulbs, air conditioners, ovens, furnaces,
battery chargers, dishwashers, and ceiling fans. History shows
that these so-called ``midnight regulations'' pushed out the
door in the final months of an administration can be especially
bad news for consumers. This includes a rule for air
conditioners finalized at the very end of the Clinton
administration that added more than $700 to their cost. Of
course, the disproportionate victims of appliance price hikes
are low-income households that can least afford them.
As many of you know, the energy bill contained a number of
useful reforms to the appliance rulemaking process as well as
some specific fixes for certain problematic rules. This
includes additional opportunities for stakeholder input, as
well as the requirement that the data and analysis relied upon
by DOE be available for review. A discussion of these
provisions will of course be a part of the upcoming energy
conference.
But I hope the reform efforts do not end there, and that we
can consider more fundamental reforms that restore common sense
and balance to the appliance efficiency standards program.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. Good morning. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman,
for holding today's hearing on the ``Home Appliance Energy
Efficiency Standards Under the Department of Energy:
Stakeholder Perspectives,'' and I want to welcome, Mr.
Chairman, all of our witnesses before the subcommittee here
today.
Mr. Chairman, since there are DOE standards that we are
addressing here today, I think that it would definitely benefit
the members of the subcommittee to also hear from the agency
directly, and I hope that we can invite them to testify on this
issue at a near date in the near future.
Mr. Chairman, historically, energy efficiency has proven to
mean the low hanging fruit that has brought both parties
together legislatively, while also making our country safer,
more secure, and more attentive to the impacts of climate
change.
Indeed, the story of energy efficiency, Mr. Chairman, is
one that is filled with success stories that really help
prepare our country forward by making us more independent and
more secure, while also reducing the cost of energy, both in
our pocketbooks, and its impact to our environment. In fact,
Mr. Chairman, by DOE's own estimation, American families save
close to $63 billion as a result of their energy bills going
down, and this is a result of these appliance standards that we
are considering just in the year 2015 alone.
The agency also forecast, Mr. Chairman, that standards
issued since 2009 will save the American consumer over $53
billion in utility cost, and decrease common emissions by 2.3
billion metric tons by the year 2030.
Mr. Chairman, in addition to the huge energy savings and
the benefits to the environment, appliance and equipment
standards also lead to additional investments in the workforce
and the ultimate creation of jobs. A 2011 report by the
American Council for an Energy Efficient Economy entitled, and
I quote, ``Appliance and equipment efficiency standards are a
money maker and a job creator,'' end of quote, found that the
efficiency standards led to net job creation in every single
State. The study also found that by 2020, appliance and
equipment standards will contribute up to 387,000 annual jobs
to the U.S. economy.
Mr. Chairman, while almost every effort by DOE to establish
or revise energy efficiency standards has been met with some
type of opposition, traditionally, this issue has been pursued
in what I will commend on both sides of this committee--
subcommittee on, they have been presumed in a bipartisan manner
with contributions to the party put forward by our President's
and my past congressmen, even though those congressmen and the
White House had been under the control of both Republicans and
Democrats. It is my hope, Mr. Chairman, that following today's
hearing, we will ultimately get back to that type of
collaboration and that type of cooperation on this issue.
Mr. Chairman, it is critically important that the Federal
Government maintains its leadership role of promoting,
encouraging, and enticing interested stakeholders to continue
with the progress that has already been made in efficiency
technologies so that we can continue to keep moving the
Nation's energy policy forward.
Mr. Chairman, I want to end by saying I look forward to
today's hearing. I am looking forward to our expert witnesses
on the successes and the challenges that are facing this Nation
as it relates to energy efficiency appliance, and with that, I
yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back. At this time I
recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, for 5
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN SHIMKUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome. It is
important to hear from stakeholders because the stories that we
weave here may not always really reflect the real world, and we
are hoping that you will give us what is going on on the
ground. And so I am going to weave a little story to put this
all in perspective, too.
Congressman Bost and I met with a small manufacturer about
2 months ago, and their--subject to a DOE enforcement case,
and, of course, because of the enforcement case, they even told
to stop selling a piece of equipment. This company spent
several months trying to find out why a third--they and a third
party lab that tested the product, why they met the standard
and why when DOE got their hands on it, they didn't meet the
standard.
So DOE tested that the product, 7 months later, and not
only--and I will weave the story why DOE came to a different
conclusion, but it is also under a new regulation than when the
product was originally produced. So here is this fraud in,
catch-22 world in which you all have to try to live in to try
to catch up, after a product has been manufactured, to a new
regulation, and then face the heavy hand of the Federal
Government.
So the company was not aware of section 2.11 because it was
not included in the proposed rulemaking. It was two lines in a
large rule previously represented as not materially altering
efficiency measures. This piece of equipment did not pass the
automatic test, but it did pass the manual test. So this is a
piece of equipment that you can operate manually, or you can
hook up a thermostat and operate automatically. It did meet the
standards for the manual test. It didn't meet the test for the
automatic.
DOE would never tell them why they failed the test until
months later, even when they asked for transparency, show us
your work, tell us what you are doing.
So this is a crazy world in which we live in. The Federal
Government is there to help, not punish. The Federal Government
is there to, if they want to have efficiency and they want to
encourage movement forward, they should be incenting. They
should not--so this small company, it is a small company, has a
proposed $241,000 penalty, because DOE is now saying that they
knowingly, knowingly kind of jimmied the efficiency standards
where the equipment met the manual standard, didn't meet the
automatic standard.
Of course, when you fall into this regime, you can't sell
your product. It is banned from being sold until this conflict
gets resolved. Small companies just can't survive this type of
work. It would be best, as we hear, I am sure, similar stories
about the struggles of maintaining it, businesses' goal is to
help to raise capital, assume risk, hoping to get a return, and
while they are doing that, they create jobs.
If the Government--we just want the Government to be fair
players in this system. If we are going to create these new
standards, give industry a chance to meet them, and don't play
games of delay by not working with the industry and then
telling them why they failed to meet the standard, or changing
the rules for automatic or manual-type systems. So I am really
looking forward to the hearing. I think it is very, very
important, and I have got questions, when we come to it, on--to
address the jobs debate, which I think people find pretty
problematic that these are now causing the loss of jobs in our
country, and I yield back my time.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back. At this time I
recognize the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Pallone, for 5
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Appliance and
Equipment Efficiency Standards Program at the Department of
Energy has been incredibly successful over the years in
reducing energy consumption and lowering consumers' energy
bills. The program has also been beneficial to manufacturers,
making energy saving products more ubiquitous and leaving the
playing field--leveling, I should say, the playing field
nationally.
In fact, efficiency standards for consumer appliances and
other products likely constitute the single most effective
Federal effort to reduce energy consumption in the United
States. According to the Energy Department, Americans save $63
billion on their utility bills last year because of these
standards, and this has also resulted in avoiding 2.6 billion
tons of carbon dioxide emissions, which would equal the annual
level of emissions from roughly 543 million vehicles.
These figures are staggering and highlight the dual
benefits of this important program. Consumers save money, and
our environment is spared billions of tons of pollution every
year. And all of this began with enactment of the Energy Policy
and Conservation Act, EPCA, which was signed into law by
Republican President Gerald Ford. I highlight ``Republican.''
This apparently started a trend because with the exception of
an amendment to the statute directing DOE to establish
efficiency standards for consumer products under the Carter
administration, every major expansion of the appliance
efficiency standards program has been signed into law by a
Republican president.
So while some of our witnesses and my colleagues on the
other side of the aisle may lament the long list of appliance
standards proposed by the Obama administration, they should
remember that, depending on your point of view, much of the
credit or blame for the Obama standards can be traced back to
two laws signed by President George W. Bush, the Energy Policy
Act of 2005, and the Energy Independence and Security Act of
2007.
And while the 2007 Act was passed by a Democratic Congress,
the Energy Policy Act of 2005 was borne out of a fully
Republican Congress and authored by the former Republican
chairman of this committee. I don't know why I have to keep
saying ``fully Republican Congress.'' That is obviously not
what I like, but the fact of the matter is that, that most of
this legislation was done by Republican Congress and
Presidents, and this underscores an important fact: For the
past 40 years, energy efficiency has been a bipartisan issue
where Republicans and Democrats have come together to reduce
energy consumption and save consumers money.
Times have changed, obviously. Certainly, there are a few
Republicans who still understand the importance of energy
efficiency. Mr. McKinley has worked with Mr. Welch to
demonstrate that bipartisanship in this area is still alive to
some degree. Yet regrettably, that seems to be the only
Republican support for major efficiency legislation in this
Congress. Consider the recent House vote to go to conference on
an energy package that would actually increase consumption by
rolling back efficiency. Again, how times have changed.
Could the efficiency-standard-setting process use
improvement? Of course it could, because there is always room
for improvement, despite a revisionist view that disputes over
efficiency standards are a new development, the fact is that
the standard-setting process has always yielded some
controversy from one industry participant or another. But these
controversies were generally worked out, and the results were
better products, more efficiency, and often useful changes to
the standard setting process.
My concern is that improvement simply may not be possible
in this current Congress. Last year, when we were working to
forge a bipartisan compromise on furnace standards, the less
and forthright positions taken by certain stakeholders made me
question the sincerity of the so-called reform efforts. Perhaps
it is just a matter of perspective. What some stakeholders view
as minor tweaks, look an awful lot to me like a thorough
gutting of the standards program.
So ultimately, I believe a serious, successful energy
policy for our Nation must address demand, not just supply.
Improving the use of the resources we have to get more from
less is common sense, and that is why efficiency has
traditionally been a concept that brought parties together. And
Mr. Chairman, I just hope that one day we will see that again.
It doesn't seem like today is the day. So thank you. I yield
back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The appliance and equipment efficiency standards program at
the Department of Energy (DOE) has been incredibly successful
over the years in reducing energy consumption and lowering
consumers' energy bills. The program has also been beneficial
to manufacturers, making energy saving products more ubiquitous
and leveling the playing field nationally.
In fact, efficiency standards for consumer appliances and
other products likely constitute the single most effective
Federal effort to reduce energy consumption in the U.S.
According to the Energy Department, Americans saved $63 billion
on their utility bills last year because of these standards.
And this has also resulted in avoiding 2.6 billion tons of
carbon dioxide emissions, which would equal the annual level of
emissions from roughly 543 million vehicles. These figures are
staggering, and highlight the dual benefits of this important
program. Consumers save money, and our environment is spared
billions of tons of pollution every year.
All of this began with enactment of the Energy Policy and
Conservation Act (EPCA), which was signed into law by
Republican President Gerald Ford. This apparently started a
trend because with the exception of an amendment to the statute
directing DOE to establish efficiency standards for consumer
products during the Carter administration, every major
expansion of the appliance efficiency standards program has
been signed into law by a Republican President.
So while some of our witnesses and my colleagues on the
other side of the aisle might lament the long list of appliance
standards proposed by the Obama administration, they should
remember that -depending on your point of view-much of the
credit or blame for the Obama standards can be traced back to
two laws signed by President George W. Bush:
The Energy Policy Act of 2005 and the Energy Independence
and Security Act of 2007. And, while the 2007 Act was passed by
a Democratic Congress, the Energy Policy Act of 2005 was born
out of a fully Republican Congress and authored by the former
Republican chairman of this committee.
This underscores an important fact: for the past 40 years,
energy efficiency has been a bipartisan issue where Republicans
and Democrats have come together to reduce energy consumption
and save consumers money.
How times have changed. Certainly, there are a few
Republicans who still understand the importance of energy
efficiency. Mr. McKinley has worked with Mr. Welch to
demonstrate that bipartisanship in this area is still alive to
some degree.
Yet regrettably, that seems to be the only Republican
support for major efficiency legislation in this Congress.
Consider the recent House vote to go to conference on an energy
package that would actually increase consumption by rolling
back efficiency. Again, how times have changed.
Could the efficiency standard setting process use
improvement? Of course it could, because there's always room
for improvement. Despite a revisionist view that disputes over
efficiency standards are a new development, the fact is that
the standard setting process has always yielded some
controversy from one industry participant or another. But,
these controversies were generally worked out and the result
was better products, more efficiency, and often useful changes
to the standard setting process.
I'm concerned that improvements simply may not be possible
in this current Congress. Last year, when we were working to
forge a bipartisan compromise on furnace standards, the less
than forthright positions taken by certain stakeholders made me
question the sincerity of so-called ``reform'' efforts. Perhaps
it's just a matter of perspective: what some stakeholders view
as ``minor tweaks'' look an awful lot to me like a thorough
gutting of the standards program.
Ultimately, I believe a serious, successful energy policy
for our Nation must address demand, not just supply. Improving
the use of the resources we have--to get more from less- is
common sense. That's why efficiency has traditionally been a
concept that brought both parties together--and, Mr. Chairman,
I hope it will again one day soon.

Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back, and that
concludes the opening statements on our side.
So at this time, our first witness will be Ms. Sofie
Miller, who is the senior policy analyst at the George
Washington University Regulatory Studies Center. So, Ms.
Miller, thanks for being with us, and you will be given 5
minutes, and just make sure the microphone is on and it is up
close to you so we can hear every single word that you say. And
you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF SOFIE E. MILLER, SENIOR POLICY ANALYST, THE
GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY REGULATORY STUDIES CENTER; JOSEPH
M. MCGUIRE, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, ASSOCIATION
OF HOME APPLIANCE MANUFACTURERS; ELIZABETH NOLL, LEGISLATIVE
DIRECTOR, ENERGY AND TRANSPORTATION, NATURAL RESOURCES DEFENSE
COUNCIL; KEVIN J. COSGRIFF, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, NATIONAL ELECTRICAL MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION; TOM
ECKMAN, DIRECTOR, POWER DIVISION, NORTHWEST POWER AND
CONSERVATION COUNCIL; AND STEPHEN R. YUREK, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, AIR-CONDITIONING, HEATING AND REFRIGERATION
INSTITUTE

STATEMENT OF SOFIE E. MILLER

Ms. Miller. Well, thank you very much, Chairman Whitfield
and Ranking Member Rush and members of the subcommittee for
inviting me to share my expertise today. I appreciate the
subcommittee's interest in the Department of Energy's energy
conservation program as well as opportunities for Congress to
improve it.
I am the senior policy analyst at the George Washington
University Regulatory Studies Center, where I analyze the
effects of regulation on public welfare, including the effects
of DOE's energy efficiency standards on consumers specifically.
Through my research, I have identified ways in which these
standards can harm consumers rather than benefiting them by
limiting the products available and removing from the market
appliances that might best suit their needs.
DOE's energy efficiency standards regulate appliances used
in most households such as dishwashers, air conditioners, and
refrigerators, and as a result, they affect almost all U.S.
consumers. These standards increase the prices of common
appliances in exchange for reducing consumers' energy and water
bills in the future.
While DOE does estimate that consumers receive large net
benefits from this tradeoff, it does not take into account the
diversity of Americans, or that U.S. households have very
different needs and preferences when it comes to household
appliances. As a result, one-size-fits-all energy efficiency
standards can deprive consumers of the ability to make
purchases that best suit their circumstances and constraints,
and in such cases, these regulations are a cost to consumers
rather than a benefit.
For example, efficient dishwashers or clothes dryers save
consumers more money in the long term the more frequently they
are used and tends not to benefit households with lower
frequency of use, which includes couples or single residents,
such as the elderly. In proposing energy efficiency standards
for clothes washers, DOE calculated large benefits by
estimating that a household operates its clothes washer 392
times per year or more than once a day on average.
And while this might be realistic for large families or
households with small children, it does not represent every
household. In fact, even after accounting for their lower
energy bills, the standards ended up costing the nearly 70
percent of American households that use clothes washers less
frequently than six times per week. And to illustrate from
personal experience, a very efficient dishwasher made sense for
my mother, who has nine children and used to run the dishwasher
as much as four times per day, if you can imagine that. But my
current household of two, we run the dishwasher twice a week,
and in our case, it is not likely that a more efficient and
more expensive appliance is going to be worth the investment.
In addition, efficiency standards are particularly costly
for low-income households. Wealthier Americans can afford to
wait years or even decades to recoup the higher cost of an
efficient appliance while poor Americans with less certain
streams of income have higher opportunity costs. DOE calculates
high benefits by using a relatively low time value of money,
which field studies find represents wealthier households.
Changing DOE's model to reflect the actual time value of
money to low- and median-income households shows that they
encourage large net costs as a result of efficiency standards.
When a paycheck has to cover rent, food, and other necessities,
a very efficient appliance may not be affordable even if it
does reduce electric bills in the future. Many families simply
cannot borrow at the 3 percent rates that DOE assumes.
But energy cost savings are not the only justification for
these standards, as we have heard, as more efficient appliances
can also reduce environmental emissions, but these
environmental benefits are typically quite small relative to
the cost of the standards. In fact, the costs outweigh these
benefits by a factor of three to one. By looking at
environmental benefits alone, DOE would not be able to justify
the standards that it has set for most appliances.
In sum, the payoff from more efficient appliances will vary
depending on a household's income, size, and other
characteristics such as geographic location. It is perfectly
rational for individual households to prefer to purchase
different appliances, including those that do not meet DOE's
standards. By taking away those choices and preventing
households from buying the appliance that best suits their
individual needs, DOE is imposing a cost on consumers and not a
benefit. This is particularly true for low- and median-income
Americans and the elderly who bear the highest costs of
appliance efficiency standards.
Thank you all for your time. I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Miller follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Ms. Miller, very much for your
opening statement. And our next witness this morning is Mr.
Joseph McGuire, who is the president and CEO of the Association
of Home Appliance Manufacturers. Thanks for being with us, and
you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH M. MCGUIRE

Mr. McGuire. Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Rush, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify this morning. AHAM's membership includes more than 150
companies throughout the world, and employs tens of thousands
of people in the United States. Our members produce more than
95 percent of the household appliances shipped for sale in this
country. I don't think there is any disagreement at this table
that the appliance standards and Energy Star programs have been
successful.
Energy efficiency gains across core major appliance
categories are dramatic and undeniable. For example, the most
commonly purchased modern refrigerator uses the same amount of
electricity as a 50-watt light bulb. A new clothes washer uses
73 percent less energy than it did in 1990 and half the water.
I also want to make very clear that our industry has been a
strong supporter of these programs and has been involved in
numerous rulemakings and legislative solutions to strengthen
and improve the programs. In 1987, I personally led the 200-
plus organizations that initiated and supported the National
Appliance Energy Conservation Act. We strongly support a system
of Federal standards and State preemption, and we do not
propose a rollback of any standards.
But while these programs are both successful, they are both
in need of modernization to recognize the success achieved and
to establish a framework for policies and programs focused on
meaningful additional efficiency gains. Yes, there should still
be Federal standards that guarantee energy savings nationwide,
by absent technological breakthroughs, a process geared towards
continually ratcheting up efficiency standards, particularly
for products that have already been subject to multiple
revisions, does not make sense for the environment, the
consumer, or the economy. But this will not happen under the
current standards construct.
Reform legislation is needed. H.R. 8 is a practical step
along that path offering modest, sensible changes to EPCA that
will essentially require DOE to follow the regulatory
procedures it had agreed to with the very organizations that
advocated for EPCA reform in 1987, but more is needed. Today,
AHAM is calling on Congress to take further steps to modernize
our national energy efficiency law by ending mandatory serial
rulemaking and permitting amended standards only when justified
by quantifiable metrics, including a list of covered products
for which no further rulemaking is needed, absent technological
game changers; requiring DOE to meaningfully consider
cumulative regulatory burden on product manufacturers;
mandating procedures regarding transparency and public
engagement, no more black box analyses; applying the
Administrative Procedure Act to the Energy Star program.
There have been more than 30 standards and amendments that
apply to the AHAM products under the program, and there have
also been numerous test procedure revisions accompanying these
standards. The reality is, though, that for many product
categories, the relentless march of sequential rulemakings is
not justified. That is because opportunities for additional
energy savings beyond those already achieved are severely
diminished as products are nearing maximum efficiency under
technology. Further standards are likely to increase cost to
consumers and manufacturers beyond an acceptable level, and for
some products, reduced energy use will likely result in
degraded performance and functionality.
We saw this in the flawed proposed dishwasher rule last
year whose consumer payback period exceeded the product's life
and resulted in products that could not clean dishes. DOE, to
its credit, retracted the proposal, but it shouldn't take a
national uproar for this to happen. The rule never should have
been proposed.
As for Energy Star, the program has drifted from its
original mission of energy efficiency into other areas beyond
its expertise and authority. This drift must be considered in
concert with the reality that the success of the program has
essentially made it mandatory in the marketplace.
Congress needs to bring this program under the much more
traditional procedures and specific criteria of the
Administrative Procedures Act, which applies to virtually every
other program EPA administers. It is also important that
Congress make clear that Energy Star is about energy efficiency
only, not about EPA's ideas regarding quality, functionality,
sustainability, other nonenergy factors.
Our ultimate objective is to improve the U.S. regulatory
environment in measurable ways that foster fair, more
predictable, more open, and more efficient regulatory
landscape. As an industry, we will continue to live up to our
responsibility to provide consumers with life-enhancing
products that deliver superior performance and energy
environmental benefits. Our industry is very competitive, which
drives not only innovation, but also reduce product costs
through hundreds of millions of dollars in productivity
improvements. That is why home appliance prices don't keep up
with the CPI, not because of appliance standards.
Productivity investments hide the fact that changing
product design and materials to meet energy standards adds
costs. Implying that the huge efforts in time and capital
investments to achieve productivity somehow make energy
efficiency free is a great misunderstanding.
Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee, in summary,
we call on Congress to modernize EPCA so that it addresses
current circumstances by recognizing the diminishing energy
savings opportunities for many products, evaluating cumulative
regulatory burden and the actual impact of past rules in
improving transparency in stakeholder engagement. Thank you for
the opportunity to testify. I will be happy to answer any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McGuire follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. McGuire. And our next witness
is Ms. Elizabeth Noll, who is the legislative director for
Energy and Transportation at the Natural Resources Defense
Council. Ms. Noll, thanks for being with us, and you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ELIZABETH NOLL

Ms. Noll. Good morning. Mr. Chairman, members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to share the
perspective of the Natural Resources Defense Council on
national energy efficiency standards set by the Department of
Energy for many household appliances and commercial products.
This program sets dependable, minimum levels of energy
efficiency that all Americans can count on to reduce their
utility bills, the carbon pollution that harms human health
while promoting innovation and new job opportunities. My name
is Elizabeth Noll, and I am the legislative director for the
Energy and Transportation Program at NRDC.
NRDC has long supported energy efficiency standards, and we
are far from alone. We have successfully worked alongside many
groups, including NEMA, AHRI, and AHAM here today, and was
reiterated in a recent op ed we authored with the National
Association of Manufacturers. And let's not forget, the initial
law establishing standards was signed by President Ronald
Reagan, then expanded and improved with broad bipartisan
support in law signed by both Presidents George H.W. And W.
Bush. And why is there such strong support for efficiency
standards?
This program is wildly successful, delivering tremendous
consumer and national benefits. It has broad and bipartisan
support founded on a long history of collaboration and
consensus building, and by all accounts, there is still huge
potential for even more energy and financial savings now and in
the future.
To my first point, by every single measure, the program
provides huge benefits. In fact, national appliance standards
are the second biggest energy saving policy in U.S. history,
second only to vehicle fuel economy standards. Appliance
standards are saving the typical U.S. household about $500 per
year on their utility bills. Last year alone, American
consumers saved $63 billion. And thanks to standards already on
the books today, consumers and benefits will save almost $2
trillion on their energy bill due to improved appliance and
equipment sold through 2035.
Because these standards are cutting American energy
consumption, it also reduces the need to burn polluting fossil
fuels to run those appliances and equipment. Last year alone,
national appliance standards helped the U.S. avoid emissions of
300 million tons of carbon dioxide. That is equivalent to the
annual pollution from about 63 million cars.
As I noted earlier, three Republican presidents have signed
laws supporting energy efficiency standards, and for the first
time since the early 1990s, the Department of Energy is up to
date with its legal deadlines that Congress enacted. In the
spirit of consensus building and collaboration, the agency has
done more than ever to open up avenues to increase stakeholder
participation and collaboration. Of the 42 standards finalized
since 2009, almost a quarter stemmed from consensus agreements
negotiated with industry support.
And those that aren't negotiated, go through a normal
rulemaking process, which includes multiple opportunities for
input from industry. As a result, the vast majority of American
energy efficiency standards go into effect without controversy.
As noted in other testimony today, manufacturers much
prefer a single national standard over a State-by-State
patchwork of requirements. Consumer groups, State Governments,
business groups, utilities, all have engaged constructively and
support the program. One might ask, Are there more energy
consumer and environmental savings to be achieved?
Emphatically, yes. One example involves the biggest energy and
pollution saver from a single standard in the agency's history
which was completed in January for commercial rooftop air
conditioners, heat pumps, and warm air furnaces, and it
represents the third revision to this standard. This standard
is expected to save 15 quadrillion BTUs of energy over a 30-
year period, which is nearly equivalent to the amount of energy
in all of the coal burned to generate electricity in the United
States in 1 year.
A forthcoming report by the Appliance Standards Awareness
Project and the American Council for an Energy-Efficient
Economy finds that the savings potential for Federal standards
that will be eligible for update within the next 8 years
exceeds what has been accomplished over the last 8, and
innovation by our leading manufacturers is likely to open up
new opportunities for savings that we cannot even contemplate
today.
Without standards, cost-effective energy efficiency
opportunities will be lost leading to unnecessarily high energy
bills, increased energy consumption, more harmful pollution,
and uncertainty from manufacturers. There is no doubt that this
program works and will continue to deliver huge consumer and
environmental value now and into the future. Thank you for the
opportunity to share my views, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Noll follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Ms. Noll, for your statement.
At this time, I would like to introduce Mr. Kevin Cosgriff,
who is the president and CEO of the National Electrical
Manufacturers Association, and thanks for being with us, and
you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KEVIN J. COSGRIFF

Mr. Cosgriff. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Rush,
and members of the subcommittee for having us today. I am the
president and CEO of the National Electrical Manufacturers
Association, some nearly 400 members that provide virtually
everything in the electrical world, and I appreciate this
opportunity to talk about EPCA with the subcommittee.
We have a central position in this dialogue given that 20
of the 63 covered products are made by NEMA members, and an
additional 30 covered products contain components made by NEMA
members.
I have three main points that I would like to make today.
First, as has been stated, there are diminishing energy savings
returns to multiple rulemakings on the same product. That is
not saying that we don't believe in energy savings. We are just
saying there is diminishing returns on multiple rulemakings
that ought to be considered.
Future energy efficiency opportunities should include
looking at energy use systems, not simply components or
individual products. And lastly, serial regulation does, over
time, limit consumer choice.
First, on diminishing returns. EPCA was written 40 years
ago, and many of the covered products have since achieved then
unimagined levels of efficiency. Several products have been
through two or more different rulemakings, and the EPCA statute
requires the DOE to determine whether higher standards are
warranted on every single covered product at least every 6
years. This applies even to products that have already reached
the stage of regulatory maturity, as it were, that is to say,
the products for which cost-effective efficiency improvements
have essentially reached their limits. Cost-effective energy
improvements have reached their limits.
There are two components to this situation we believe
warrant congressional attention. We should retire several and
mature covered products, and by that, I mean retire at the
current level of efficiency, not backslide, and that
stakeholders, including Government, should be given sufficient
time to analyze the impact of a previous regulation before a
new rulemaking cycle kicks off. Rarely has a product entered
the market before the next rule process kicks off. There has
not been enough time to really analyze the information in the
real world to see if it works.
My second point is that energy efficiency opportunities
should begin to looking at energy use systems. EPCA was crafted
for individual products. The challenge ahead, I think, is to
build on this past industry success with a new, more holistic
approach to these savings opportunities. Individual products
are increasingly interconnected and operate as a system, rather
than singularly. We suggest Congress consider this opportunity
when discussing energy savings.
Think energy savings from a building versus energy savings
from a lamp. Demands from--my third point is serial regulation
impacts consumer choice. Demands from global competition,
Government regulation, and all important consumer preference
requires manufacturers to sprint to remain competitive. While
our members are accustomed and good at running this race, and
endless regulatory environment erects hurdles that they must
repeatedly clear each and every time to remain viable. They are
the definition of having skin in the game.
One tendency of EPCA, however, is that over time, it will
trend towards eliminating certain products from the market.
Under this type of regulatory scheme, there will be fewer and
fewer choices offered to consumers. We assert that markets
should drive and, in fact, are driving the energy-efficient
economy. One choice that markets can do without, however, is
availability of products entering the United States that do not
comply with U.S. law and policy. This deprives consumers of
energy-efficient benefits, and disadvantages law abiding
manufacturers. This is an area where the Federal Government
especially could be helpful with policing up these imports.
In conclusion, electrical manufacturers' contribution to
the energy efficiency economy has been diligent, and I believe
commendable. Throughout this effort, NEMA has made constructive
proposals to Congress, to DOE, and working with other
stakeholders to advance energy efficiency where we believe it
was justified and where the savings were significant. We have
resisted regulation for the sake of simply doing something more
when the benefits are insignificant, Or the costs were just too
high. The 40-year-old model of regulating energy use in single
products has, in many cases, done its duty, but its diminishing
returns are exacting an increasing cost for our industry and
higher price for our consumers.
The legislative overhaul that builds on the success of the
last 40 years, but allows us to all keep the energy efficiency
economy moving forward is what we wish to support. We urge
Congress to seize this unique opportunity. Thank you. I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cosgriff follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Cosgriff.
At this time, our next witness is Mr. Thomas Eckman, who is
the director of the Power Division of the Northwest Power and
Conservation Council. Thanks for being with us, and you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TOM ECKMAN

Mr. Eckman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Rush. My name is Tom Eckman. I am the Director of Power
Planning for the Northwest Power and Conservation Council. I
will start with a very quick thumbnail of who we are. Since
there are no northwest delegates here, I thought you might--it
might be important to figure out why I am here representing the
northwest.
The Northwest Power and Conservation Council was
established under a congressional authorization under the
Northwest Power and Conservation Act of 1980, public law 96-
501. We are an interstate compact authorized by you folks here
in Congress to do power planning for the northwest. So we, for
the States of Oregon, Washington, Idaho, and western Montana,
we produce a 20-year power forecast of future needs and a
resource plan to meet those needs for electricity, and our
statutory requirement is that we are to treat energy efficiency
as one of the resources we can rely on to meet those needs.
Over the past three decades, 3 \1/2\, 35 years, we produced
seven different power plans. We are to update those plans every
5 years, so we started back in 1982 with the first plan, and
called for cost-effective energy efficiency to be a major
component of that planning process as directed by Congress.
Over that past 35 years, energy efficiency has been a very
significant contributor to the northwest economy and to meeting
our needs. In summary, since 1980, the northwest region has
saved enough electricity through codes and standards, utility
programs, to be equivalent of roughly six Seattles in annual
electricity consumption, or more than one and one quarter times
the actual consumption of the State of Oregon, so it is a
significant contributor. It roughly represents our second
largest resource in the region. It has met 55 percent of low
growth since 1980, so we really believe in energy efficiency
that is cost effective.
The reason I am here is to talk to you about the role that
Federal standards have played in making that happen and what
they look like going forward. Over the past 35 years, Federal
standards have basically produced one-fifth of the total
savings that we have been able to achieve. Energy code is about
20 percent, and the remaining through rate pair-funded utility
programs. One-fifth of the savings turns out to be worth about
$1 billion in annual savings out of the--on an annual basis,
and saves about 5 million metric tons of carbon off of our
system. And we have a very clean system because about half of
our power comes from hydroelectricity. So that is a significant
component of us. It is about 10 percent of our total carbon
emissions on an annual basis.
So on a going-forward basis, we looked at the Federal
standards that have been adopted between 2009 and 2014. Those
standards alone will reduce our forecast low growth from 1.1
percent to .8 percent, about 30 percent reduction in low
growth. Again, saving significant consumer cost for new
generation and saving consumer pain and agony from carbon
emissions. So we are here to support those standards because
not only have they been a huge benefit to us, but we have been
involved in the negotiations that led to not only the Federal
standards, but many of the standards that have been adopted
since 20--since 1987.
I am a member of the Appliance Standards Rulemaking
Advisory Committee that was appointed by DOE to facilitate
better communication between manufacturers and advocates for
energy efficiency to begin to develop more transparent and open
processes to engage in rulemaking. And that--since the advent
of that committee, which was basically formed at the behest of
the Department itself because it understood that it could do a
better job of rulemaking in the negotiations, and it could, in
a standard notice and comment process, it can't always do a
better job, but in some instances, particularly Elizabeth noted
the appliance rulemaking for air conditioners and package
rooftop systems, those consensus agreements between
manufacturers and advocates have produced better standards,
more regulatory certainty on behalf of the manufacturers, and
greater compromise and facility to implement standards on
behalf of the manufacturers.
So I think those--that particular improvement was not
envisioned in the original statute, but as a regulatory process
that DOE implemented on a voluntary basis and has improved
immeasurably the transparency of the standards development
process on a going-forward basis, and I think that we can talk
more about that in the time that you have questions for me. I
will stop there. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Eckman follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thanks, Mr. Eckman.
And our next witness, and last witness, is Mr. Stephen
Yurek, who is the president and CEO in the Air-Conditioning,
Heating and Refrigeration Institute. So thanks for being with
us, and you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN R. YUREK

Mr. Yurek. Thank you, Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member
Rush, and members of the subcommittee for inviting me to
testify on this important topic. I am Steve Yurek, and I am the
president and CEO of the Air-Conditioning, Heating and
Refrigeration Institute. AHRI has 315 member companies that
manufacture more than 90 percent of the residential,
commercial, and industry air conditioning, space heating, water
heating, and commercial refrigeration equipment sold and
installed in North America.
Our members employ over 100,000 people in manufacturing,
and more than 1 million American jobs when you include those
involved in distribution, installation, and maintenance of our
equipment. I want to make it clear that our industry has a long
record of leadership when it comes to innovation, energy
efficiency, and environmental stewardship. In fact, the
equipment our members produce is 50 percent more efficient than
it was just 20 years ago. But even as we innovate and develop
the next generation of highly efficient equipment, we always
have in mind the needs of our customers who are, after all, the
people who buy and use our equipment.
We have three main concerns with the current statutes that
I would like to discuss today. First, the authority Congress
set forth for setting efficiency standards, the Energy Policy
Conservation Act, is 40 years old and has not been undated to
reflect new technologies and economic realities.
Two, in addition to the impact in our industries, consumers
are paying a heavy price, both in real monetary costs and in
comfort and safety. When new equipment costs more than
consumers can afford, they find alternatives, some of which
compromise their comfort and safety while saving less energy,
and in some cases, actually using more energy.
Finally, American jobs are being lost, in part, because of
the promulgation of ever more stringent deficiency regulations,
and the worse thing is, DOE admits that these regulations cost
jobs.
While the Clinton administration issued six major
efficiency rules during his 8 years in office, the current
administration issued eight major efficiency rules in 2014
alone. There are real consequences from this rush to regulate.
Yes, complying with these rules cost my member companies
millions and millions of dollars, but what is far more
important, it should be far more worry to Congress, is that
American jobs are being lost, and consumers, who are already
feeling financially squeezed, are being forced to pay more for
products they rely on in their everyday lives from comfort
cooling and heating, to refrigeration, to hot water.
EPCA requires that all efficiency standards meet the twin
tests of technically feasible and economically justified, and
yet, DOE has issued rules that use unrealistic assumptions in
its analyses to justify higher efficiency levels. I will give
you a couple of examples.
For commercial boilers, DOE estimates the new standard
would save just eight-tenths of a percent more energy than the
existing standard, but would cost manufacturers up to $24
million to comply. For residential boilers and commercial
refrigeration equipment, DOE justified the economic impact of
the higher efficiency levels by using the assumption that no
matter how much the product increases in price, demand for that
product would never decrease.
Every time DOE issues a new rule, it issues a press release
estimating the rule's benefit in cost savings for consumers and
energy savings for the Nation based on theoretical models. DOE
has never looked back to see what the energy savings actually
were, or if consumers actually ever benefited from spending
more money, and the current law does not even require such a
review.
Finally, DOE projects future job losses in several of its
rulemakings for our products. For example, in two separate
rulemakings for different types of commercial air-conditioning
units, DOE noted small business manufacturers would need to
redesign their entire private offering or leave the market. DOE
acknowledged a potential scenario in which a rulemaking for
commercial refrigeration equipment could cause all existing
production to be moved outside of the United States, resulting
in a loss of over 3,500 jobs.
Changes to EPCA should be implemented in phases with the
collaboration of all stakeholders. I urge all members of the
upcoming conference committee to ensure that the technical
corrections in H.R. 8 remain part of the final energy bill.
Broader EPCA reform should stress flexibility, enhance
technical and economic justifications, and the process should
be overhauled to maximize transparency and stakeholder
engagement. Congress should require DOE to convene stakeholders
to discuss and recommend a new regulatory framework.
AHRI is ready to work with Congress, DOE, and other
stakeholders on ways we can, together, fix and update this 40-
year-old law to create a new, more open process, conserve
energy, help manufacturers remain competitive in the global
marketplace, and benefit all consumers. I appreciate the chance
to appear today, and I look forward to answering any questions
you might have and to working with you as we move forward on
this important issue.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Yurek follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you, Mr. Yurek, and thank all of
you very much for your testimony. We appreciate it, and I
recognize myself for 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Miller, the George Washington University Regulatory
Studies Center, how old is the center?
Ms. Miller. It began in 2009.
Mr. Whitfield. 2009.
Ms. Miller. That is right.
Mr. Whitfield. And how long have you been there?
Ms. Miller. Since 2012.
Mr. Whitfield. 2012.
Ms. Miller. Uh-huh.
Mr. Whitfield. So if you were running for public office or
you going to some Rotary Club speaking somewhere around the
country, could you categorically say that these efficiency
regulations are saving consumers money because the reduction of
electricity cost exceeds the additional cost of the new
appliance?
Ms. Miller. I would say that these standards have very
different effects on different households based on some of the
characteristics that I mentioned, and also some that I state as
well in my written testimony.
For instance, if you live in Texas, maybe it is more
beneficial for you to have an efficient air conditioner, but do
you care how efficient your furnace is, how often are you ever
going to use it?
Mr. Whitfield. Right.
Ms. Miller. In that case, you may not actually save any
money by getting an efficient furnace. So I would say that
different situations----
Mr. Whitfield. So geographical area would have an impact on
it?
Ms. Miller. Absolutely.
Mr. Whitfield. And then you indicated the use of the
product, obviously, would have an impact on it. And you
mentioned, I think, that some elderly people who maybe use it
less would have less benefit from it as well. Is that correct?
Ms. Miller. That is correct, and the Department used that
in its analysis.
Mr. Whitfield. So you know, we--all of us make comments
about, well, this is going to save money and so forth, but it
is certainly possible, and in many instances, I would assume
that low-income people and elderly are harmed more by these
regulations perhaps than they are benefited. Would you agree
with that?
Ms. Miller. That seems to be the case, and the Department
also does acknowledge that there are negative impacts on those
groups in its own analyses.
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Ms. Miller. It is not a view that is outside the
mainstream.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, you know, originally this started
because of the Arab oil embargo. I think the reasoning that
this all started was because of trying to conserve the use of
energy. And certainly that has changed today because we have an
abundance of energy in America, but today, it has become more
of a climate change issue. That is what people talk about.
Well, we have got to stop. We have got to be more efficient,
less CO2, and so forth.
Now, Mr. McGuire, you and Mr. Cosgriff and Mr. Yurek all
touched on this, a need for reform. And you all made some
pretty strong statements. You said that sometimes the product
is not going to be as effective. It is going to cost more to
consumers. It is going to reduce consumer choice. And one
comment I would also make on H.R. 8, which is our energy bill,
one of the most controversial aspects of it related to the
process that the DOE goes through in adopting these new
standards.
For example, they really are not transparent on it. The
data analysis is not really available until they are getting
ready to notice it, and so all we were saying in this one
provision, which was like we were turning the world upside down
was, we want DOE to sit down with the manufacturers, the people
who make these goods and have a more open and transparent
discussion with them. I mean, you would agree with that, right?
Mr. McGuire. We would agree with that, Mr. Chairman, and
actually, that process that you are describing used to be used
by the Department of Energy where manufacturers would have an
opportunity to test a product under a new standard, or to even
employ a new test procedure before you could determine whether
a standard was appropriate.
But what we have seen in the last several years is because
so many rulemakings are going on at the same time, that DOE has
not been able to go through this very thorough process of let's
do a test procedure and make sure that works. A test can be
repeatable and reproducible before we set a standard so that
companies can see if you can test a product. It is very--
manufacturers spend an enormous amount of resources on
compliance to these standards. The testing is very complicated.
Mr. Whitfield. Right.
Mr. McGuire. These products are more sophisticated than
they used to be, so you want to get that right. You don't want
to----
Mr. Whitfield. Right.
Mr. McGuire [continuing]. Mess that up. And what has
happened is the process has become conflated, and it is very
difficult to understand what is happening sometimes.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Cosgriff, do you agree with that
basically?
Mr. Cosgriff. I would agree with that, it made me think, as
Mr. McGuire was answering your question, the product cycle of
some of the products entering the market now in our area, LED
lamps as an example is in many cases, less than a year. So if
you miss one of these hurdles I refer to, you have missed a
product cycle. That is a very big deal.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
Mr. Cosgriff. And for a small or medium size company of
which there is many making LEDs, that could be fatal.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, I have a lot of other questions, but
my time has already expired. Mr. Rush, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you again, Mr. Chairman. Ms.
Noll, I want to thank you for your interesting testimony so
far.
There is a question that I have and there is an argument
that while the efficiency standards have been very valuable in
reducing energy costs and consumption, many of these standards
have already reached their maximum efficacy and we cannot
squeeze any more juice from the grapes in a certain manner of
speaking. Do you agree with the statement that many of these
appliances are as efficient as they can reasonably come, or is
there--and there is no room to move forward with these new
standards. Or do you believe that there is some more cost
effective standards, and measures, and pathways that we could
implement in order to greater have more efficiency than cost
savings?
Ms. Noll. Thank you Congressman Rush. Yes, I do think that
there are more cost effective pathways to achieve greater
energy savings that have yet to come. And I would begin by, as
I stated in my opening remarks, the rule that was finalized
just last year for commercial rooftop units represented the
largest energy savings single standard in agency history. And
that was the third time that that standard had been revised.
And while this is going to deliver huge consumer and
environmental value, it was nowhere near the most energy-
efficient technology that is commercially available. So it just
suggests that there is still room to improve.
And I would also note that, as I mentioned in my opening
remarks, that the forthcoming report from ACEEE and the
appliance standards awareness project, looked at the rules that
will be up for revision in the next 8 years and has shown that
the energy savings opportunity from those rules will exceed
that of which, of those that were finalized from the last 8
years. Again just further suggesting that--and some of those
standards will be ones that will be products that have already
had standards and have gone through revisions in the past.
And I would finally just say that standards increase
innovation and that technological innovation creates new
product features, new design opportunities. Our refrigerators
today have more features than ever before. And that also could
unlock opportunity for increased energy savings and that could
form the baseline for future revisions to standards in the
future.
Mr. Rush. Yes, ma'am. I want to shift my focus, my office
has had many conversations regarding energy efficiency
standards for appliances and their impacts on low-income
families. One of the arguments that we hear quite often is that
the cost of complying with new energy efficiency standards will
have a disproportionate impact on low-income consumers. How do
you respond to this charge?
And secondly, are there any benefits to low-income
households if industry is forced to comply with the most
current energy-efficient appliance standards?
Ms. Noll. Thank you. I guess I would begin by saying I know
that the impacts on low-income customers is a priority of yours
as it is for NRDC. And minimum efficiency standards set a
dependable level of energy efficiency that every American can
count on. Our analysis suggests that appliance standards will
save the average American household, including low-income
households, $500 a year compared to before standards were set.
So that is significant.
And I agree that low-income households pay--a
disproportionately higher portion of their income goes to
energy costs. A recent report by NRDC and ACEEE shows that
energy efficiency is a key strategy for addressing and reducing
that energy burden that low-income households face.
So I would say that is why groups like the National
Consumer Law Center and Texas ROSE and other consumer advocacy
groups engage and are highly active in the standards setting
process because of important benefits that it serves for the
low-income populations that they support.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back. This time I
recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is actually a
very good panel. There really is more that unites us than
divides us on this whole debate. And I think that is true
across the board.
Ad first of all, for Mr. McGuire, Mr. Cosgriff and Mr.
Yurek, you are saying that there is a need for some reform, but
you are not claiming that there is a desire to jettison energy
efficiency standards, are you?
Mr. McGuire. No.
Mr. Yurek. No.
Mr. McGuire. Not at all. We are supporters of the program--
--
Mr. Shimkus. OK. I am going to go quickly, so Mr. Cosgriff.
Mr. Cosgriff. Absolutely not.
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. Yurek?
Mr. Yurek. No.
Mr. Shimkus. So this is an example of where we really can
work together to get some sensible changes to affect folks like
the narrative that I provided earlier today, there is a trap
that people do fall into, from big Federal agencies, and the
rolling out of regs, and as the fluorescent light bulb case,
Mr. Cosgriff, that they get caught in a trap. You don't want to
miss a cycle of putting a product on the shelves because for a
small company that could be deadly.
So Ms. Noll, you did mention in the discussion with my
colleague, Mr. Rush, that the confusing thing is we are not
talking from a baseline of families. What is a family? What is
the cost? I think Ms. Miller mentioned it, her cost in a two-
family household is different than a family--I am one of seven
kids, nine in the family grew up--a lot different costs, a lot
different projected savings. Don't you think that if we are
going to have this debate that the Department of Energy ought
to help us define what is a family? What is a savings? And to
have part of that transparency, Ms. Noll?
Ms. Noll. Thank you. I would say that the Department of
Energy does take into account many perspectives.
Mr. Shimkus. Buy don't you think they should help define
this so we can have a better, accurate discussion of what these
savings are and who they are--this amorphous savings is being
disputed by economists based upon real data and real numbers.
Ms. Noll. As many of the colleagues that I work with, we
strive to find--get better data on----
Mr. Shimkus. The question is, shouldn't the Department of
Energy help us define their savings? The answer is they don't.
Mr. Yurek, following up on this question, don't you think
they should do a better job, the Department of Energy should
help us define savings and costs?
Mr. Yurek. Yes. I think the process, the DOE is in a bind
in some ways by the statutory language of this 40-year-old act
and how they are required do the analysis. They are in a bind
by the timeframe in which they need do all these rules. They
don't have the time anymore because of all the rules that they
are involved in, to do the deep analysis that they used to be
able to do and confer with everybody.
And they also have the court order saying that they need to
meet these deadlines so----
Mr. Shimkus. OK. Let's go quickly to job losses you
highlighted in part of your written testimony. Talk about the
job loss, and shouldn't the DOE talk about that there is a loss
of jobs? Especially as you get to this point of again as again
my colleague, Mr. Rush, says here how much juice are you
squeezing from the grape? And you identified that in your
testimony.
Mr. Yurek. Yes. No, I think that is one of the economic
analyses that needs to be done. I think they forget the purpose
of this act is not to go to the maximum tech and maximum
efficiency, it is to slowly raise the bottom so that everybody
can purchase that equipment and have those savings.
There are other programs such as Mr. McGuire mentioned
related to Energy Star that are the pull, to get those other
higher efficients, to get people to buy that equipment. What we
are seeing now is that this program is being used to go to the
max tech versus going the minimal level where people get
savings and benefits but don't have the cost.
Mr. Shimkus. Aren't you asking for a return to a
collaborative approach with the Department of Energy? Mr.
McGuire?
Mr. McGuire. Yes, we are----
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. Cosgriff?
Mr. Cosgriff. More collaborative----
Mr. Shimkus. So I do have to applaud the DOE. We have
actually been pressuring them for years and also the EPA to
say, ``tell us how that affects jobs.'' So in this most recent
proposed rule, March 12, 2015, this is what it says.
Some large manufacturers have already begun moving
production to lower-cost countries. Short-term, U.S. job loss.
This is the Department of Energy saying that. And an amended
standard that necessitate large increases in labor content or
that requires large expenditures to retool facilities should
cause other manufacturers to reevaluate production citing
options.
What that means is, that if we squeeze too much--my
colleague Mr. Rush--if we go too much, we lose jobs to overseas
manufacturers and that would be unfortunate. Thank you, I yield
back the balance of my time.
Mr. Olson [presiding]. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair recognizes the ranking member of the full committee,
Mr. Pallone from New Jersey for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Noll, from listening to some of the people sitting next
to you on the panel and some of my colleagues on the other
side, you would think that the standards process has suddenly
become for more contentious than it used to be.
In my opening statement I talk about the fact that the
standard setting process has always yielded some controversy
from one industry to another. And that is not to say that
complaints or controversies weren't always important or even
valid. But I just see some contention as an inevitable part of
any meaningful standard setting process no matter how well it
functions.
So while not every standard can be negotiated, my sense is
that there has been more consensus than ever before, and that
every industry trade represented here today has been involved
in and has likely benefited from that consensus.
So my question is, do you agree with me that there actually
seems to have been more consensus in the standard setting
process over the past 8 years, and of the rules finalized in
the last 8 years, what percentage of those rules has been
established through consensus negotiations, if you could?
Ms. Noll. Good morning. Um, yes, it is interesting because
I think about the number of roles and the number of
negotiations that have taken place over the years, and there
are so many to choose from. The last two revisions to home air
conditioning standards went through a consensus process and
landed an unnegotiated consensus outcome. And that is fantastic
for consumers and the value that it is going to deliver to them
for the environment as well.
So I think from my perspective I would say that the
controversy is the exception and not the rule, you know, that
we can demonstrate I think, as I said in my opening remarks, of
the 42 standards that have been finalized since 2009, almost a
quarter of those stemmed from joint consensus negotiations. And
that is not to say that every rule needs to or can come from a
consensus or a negotiation and those that didn't went through
the normal rulemaking process. And with the exception of maybe
a few standards have been without controversy and supported by
stakeholders through the process and input.
So I would just encourage us not to characterize action as
controversy at this point.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Now I am a strong supporter of
energy efficiency programs, and again I am confused by some of
the claims being made by members of today's panel.
I find it difficult to believe that there are no more
significant energy efficiency gains to consumer products unless
you assume that we can improve upon our current technology or
develop entirely new technologies that are more energy
efficient.
For example, TV went from tubes, to liquid crystal
displays, to plasma, to LED in a little over a decade. So are
we truly done with refrigerators, dishwashers air conditions,
furnaces, whatever?
Ms. Noll. Our experience has been no. I think in the latest
refrigerator standard revision, this is the sixth time,
including the State standards, that that had been revised. It
represented about 20 to 30 percent improvement over the
previous standard, and that is on par with other revisions,
fully supported by manufacturers and stakeholders.
And I think we have seen that that trajectory has held true
that refrigerators are now 75 percent more efficient, they have
more product features, they are 20 percent larger and they cost
half as much.
I think the lighting revolution that we have seen take
place is another example of--I don't think in 2000 we could
have predicted the number of choices and the efficiency that we
would get from LEDs today. So I think that it is just a few
examples of where this could be headed.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Several witnesses have referred to
mandatory serial rulemakings. And my understanding of the law
is that it mandates the review of the standard every 6 years.
However, to my knowledge, the law doesn't require that the
standard be updated every 6 years.
So just to clarify, would you answer yes or no to the
following questions, OK? Does the law require a standard be
reviewed every 6 years? Yes or no.
Ms. Noll. Once it has gone through its statutory
requirements, then yes, it is required to be reviewed every 6
years.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Does the law mandate that a
standard be updated every 6 years regardless of any other fact
pattern?
Ms. Noll. No.
Mr. Pallone. Does the DOE have to determine whether a
rulemaking is likely to result in significant savings before
requiring a standard be updated?
Ms. Noll. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. And does DOE have to determine whether
rulemaking is likely to be technologically feasible and cost
effective before updating a standard?
Ms. Noll. Yes.
Mr. Pallone. OK, thanks a lot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman's time has expired the. The Chair
uses the privilege of the vice chairman to recognize himself
for 5 minutes.
And a hearty Texas welcome to Ms. Miller, Mr. McGuire, Ms.
Noll, Mr. Cosgriff, Mr. Eckman, and Mr. Yurek. In the interest
of time I have one question about air conditioning.
Southeast Texas, my home, exists in a climate we call 95,
95. From early April to late September, it is 95 degrees
Fahrenheit with 95 percent humidity. Until 1902 the only jobs
in that region were picking cotton and guarding prisoners in
big State prisons, that provided very, very slow low growth.
And then Willis Carrier invented the air conditioner in 1902.
That single invention, combined with oil being discovered at
Spindletop, in 1901 in Beaumont, and the 51 mile Houston ship
channel being built, has put Houston on track to be the
Nation's third largest city some time this decade.
Federal actions affecting air conditioning gets the
attention of all Texans. Especially if two Federal agents are
in conflict. We are seeing that situation now right now with
air conditioners. DOE is demanding higher efficiency standards
for air conditioners, while EPA is banning certain refrigerants
and foam blowing agents from being used in air conditioners.
My only question is for you Mr. McGuire and you Mr. Yurek,
Mr. Yurek first, can companies comply with these conflicting
standards, can they comply with these, what are the challenges?
Mr. Yurek. First off, yes, they can comply with it, but how
they comply with it is that it costs a considerable amount of
money in the conflict between the two statutes going into
effect in the needs to spend money on research and development.
And then once that research and development is completed they
need to then retool their plants. And so yes they can do it. It
is going to cost. The big manufacturers that have the funds
will have the ability to do it, it will be several of the small
manufacturers that don't have the funds available that will go
out of business either be acquired by the bigger ones or just
leaving the area.
Mr. Olson. The big guys thrive, the small guys go away. Mr.
McGuire, you thoughts? Can they survive, can they work with
these conflicting regulations from different departments?
Mr. McGuire. The industry can comply, but the problem is it
takes a certain amount of time to do that. And the EPA
decisions, proposals on refrigerants is not being coordinated
with DOE on the efficiency standards with the vast majority of
greenhouse gas emission avoidance benefits come from the
appliance standards not producing the changing the
refrigerants.
We have to deal with the fact that the safety standards in
the U.S. do not allow the type of refrigerants we have to go to
yet in the amounts necessary. That requires a safety risk
assessment test that companies are doing. So it takes an amount
of time, sequence and investment for this to happen. And it
would be prudent for the two agencies to talk about this and
reach a decision that makes sense for the environment and for
the people that are making these products.
Mr. Olson. Follow-up question, sir, do you believe the
Obama administration is meeting their own goals set with the
executive orders to minimum the cumulative impact of these
regulations? These burdensome regulations, they said let's make
that lower. Does this achieve that or is this in violation of
that?
Mr. McGuire. We do not believe the DOE has done a proper
analysis to the cumulative regulatory burden on manufacturers
when they are doing their appliance efficiency standards,
because they are not taking into account the costs in
investments that are made for previous versions that haven't
been recouped, as well as investments that have to be made in
alternative refrigerants.
Mr. Olson. Mr. Yurek, you thoughts, sir?
Mr. Yurek. I agree with Mr. McGuire in that that proper
analysis has not been done. And the burden on manufacturers is
not being considered, and actually has been ignored when raised
in some of the rulemakings related to commercial refrigeration
equipment where we did raise EPA changing the refrigerants that
can be used at the same time efficiency regulations went into
effect.
And DOE said, well, they haven't changed it yes so we are
using the current refrigerant. They issued the rule, 6 months
later the EPA banned those refrigerants. There are two
different implementation dates, one is 2016 for refrigerants
and 2017 for the energy efficiency standards. You have to
redesign twice in two different periods of time.
Mr. Olson. Thank you, my time is expired. One word of
warning, don't mess with Texas air conditioners.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
McNerney for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. I thank the assistant chair. Mr. Cosgriff, I
believe that you stated that many of the imported products are
not held to the same standards as American made products. Is
that right?
Mr. Cosgriff. I didn't say many. I said that we should be
on guard to make sure that nonqualified products enter the
stream of commerce inside the United States.
Mr. McNerney. So that must be happening then.
Mr. Cosgriff. I am sorry?
Mr. McNerney. Is that happening are products entering the
American----
Mr. Cosgriff. We receive information from our manufacturers
routinely that they find products in the stream that don't, by
objective standards, meet the standards of the United States of
America.
Mr. McNerney. So U.S. consumers are buying products made
overseas that are potentially less efficient and cost American
jobs at the same time?
Mr. Cosgriff. They might be, yes, sir.
Mr. McNerney. How could we remedy that situation?
Mr. Cosgriff. Well, NEMA in the past has worked with
commerce in the area of counterfeiting to take our expertise
from our member companies and make it available--Customs,
excuse me, Customs and Border Security to make it available to
their agents so they can though what they are looking for, to
be able to identify what constitutes a valid third-party
certification mark, what might be a counterfeit and other tells
that you might see in products.
Mr. McNerney. So this is an enforcement issue it is not a
trade rules issue?
Mr. Cosgriff. Mostly enforcement, yes sir.
Mr. McNerney. OK, very good. Mr. Eckman, please elaborate a
little bit if you would on how the rulemaking process could be
improved, the transparency of the rulemaking process could be
improved?
Mr. Eckman. I will go through a little bit of history so
the context is there.
In the mid-2000s DOE staff directed their consulting staff
to sit down with advocates and manufacturers to help negotiate
a white good standard with the AHAM folks so the technical
staff supporting DOE's rulemaking was appraised and involved in
those negotiations that were informal at the time. They weren't
authorized by DOE, we were handling those on the side.
And that led to another process on electrical transformers
where both DOE staff and their consultants got involved. And
finally DOE established under the Federal Administrative
Procedures Act a negotiated rulemaking group called the ASRAC
of Appliance Standards Rulemaking Advisory Committee, which now
oversees a series of requests that might come in from parties
that want to enter into negotiations through a regulatory
process, through regulating negotiation as opposed to
rulemaking through a standard comment process.
And that has opened I think the doors to more consensus
agreement, to the agreement on major refrigeration products,
the HVAC equipment, pumps and electrical transformers all came
from those kinds of negotiations, where there is a great deal
more transparency interaction with the manufacturers, with
advocates staff and consultants because they can get down and
talk face to face, roll the sleeves up in a meeting not in a
very formal hearings type process.
And I think that has improved both the outcomes and the
feelings that come out of those outcomes about we agree that we
can't get everything we need but the compromise works for all
of us. And that process to me is really central to and
advancing the rulemaking process.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. Mr. Cosgriff again, I am going to
ask do you believe that the current standards are room to drive
more innovation?
Mr. Cosgriff. Do I believe the current standards have?
Mr. McNerney. Can drive more innovation?
Mr. Cosgriff. Can drive more innovation. I think the
manufacturers are driving innovation. I think competition is
driving innovation and I think standards have a part in that,
but I wouldn't overstate what they are part is.
So if a product is at the low end of efficiency, then the
standards are a welcomed boost. If a product like a transformer
is approaching 99 percent efficiency, I am not sure what their
accomplishing.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. Ms. Noll, could you give some
examples of efficiency improvements that are still possible?
Ms. Noll. Yes, I would be happy to. I think as we look at
some of the products that are still--that will be revised in
the next 8 years, there is standards for equipment and
household appliances that have seen standards before, water
heaters is a likely--a potential opportunity for increased
savings.
As Mr. Cosgriff just mentioned distribution transformers, I
mean they may be reaching a high level of efficiency but all of
the electricity that is produced in America goes through
transformers. So even half of a percent of improvements there
will be a significant national benefit.
So I do think that there is opportunities that still exist
to improve through the standards process.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman's time has expired the Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Latta, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, thanks, Mr. Chairman. And I would also
like to echo I think this is a great panel today and really
appreciate you all being here. I am kind of an expert, my wife
and I in the last 6 weeks just bought a washer and dryer, and
the refrigerator is next.
But in northwest Ohio we do make HVAC, we make dishwashers,
we make dryers, we make washing machines, we also make waffle
irons, we make large mixers and we also have a large freezer
plant right in northwest central Ohio. So we have a lot of
things going on, and it is very important to our economy.
But, Mr. McGuire, if I could start with you: You have been
particularly critical of the proposed standards for
dishwashers. Can you explain what is wrong with the standard in
terms of substance of the proposed rule as well as the process
by which it has come about?
Mr. McGuire. Well the proposed dishwasher standard from
last year, first of all, it required a 20-year payback to the
consumer for a product with useful life was 13 years. It
reduced the amount of water that a dishwasher uses in a cycle
from five gallons to three. And the proposed rule did not go
through any type of performance or consumer testing before it
was issued, we did not get a chance to do that, we normally do
in these rulemakings. So----
Mr. Latta. Let me interrupt. Now why didn't you get to be
part of that?
Mr. McGuire. DOE just didn't do that part of the process.
They just went right to the rule without that type of testing.
So once it was proposed, we did the testing and we demonstrated
to DOE and others that dishes were not clean. In multiple
product manufacturers products, it did not clean the dishes. So
the utility of the product was affected, the consumer payback
was not there and the energy savings was minimal, less than a
quad, 7 percent of one quad.
Now the current dishwasher standard that is in place today,
that has a pay back to the consumer of 12 years, so that was
already at the limit in terms of economic sense. There was no
need for this fifth dishwasher standard. So it messed up the
product and it did not make sense for the consumer to buy such
a product, so our view is that there is something wrong when
the process spits something out like that. That has to be a
product or a category where you don't do another rulemaking
unless some quantifiable measure can show that there is going
to be a real significant savings in energy that won't harm the
consumer.
But under the current process it is very difficult to get
DOE's assumptions and other things that go into their analyses
done by their contractors and the national labs. So that is
part of the process change we would like to see.
Mr. Latta. Now just out of curiosity, when you were doing
this testing, when you were going from five gallons to three
gallons, how much did that cost the industry? And what did that
cost the consumer in the end run then?
Mr. McGuire. Well, how much did it cost of the consumer
for----
Mr. Latta. So when you were doing the testing, when it was
going from the five gallons down to the three gallons, you
said, and I was just curious is there a cost to the industry
that you had to do----
Mr. McGuire. Oh, sure.
Mr. Latta [continuing]. And then what was overall--I assume
it would go back to the consumer?
Mr. McGuire. Well these tests that we did on the proposed
rule, this standard didn't go into effect. Those costs were
absorbed by the companies. There is thousands of dollars to do
these tests. Once a standard is in effect, in order to prove
compliance with the standard, you have to test the product
before it is submitted to the marketplace and then a regular
routine testing market surveillance that our industry actually
does some of that testing to police ourselves and provide some
information to the Government.
Those tests are very expensive and the cost of compliance--
the tolerances are very, very tight so manufacturers invest a
lot to make sure their products meet the standards and the
tests are sophisticated. So it is a costly part of being an
appliance manufacturer. And those costs are going to the
product like any other costs and are passed on to the consumer.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Mr. Yurek, I am concerned about the economic effects that
the administration's aggressive regulatory agenda has.
It is my understanding that DOE is implementing rules that
set new standards for individual components and your members
residential consumer products such as the new standard for the
efficiency of furnace fans. How does regulating a specific
component in a large heating or cooling system add to the cost
of a furnace or air conditioning system?
Mr. Yurek. We have a lot of concern. I think looking at
this 40-year-old law, that it is dealing with products, and in
some instances it is going into the components of those
products and pieces of equipment, which is the wrong direction.
Really what we should be looking at is how these products are
put into the house or into the building and looking at an
overall systems approach to efficiency to really look at the
gains. Because if you start dictating and regulating the
components, be it the compressor, now they are looking at
regulating the fans that go into the HVAC, air conditioning and
furnaces, and others, you are dictating how these products are
designed. And once they are put into that product, they might
have--and we have shown in a case, in a proposal out with the
California energy commission when they were doing this with the
air handlers, what they were proposing on the efficiency level
for fans, actually used more energy when applied in the air
handler than being able to design the overall product and the
energy use of that air handler.
And so we just want to make sure that this is done
rationally and the current law doesn't give DOE that type of
authority to look at the broader picture. And I think we just
need to step back and say, it is 40 years old, let's look at it
and make some changes and make it better so we can actually get
some energy savings out in the field and have consumers be able
to afford the equipment.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. My time has
expired, I yield back.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Vermont Mr. Welch for 5 minutes.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much. This is a great panel, I
appreciate it.
A couple of things, we don't have a bill yet, right? So
this is kind of an abstract discussion. And I thought Mr.
Shimkus kind of laid out the potential for cooperation here. I
do like the notion of collaboration in the process, because you
have got folks at DOE who are doing their best to implement
efficiency standards, you have got real world folks that are
the manufacturers that have to contend with the very practical
issues of implementation.
Ms. Noll, you're OK with that, right?
Ms. Noll. Yes----
Mr. Welch. I think standards are incredibly important, but
I don't think they are everything. Mr. Cosgriff, you mentioned
that the standard in some cases especially at the low end does
spur the innovation. But if you have got something that is
highly efficient then it is not going to accomplish all that
much. A lot of what you are saying sounds very reasonable to
me.
The jobs issue, I think, is not so much the jobs issue, I
mean air conditionings--by the way, one the most outrageous
loss of jobs is with Carrier leaving Indiana to go down to 3-
buck-an-hour wages in Mexico, which I think is pretty appalling
but has nothing to go do with standards, particularly since
whatever it is is manufactured at 3 bucks an hour has to meet
the standards before it can come back into this country, right?
So you know, you have a got to level the playing field, as long
as the standards apply everywhere.
But I do as a strong, strong supporter of efficiency
standards with Mr. McKinley, who has got a lot of experience in
this, I feel that those of us who believe standards can work
have to be extremely diligent in trying to address practical
concerns as they come up. That makes sense to me.
So I have heard the industry folks saying you are not for
unraveling them, you want them to be more practical. I am not
asking a lot of questions because I don't think there is that
much disagreement and we don't have a bill. But one of the
things I think that would be helpful as part of this process
would be to get the DOE folks in here and ask them what are
some of perhaps the congressionally imposed burdens we are
imposing on them where you are saying that they have so many
rules they have to deal, they don't have the time and the
space.
The bottom line here, collaboration I think is really good.
I think standards are absolutely essential. I mean, the energy
efficiency savings that we have had have been tremendous in--if
they are done right it can save consumers money, it is not
without impact. We all understand that. There was a cost
associated with requiring that automobile manufacturers install
seat belts, that cost more money when you bought a car. Most of
us think, it is about time.
Mileage standards have been tremendous, that is a cost that
has really had an impact on the average mileage in our fleet.
So really what I am asking for is to take up Mr. Shimkus on his
observation that this is an area where there is some
opportunity for us to cooperate, but that means not letting it
get adversarial. If there is acknowledgement even from the
people who are affected by this in ways that they think are a
little too aggressive, to have some interaction with DOE, and
us to try to figure out what are the process improvements we
can make in order to get the benefits of regulation.
I mean, I will just ask the industry people Mr. McGuire and
Mr. Eckman or Mr. Yurek, is that a problem for you the approach
I am taking about?
Mr. McGuire. It is not a problem. We have used consensus
many times in the past, but we think consensus ought to be to
change the law so that the process requires these improvements
and they are not discretionary.
Mr. Welch. Well, that has to be a discussion--there is no
specifics here, all right? So we don't have a bill in front of
us.
Mr. McGuire. There are some process improvements in the
energy bill in conference, but the ones that we are talking
about the major reforms you are right, there is not----
Mr. Welch. Well, I tell you what would be helpful for me if
each of you did a 1-page bullet point assessment of concrete
things that you think in the process would improve it. Then we
can assess it, have a discussion, we can talk to DOE, how does
that work, would it improve it or not? What is the down side?
We are just having this real abstract discussion here.
And regulations I think are really important, and it can be
really beneficial, so if they are not done right can have a lot
of downside to them with no upside.
Ms. Noll, how about you do you, what I am saying----
Ms. Noll. I would be happy to do that. I would also
encourage us to look at some of these where the process is
working. And I think dishwashers is an example of that where
DOE heard from industry and Congress granted them the authority
to look at consumer utility and performance criteria for
economic justification----
Mr. Welch. That would be helpful.
Ms. Noll. As an example of how it is working and how it is
serving to protect consumers and also ensuring a balanced
both--the impacts on manufacturers as well as the impacts on
consumers and the environment and reducing our energy
consumption.
Mr. Welch. That makes sense. What about you, sir?
Mr. Olson. The gentleman's time has expired. I am sorry,
sir. We have to move on with votes coming up.
I recognize the gentleman from West Virginia, Mr. McKinley
for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And let me just
build a little bit on some of the remarks that have been made
earlier about credentials. Peter Welch and I have had a
wonderful working relationship, we both chair the efficiency
caucus, we put language into the current energy bill that we
are waiting to see what is happen in the Senate. We have been
to the White House for the energy efficiency bills. So this is
something I think he and I grasp fairly well with this.
Back when I was in private practice in engineering we
designed some of the first LEED certified schools and office
buildings in West Virginia. I am working with Tonko over in
energy efficiency with the turbines to create electricity to
make that more efficient. So energy efficiency is one of the
prime areas that I like to play with and can get involved in
here.
But I get to a point, there are some vast differences and I
want to play back on what my colleague and good friend Bobby
Rush from Illinois was talking about, was the disparity of
income when people were facing this, if you look at this, it
poses a challenge for all of us. It really does for it.
If you look at Mississippi my colleague from Harper from
Mississippi, their median family income $36,000 a year. In
Mississippi. $36,000 a year, but in Maryland, it is over
$70,000 per family income. So in those affluent States or
neighborhoods, they make choices, they have choices. You will
probably if we went through the motor vehicle licensing we
would find they probably have more BMWs and Lexus cars there
then we have in some other areas of the country or in
neighborhoods.
So cars are going to be different because people have
choices. We have housing, different pricing for housing because
people have choices for that. We have health care. When you go
to the exchanges under ObamaCare there are different exchanges
so people have choices. But when it comes to their major
consumer appliance, they don't.
For your air conditioning, your refrigerator, your range,
your dishwasher, your furnace all of these now have been
mandated that this is the only one that they have available to
them. I am troubled with that, because of the diversity of
income, their capability of doing it, and don't tell me it is
going to save my $500 a year, because we understand the pay
back is so much longer on all of these.
So I am wondering is there a suggestion you all could make
that might make it more palatable for people to be able to have
a choice so that they are not confronted with this hard
decision? I know of families that are trying to fix anything,
their equipment--to make it last as long as possible, because
they know that they can't afford the cost of the new one. And
so they are spending a lot of money in repairs because they
don't have a choice. They know what the cost is. That air
conditioning costs the same in Connecticut as it does in
Mississippi, or that dishwasher.
So what would you suggest that we in Congress could do to
maybe ameliorate some of these differences a little bit so that
the poorer communities or States that have trouble, how can
they afford to have this cost? Can some of you--OK, Mr. Yurek.
Mr. Yurek. Congressman, I think this is a really important
issue. And I think it is bringing back the balance that was
originally put out in the 40-year-old law where it says,
technically feasible and economically justified.
Right now the focus is too much on the technical
feasibility in saying, hey, my manufacturers manufacture
products everywhere from the Federal minimum to very high
efficiency. Yes, we can go to the high efficiency but we need
to look at the cost. And I think it is bringing that balance
back to that economic justification in saying this law is
intended to raise that floor slowly.
People that have the incomes in Maryland and other places
are going to purchase the things with all the different bells
and whistles on that you are refrigerators, their dishwashers,
their air conditioners and everything else. But there are a lot
of people in this country when you look at the cost now of the
minimum-efficient air conditioner, you are looking at $6,000 to
$10,000 at a minimum, that is done in an unplanned time,
because most of the time these units go out when it is the
hottest day of the year, or the furnace when it is coldest day
of the year.
And the Federal Reserve just had a study last week that
said over 47 percent of the American people have less than $400
in emergency cash available to them. So what are they going to
do? They need that comfort. In the wintertime they need the
heat. A lot of times for medical reasons they need the cooling
in the summer. And so it is bringing back that balance.
Probably putting more of an emphasis on the economic
justification.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you. My time expired, but I will ask
can each of the six of you mind putting a paper together saying
what would you suggest that might be a solution to help out for
families in depressed areas?
Thank you very much, I yield back.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr. Tonko, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to our
witnesses.
Certainly we are citing a 40-year history here. And again
to repeat what my colleague from Vermont indicated, we have to
look at some of the trade situations too. Where offshoring of
jobs might have helped some families retain those jobs and be
able to afford these items. And this job loss thing I think is
much more complex than just suggesting standards caused it.
Our energy efficiency standards have improved products that
benefit all of our constituents. Many of these are not luxury
goods but necessities found in nearly every home. We have heard
support for national efficiency standards from manufacturers
and consumers and we have heard from industries from States
from environmental groups that there is consensus that this
program has been a success.
I am certainly open to improving the program, but
improvements cannot undermine the purpose of this program. And
while we look for those improvements, we should not lose sight
of the fact that this program is incredibly successful. While
there have been a few contentious rules, it is my understanding
that of the final rules issued since 2009, almost one-quarter
were the result of negotiating consensus agreements and only
five have been subject to litigation.
So to our witnesses, do you agree many of these rules have
been consensus driven?
Mr. Yurek. Mr. Chairman, yes. Most of them as Ms. Noll
said, 25 percent of the rules in this administration have been
through the consensus process. That means 75 percent of those
40 others have not. I think we all support and would encourage
that negotiation consensus process because there is more of
that give and take that Mr. Eckman talked about versus the
notice in comment where you only have--the adversarial is much
more adversarial versus a negotiation and I think that is
something we should look at.
Mr. Tonko. OK. And I think it is worth noting that DOE has
a history of working to improve the program especially around
increasing stakeholder engagement dating back to the 1990s.
A few years ago DOE established as I understand the
Appliance Standards Regulatory Advisory Committee which
formalized the process for negotiated consensus rulemakings for
the first time.
A number of our witnesses participate on this committee
which includes again manufacturers, trade associations, States
and consumer groups. Can anyone comment on this committee's
work and what it is as a--what it might be as a positive step
to formalize this process? Mr. Eckman.
Mr. Eckman. Yes. I think it has improved the process a lot
particularly where there is a likelihood that both the
manufacturers and efficiency advocates and the DOE agency
personnel and consultants can come to a more flexible
conclusion than would otherwise be provided.
I think it has allowed for lots of horse trading that
wouldn't occur, as Mr. Yurek said, under the standard process,
the rulemaking hearings process and file your report. So I
think it has been a huge advantage. I have been a member since
the committee was established. We have had multiple work
groups, seven different work groups so far on negotiating
standards. They work the best when both the parties that want
to participate in that come before the committee and say, we
think we can work this out, give us a chance.
If that is not possible or there is not really an issue,
everybody thinks we can do this through rule and comment, that
is a much more expedient processes it takes a lot of time and
energy to do the negotiations as you are aware, but they turn
out to be better rules as a consequence for everybody involved.
And I think supporting that on a continuous basis, the ASRAC
committee and process that has improved the process a lot.
Mr. Tonko. Does anyone else----
Ms. Noll. I would just to note on the 75 percent that
weren't consensus or joint negotiations does not mean that they
weren't going through the normal rulemaking process to deliver
superior outcome. And only five of those rules have been
litigated and I think that is still a very small number on the
grand scheme of things.
Mr. Tonko. OK. Thank you. Mr. Cosgriff?
Mr. Cosgriff. Yes and to Mr. Yurek's point to follow it up
a little bit, we are sitting around a table taking about
technical things, you better have the technical chaps to have
that conversation. And so in this highly quantified algorithm
that ASRAC and DOE consultants use, I would like to see inside
that. We have mathematicians, we can figure it out. I don't
understand why we can't see what the key assumptions are and
how those assumptions play inside the model that they are run
through the computer.
So one of the things we learned over the last 4 years I
think is that that incoming tide has raised all the boats. This
is a good news story, so now let's perfect it so let's do it in
as scientific way as possible and as transparently as possible.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. Anyone else? McGuire?
Mr. McGuire. Mr. Tonko I would say----
Mr. Olson. I am sorry, the gentleman's time is expired. We
have votes coming up, my friends so make it quick. I recognize
the gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Long for 5 minutes.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Mr. McGuire could you recommend to me what type of hair
dryer would be the best purchase for my dishwasher so I could
dry my dishes whenever the cycle is through?
Mr. McGuire. I will provide it for the record.
Mr. Long. My dishes are not feeling the burn as they once
did.
Mr. Cosgriff, in some of the testimony given today, the
issue of the Department of Energy coordinating better with
other agency was mentioned as an area for improvement,
particularly in the area of making sure that imported products
containing regulated components are held at the same standards
as the domestically manufactured products are on their own.
What are your thoughts on how we can ensure a level playing
field for U.S. made components?
Mr. Cosgriff. There would be a number of things. I think
clearly it may not be DOE's responsibility, but it would be
their responsibility to make sure that their fellow travelers
principally, Customs and similar policing function are aware of
what the standards are, what to be looking for.
Mr. Long. Can you pull your mike a little closer?
Mr. Cosgriff. I think industry has a role in that too. We
should step up offer our technical expertise. There is other
distributors would have a role in that, systems manufacturers
will have a role in that. So it is not going to be one easy
solution, but we don't want the products in the stream or in
the system.
Mr. Long. Well the energy conservation standards program
required the Department of Energy to start a new rulemaking
procedure on a product as part of 6-year review cycle. Can you
tell me generally how long it takes to fully comply with the
energy conservation standards for a product factoring in all of
the cumulative rules, including test procedures?
Mr. Cosgriff. Three years sticks in my mind, I think it
would be different for different products, I mentioned lighting
happens a little bit faster. If we are meeting a motor
efficiency standard, that is a little more complex machine. So
I think it is different.
But assuming we have 3 years to get into compliance and
then that gives you 3 years of run time before the next
rulemaking kicks off and DOE tends to as you would expect, and
as they should, start that rulemaking early so they are able to
comply with the law when they get to 6 years.
I would also point out in the covered products for NEMA, we
know of only two times where the Department has chosen for the
cost-benefit analysis to forego the rule.
Mr. Long. What are some of the challenges in complying with
both the energy conservation standards and additional test
procedures?
Mr. Yurek. Congressman, that is one of the interesting
things that--the change when we made the serial rule part of
the I think the 2005 amendments to EPCA, you have to review the
standards every 6 years. And the requirement is review the test
procedures every 7. And what we are starting to see in light of
lot of our products, the test procedures aren't complete for
the products that they are setting standards for.
So as a matter of fairness don't even know what the test
procedures can be and how our products will be measured. The
information isn't there. And they are setting efficiency
standards in minimum levels. And so, I think, the
interrelationship is very important and we need to know what
the rules are, be able to evaluate what those rules are through
testing our products and providing that information to DOE
before they start setting the next standard.
And the same thing in the previous question Mr. Cosgriff,
our products it is a 5-year implementation time from the
standard being set and when it becomes effective. And it takes
that entire time to do it. And so what we are seeing is that
even before in some cases the standards are put into effect, we
are seeing the next round, and we saw that with residential air
conditioners. The standard went into effect January 2015. The
fall of 2014 they already started discussing the next round of
efficiency. So you are looking at increasing the efficiency
standards on the equipment before the prior standard went into
effect.
Mr. Long. Welcome to Washington, DC. Mr. Cosgriff, do you
care to comment on that as to what the challenges are?
Mr. Cosgriff. It pretty much is, as Mr. Yurek said, it is
going to take us some additional time depending upon the
product.
Mr. Long. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair recognizes
the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Hudson for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hudson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and thank the panel for
being here today, a very informative discussion.
Mr. McGuire, which of your appliances have been regulated
multiple times? I mean, do you believe we are reaching a point
of diminishing marginal returns with this serial rulemaking?
Mr. McGuire. Virtually all of our products have been
regulated multiple times. The current refrigerator standard
that has been in effect since last year is the fourth version
of that standard, same for dishwashers. And the rule I
mentioned proposed was the fifth revision.
So we believe we hit the point of diminishing returns in
the last tranche of standards that were negotiated through the
consensus process. We think standards going forward for most
our products not justified on the economics or the energy
savings.
Mr. Hudson. I appreciate that. Mr. Long asked one of the
other panelists about the issue of having the DOE propose new
standards for some products while the underlying test
procedures are also changing, would you like to elaborate on
how this is a problem for you?
Mr. McGuire. It is a major issue because a manufacturer
cannot tell what they have to do to comply with the new
standard until they know how to test to it. So that is why the
law said test procedures come first, but that process is a
little out of whack right now.
So we, in the case of portable air conditioners, we have
had to comment on proposed standard before we knew what the
final test procedure was. That is really impossible to do but
that has what we are forced to do under the current process
that is being employed.
Mr. Hudson. Well that seems like it is not serving the best
interest of the people either if we aren't getting the true
assessment of the as a result of these tests. I obviously see
why that is a mistake.
Many of your manufacturers made several regulated products
and face multiple rules. What is the challenge, maybe you can
elaborate a little more it for your member companies in terms
of complying with all these different requirements
simultaneously, just in addition to the testing things we
talked about but just elaborate on that?
Mr. McGuire. The initial investment to gear up for a new
standard is as Mr. Yurek and Cosgriff said, is quite an
investment to understand the test procedure and get your
products qualified. But ongoing, once a standard is in effect,
a manufacturer has to test and certify those products with the
Department of Energy. If you want your products to be Energy
Star qualified, that requires a further up front test as well
as ongoing testing of a certain percentage of your products.
So that is a pretty significant testing burden for the
manufacturers. And when the test procedures are under revision,
it has to be very precise in order for you to design a product.
What we have experienced also is that Energy Star sometimes
will want a different test procedure than DOE requires for the
standards.
One of the benefits we found of negotiating the consensus
process, is we would peg the Energy Star requirement to the
standard requirement with the same test procedures so
manufacturers can plan that out. But that hasn't always been
the case, so these are processes that used to be employed, but
haven't been across the board in recent years.
Mr. Hudson. Thank you. Industry groups have repeatedly
asked DOE to establish separate product categories for
condensing and noncondensing covered products only to have DOE
provide response that condensing and noncondensing equipment
provide the same utility to consumers so there is no
justification for establishing separate product categories. Is
this another area that warrants an objective third-party
review?
Mr. Yurek. Congressman, what you are talking about is the
famous furnace rule. And there again is related to technology.
This equipment is at a point where you have condensing and
noncondensing and there is cost differences is considerable
between the two technologies. Right now we are at the highest
level of noncondensing efficiency and the rulemaking is looking
at making a condensing requirement.
I think the groups--this would have been a rule that would
have been great for negotiation, because we have seen over the
years every rule that is come out has landed in litigation, and
to see the groups come together and reach a solution would be a
better solution.
But right now we are in the midst of notice and comment,
and I believe DOE has just issued their proposed rule to OMB
for review, so we will see what happens there. But having two
separate product classes for condensing and noncondensing does
not look like it will be something that will be put forward.
Mr. Hudson. I appreciate that.
And Mr. Chairman, it looks like my time is about expired,
so I will yield back.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair recognizes
the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Johnson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I, too, want to
thank the panel for joining us today. Thank you all. I know
this is--you have been here awhile already.
For Mr. McGuire, Mr. Cosgriff, and Mr. Yurek, how important
is early stakeholder input in the rulemaking process? I mean,
what are the additional challenges that you face when DOE
issues a notice of proposed rulemaking without having consulted
with you beforehand?
Mr. McGuire, let's start with you.
Mr. McGuire. I think it is very important from an
effectiveness point of view. If the manufacturer hasn't had the
ability to be in a dialogue with the Government about the
proposal and how they except the efficiency requirements to be
achieved, and do some testing, then you are really dealing in a
vacuum.
This is what happened with the proposed dishwasher rule. So
it is very important. These are technical matters. It is very
important that not only manufacturers are engaged early but all
stakeholders. This ASRAC process does do that, but the ASRAC
process is useful once the decision has been made that there
will be a new standard.
And so what we are talking about is changing the process
for determining whether there should be a new standard. If
there is going to be one, consensus is always the best. We feel
we will do better. I think as the advocates feel, giving a
give-and-take, putting the data on the table, and not wondering
where the data came from.
Mr. Johnson. Before we go any further, I really want you
guys to get the dishwasher rule right. I am the dishwasher at
my house, and if the dishwashers don't clean, I have got a real
problem. So I mean, it is going to be double work for me, so
Mr. Cosgriff, go ahead.
Mr. Cosgriff. I certainly agree with what my colleague
says, and I think what I have heard is--listening to this
conversation is, at least by the manufacturers, this is not an
assault on the standards. This is--we want the energy-efficient
economy to thrive. It is good for business, as Elizabeth Noll
pointed out. That said, it can be more transparent.
The Department of Energy has some true experts in their
field, but so do we, and it should be, as was stated, let's put
the numbers on the table, and then let's bring in the business
people and say, OK, the cost of efficiency improvement goes
like that or goes like that, but the efficiency curve is almost
flat. At some point, we got to call it off.
Mr. Johnson. Got you. Thank you. Mr. Yurek.
Mr. Yurek. I think it is very important because industry
has the information that this rule is going to be based on it.
It has information on what technology is available. It has
information on the costs. It has information on the products
that are being sold in there today, you know, both on the
different efficiency levels. And so if that conversation
doesn't occur, what is the regulator looking at to make its
decision on is there significant energy savings? Can there be
energy savings? And should we move forward with the rule?
And so it is very necessary for that dialogue. And I think
DOE would like to have that dialogue, but again, they are tied
by what you as Congress has put in this act in the serial
rulemakings where you are mandating these rules every 6 years,
and they just don't have the time, you know, to do a lot of
times everything they need to do or like to do to get these
rules out and also meet the court order from the 2nd Circuit to
make sure they meet all their deadlines.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Let's continue with you, Mr. Yurek. The
DOE has proposed new standards for some of your products while
the underlying test procedure is also changing. Why is this a
problem for you?
Mr. Yurek. Congressman, it is a huge problem, as I stated
earlier, in that we need to know what the rules are, how all
our products can be measured. And again, it is getting DOE the
right information. If the test procedures aren't set, how do
they know how products are performing out in the field?
Mr. Johnson. Is it safe to say it is pretty dadgum hard to
innovate when you don't know what--how you are going to be
measured at the end of the--end of this?
Mr. Yurek. You don't know what the target is. You don't
know what you are going to be measured on.
Mr. Johnson. You don't know where you are going, any road
to get you there?
Mr. Yurek. Right.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Mr. Chairman, I am going to yield back 45
seconds.
Mr. Olson. We thank the gentleman from Ohio.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr.
Mullin for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you, sir, and thank you for having this
meeting. You know, I will be honest with you, there is a few
meetings that we have in here that I have to really study hard
on because I am not familiar with it. This is, as I would say,
in my wheelhouse.
I understand this situation extremely well. And Ms. Noll, I
am going to kind of just talk to you for probably the remainder
of the time Because of a couple of things that you said, and I
just kind of want to set the record straight. One, you said
huge savings of these energy efficiency standards that DOE has
put out, has put huge savings. That was your words, right?
Based on what?
Ms. Noll. Based on analysis.
Mr. Mullin. What analysis?
Ms. Noll. The analysis that ACEEE and Appliance Standards
Awareness Project has done, as well as the Department of
Energy's own analysis.
Mr. Mullin. And I mean, are you really looking at bills and
prices, because you said huge savings, and then you said up to
$500 a year on energy costs. Is that correct?
Ms. Noll. Correct
Mr. Mullin. So in Oklahoma, the average household today,
their total energy bill a year is $1,296. So you are saying
that because of your savings, you know, that bill would have
been $1,796. Is that right?
Ms. Noll. Absent standards.
Mr. Mullin. Yes. But yet if I go back and I look at 2008,
the midline--just the midline Whirlpool dishwasher, the average
use was about $29 a year is what that unit cost to run. At the
same time, the cost of the unit was $375. Today, the same unit
is $399, and it costs $32 a month to--or a year to run.
Ms. Noll. The standards program has been in effect since
1987, and recently----
Mr. Mullin. I am just talking about--you said huge savings.
Ms. Noll. Uh-huh.
Mr. Mullin. So I am trying to figure out where the huge
savings are from because right now, we are just talking about
dishwashers. Well, dishwashers, we can see in the last 8 years,
have actually went up. They cost more. So that is not a
savings. And they cost more to run per year. So just give me an
opportunity again, where is huge? If huge would be massive. I
mean, I am thinking like big time, that is huge, your word.
$500, I guess you could say that is huge, but I don't see it.
That is the dishwasher. So I will give you the mic and let you
go ahead and try to explain that for me.
Ms. Noll. In my opinion, I think $2 trillion in savings to
consumers is a lot of huge savings.
Mr. Mullin. No, you say $2 trillion. I am just trying to
figure out where the $2 trillion are. DOE comes in here and
makes all these outlandish claims all the time, how much they
are saving, you know, the mid-level households and all this
stuff, and how much energy is down when energy cost is actually
up, and then you are in here making claims that the household
is saving money, and I am just not seeing it.
If anybody on the panel can help me, let me know because I
don't want to make a claim that is not true, and right now I am
seeing a claim that is not true. Go ahead, Ms. Miller.
Ms. Miller. I think it is a valid question to say what is
this analysis based on, and I think to reiterate some of the
other remarks made by other members of this panel, it is
difficult to see where those claims come from in DOE's
analysis.
Mr. Mullin. Right.
Ms. Miller. And if you are looking at dishwashers
specifically, if you look at the standards that were finalized
in 2012, they assumed, as you mentioned before, Mr. McGuire,
that the payback period would be about 12 years, which is only
as long as your dishwasher is going to last, and I think they
assume that households would save on net $3.
Mr. Mullin. Let me read you a manual for a startup, for a
new dishwasher now. On top of it costing more to run, quote,
this is out of the manual, says: ``Run hot water at sink
nearest your dishwasher until water is hot. Turn off water. For
best dishwasher results, water should be 120 degrees before it
enters the dishwasher.''
This is a new standards that we have to have out. So not
only does it cost more to run, Ms. Noll, now we are having--we
are wasting water, which this is a big issue nowadays. We
always talk about water savings, especially let's go to
California. Let's talk about California for a second. They are
supposed to run--waste hot water and let it run, and this is
the manual that comes for dishwashers now that says that.
Refrigerators, let me use refrigerators real quick.
Refrigerators in 2008, average Whirlpool refrigerator costs
$999. That same unit comparable today is $1,299. Energy cost?
Also up. Now, these are two major appliances. We are talking
about a refrigerator. We are talking about a dishwasher.
Where are the huge savings? DOE and the argument on all
these energy-efficient appliances are always out there talking
about huge savings, and American people think it is huge, and
yet I gave you two examples of two----
Mr. Rush. Time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mullin [continuing]. That it is----
Mr. Olson. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Mullin. I yield back
Mr. Olson. Thank you. Seeing no further witnesses seeking
time, the Chair asks unanimous consent to enter for the record
a multitude of statements on this subject matter from a number
of agencies and concerned citizens.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
In closing, the Chair wants to thank all the witnesses for
your time and expertise and your insights as to how to use hair
blow dryers to dry dishes in the dishwasher.
The Chair reminds the members you have 5 legislative days
to submit questions for the record and statements, EORs,
statements for the record. Without objection, this hearing is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:43 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
