- OVERSIGHT OF THE NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF THE NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

AND THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND THE ECONOMY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 9, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-71

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov
_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
97-999 PDF                      WASHINGTON : 2016
_________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

(ii)

Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               JERRY McNERNEY, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        PAUL TONKO, New York
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREGG HARPER, Vice Chairman          GENE GREEN, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     LOIS CAPPS, California
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             KATHY CASTOR, Florida
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   PETER WELCH, Vermont
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILL FLORES, Texas                   FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma               officio)
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)
------

Subcommittee on Environment and the Economy

JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
Chairman
GREGG HARPER, Vice Chairman          PAUL TONKO, New York
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                LOIS CAPPS, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JERRY McNERNEY, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TONY CARDENAS, California
BILL FLORES, Texas                   FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina           officio)
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. John Shimkus, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Illinois, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     3
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Paul Tonko, a Representative in Congress from the State of
New York, opening statement....................................     5
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................    55

Witnesses

Stephen G. Burns, Chairman, Nuclear Regulatory Commission........     7
Prepared statement...........................................    10
Answers to submitted questions \1\...........................    56
Kristine L. Svinicki, Commissioner, Nuclear Regulatory Commission
\2\............................................................    23
William C. Ostendorff, Commissioner, Nuclear Regulatory
Commission \2\.................................................    23
Jeff Baran, Commissioner, Nuclear Regulatory Commission \2\......    24

Submitted Material

Chart, ``Nuclear Regulatory Commission: Runaway Regulatory
Growth,'' submitted by Mr. Flores..............................    49

----------
\1\ The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at  http://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF18/
20150909/103923/HMTG-114-IF18-Wstate-BurnsS-20150909-SD057.pdf.
\2\ Ms. Svinicki, Mr. Ostendorff, and Mr. Baran did not submit
statements for the record.

OVERSIGHT OF THE NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION

----------

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 9, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power
joint with the
Subcommittee on Environment and the Economy,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 10:07 a.m., in
room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John Shimkus
(chairman of the Subcommittee on Environment and the Economy)
presiding.
Members present: Representatives Whitfield, Shimkus,
Harper, Olson, Barton, Murphy, Latta, McKinley, Kinzinger,
Johnson, Long, Ellmers, Bucshon, Flores, Mullin, Hudson, Upton
(ex officio), McNerney, Tonko, Green, Capps, Castor, Sarbanes,
Welch, Loebsack, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Gary Andres, Staff Director; Will Batson,
Legislative Clerk; Leighton Brown, Press Assistant; Allison
Busbee, Policy Coordinator, Energy and Power; Tom
Hassenboehler, Chief Counsel, Energy and Power; A.T. Johnston,
Senior Policy Advisor; Dave McCarthy, Chief Counsel,
Environment and the Economy; Chris Sarley, Policy Coordinator,
Environment and the Economy; Dan Schneider, Press Secretary;
Peter Spencer, Professional Staff Member, Oversight; Andy Zach,
Counsel, Environment and the Economy; Christine Brennan,
Democratic Press Secretary; Jeff Carroll, Democratic Staff
Director; Jacqueline Cohen, Democratic Senior Counsel; Tiffany
Guarascio, Democratic Deputy Staff Director and Chief Health
Advisor; Rick Kessler, Democratic Senior Advisor and Staff
Director, Energy and Environment; and Alexander Ratner,
Democratic Policy Analyst.
Mr. Shimkus. I ask my colleagues to take their seats, and I
am going to call the Joint Subcommittee on the Environment and
the Economy and Energy and Power to order. And I would like to
recognize myself for 5 minutes for an opening statement, which
I will share with Chairman Whitfield.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN SHIMKUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Thank you for attending this morning's hearing to discuss
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. The NRC is responsible for
licensing and regulation of our fleet of nuclear power plants
as well as management of nuclear materials which impact our
lives daily. This is a critical responsibility and our
congressional oversight of the Commission is vital.
My home State of Illinois generates the most nuclear energy
in the country. However, the State's nuclear power generation
faces strong economic challenges. With low-cost natural gas and
minimal growth in electricity demand, I am concerned that the
economic impact associated with an increasing price of
regulatory compliance will disproportionately affect those
economically distressed nuclear power plants.
The nuclear industry's cost of complying with regulatory
action has doubled over the last 10 years. The cost of
compliance results from a layering of regulatory actions on
nuclear power plants which become more burdensome. I am pleased
the NRC recognizes the need to consider the regulatory impact
on licensees and minimize the cumulative effect of regulation.
I commend Chairman Burns for acknowledging this principle
in a recent vote on containment protection rulemaking. Your
vote to supply the policy, and I quote, ``most in line with the
Agency's efforts to reduce the cumulative effects of regulation
in which there is little to no additional safety benefit to be
gained by proceeding'' deserves recognition.
In addition to reducing the cumulative effects of
regulation, the nuclear industry needs certainty in interacting
with a reliable and efficient regulator. NRC must assure its
actions are clearly justified, and NRC staff follows
established processes which adhere to NRC's principles of good
regulation.
I look forward to hearing from the Commission other
proposals for NRC to improve the efficiency in which it
functions as a regulator. Used fuel management continues to
remain the top priority for this committee. Proceeding with a
permanent repository, Yucca Mountain maintains strong
bipartisan support. I applaud NRC staff for recently releasing
the draft supplemental environment impact statement on
potential groundwater impacts for Yucca Mountain. The draft--
environmental impact statement, again, verifies the repositor
can safely operate for 1 million years and affirms the site is
the best solution to permanently dispose of spent nuclear fuel.
The Federal Government's inability to fulfill its legal
obligations established by the Nuclear Waste Policy Act
continues to increase every year Yucca Mountain is delayed. The
NRC and Department of Energy must resume consideration of the
Yucca Mountain license application and reach a final decision
whether the site, as science has indicated, can safely store
spent nuclear fuel.
In upcoming months, we consider other important components
of a used fuel management system, issues such transportation,
benefits for host States and communities, the role of
consolidated interim storage and linked to a long-term
repository, and system of budgeting and funding challenges
should be thoughtfully examined to inform used fuel
legislation.
I look forward to hearing from the Commissioners today, and
I thank you for your service.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shimkus follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. John Shimkus

Thank you for attending this morning's hearing to discuss
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC). The NRC is responsible
for licensing and regulation of our fleet of nuclear power
plants, as well as management of nuclear materials which impact
our lives daily. This is a critical responsibility and our
Congressional oversight of the Commission is vital.
My home State of Illinois generates the most nuclear energy
in the country. However, the State's nuclear power generation
faces strong economic challenges. With low cost natural gas and
minimal growth in electricity demand, I am concerned the
economic impact associated with an increasing price of
regulatory compliance will disproportionately affect those
economically distressed nuclear power plants.
The nuclear industry's cost of complying with regulatory
action has doubled over the last 10 years. The cost of
compliance results from a layering of regulatory actions on
nuclear power plants, which become more burdensome. I am
pleased the NRC recognizes the need to consider the regulatory
impact on licensees and minimize the cumulative effect of
regulation.
I commend Chairman Burns for acknowledging this principle
in a recent vote on containment protection rulemaking. Your
vote to support the policy ``most in line with the agency's
efforts to reduce the cumulative effects of regulation'' in
which ``there is little to no additional safety benefit to be
gained by proceeding'' deserves recognition.
In addition to reducing the cumulative effects of
regulation, the nuclear industry needs certainty in interacting
with a reliable and efficient regulator. NRC must assure its
actions are clearly justified and NRC staff follows established
processes, which adhere to NRC's Principles of Good Regulation.
I look forward to hearing from the Commission other proposals
for NRC to improve the efficiency in which it functions as a
regulator.
Used fuel management continues to remain a top priority for
this committee. Proceeding with a permanent repository at Yucca
Mountain maintains strong bipartisan support. I applaud NRC
staff for recently releasing the draft supplemental
environmental impact statement (SEIS) on potential groundwater
impacts for Yucca Mountain. The draft SEIS again verifies the
repository can safely operate for 1 million years and affirms
the site is the best solution to permanently dispose of spent
nuclear fuel. The Federal Government's inability to fulfill its
legal obligations established by the Nuclear Waste Policy Act
continues to increase every year Yucca Mountain is delayed. The
NRC and Department of Energy must resume consideration of the
Yucca Mountain license application and reach a final decision
whether the site, as science has indicated, can safely store
spent nuclear fuel.
In upcoming months we will consider other important
components of a used fuel management system. Issues such as
transportation, benefits for host States and communities, the
role of consolidated interim storage, and system budgeting and
funding challenges should be thoughtfully examined to inform
used fuel legislation.
I look forward to hearing from the Commissioners today, and
thank you for your service.

Mr. Shimkus. And with that, I yield to the gentleman from
Kentucky.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much, Chairman Shimkus. And I
want to thank the Commissioners for being with us today. We
genuinely appreciate your being here and the job that you do.
I think it is quite clear that the NRC does have a
reputation of a gold standard since its establishment over 40
years ago in 1975. Your reliance on the principles of good
regulation, independence, openness, effijciency, clarity, and
reliability are the foundation of its credibility and as it
protects public health and safety through licensing and
regulation of nuclear power plants.
However, proposed regulatory actions such as the mitigation
beyond design basis and the containment protection rulemaking
recently threatened, in some of our views, to deviate from
these principles, and potentially diminish the Commission's
credibility.
In fact, I sent a letter with Chairman Upton expressing
concerns over the inappropriate use of qualitative factors by
the NRC to justify rulemakings in the absence of any
quantitative cost benefit justification. We have not received a
response yet from the Commission about that.
It has been encouraging that the Commission recognized the
need to ensure that regulatory requirements are appropriately
justified, and that the Commission adhere to its regulatory
framework and uphold the principles of good regulation, as
Commissioner Ostendorff highlighted recently.
We are, of course, concerned also about appropriately
aligning NRC's budget and staffing levels with the
organization's workload, which has changed dramatically over
the last number of years. So we look forward to your testimony
and your insights, and thank you once again for joining us. And
my time is expired.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Ed Whitfield

Good morning and welcome to this morning's hearing with the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC). I want to thank the
Commissioners for being here with us today.
The NRC's reputation as the ``gold standard'' nuclear
regulator was established over the 40 years since its creation
in 1975. The Commission's reliance on its principles of good
regulation--independence, openness, efficiency, clarity, and
reliability--are the foundation of its credibility as it
protects public health and safety through licensing and
regulation of nuclear power plants. This reputation was well-
earned, even as the industry experienced milestone events such
as the nuclear emergency at Three Mile Island and the terrorist
attacks of September 11th.
However, proposed regulatory actions such as the
mitigation-beyond-design-basis and the containment protection
rulemaking recently threatened to deviate from these principles
and potentially diminish the Commission's credibility. In fact,
I had sent a letter with Chairman Upton expressing concerns
over the inappropriate use of ``qualitative factors'' by the
NRC to justify rulemakings in the absence of any quantitative
cost-benefit justification. Unfortunately, we have not yet
received a response from the Commission.
It was therefore encouraging that the Commission recognized
the need to ensure that regulatory requirements are
``appropriately justified'' and that the Commission ``adhere to
its regulatory framework and uphold the principles of good
regulation,'' as Commissioner Ostendorff highlighted.
I also appreciate the Commission's commitment to serve as a
reliable regulator by resolving actions in a timely manner.
Both the NRC and the nuclear industry responded to the 2011
accident at the Fukushima plant in Japan with a robust
reexamination of safety, emergency preparedness and have
reinforced our confidence in the safe operation of our nuclear
power plants. The Commission's direction to develop a plan to
now resolve the remaining post-Fukushima recommendations is an
appropriate step to providing reliability in the regulatory
regime.
I am concerned about the need to appropriately align NRC's
budget and staffing levels with the organization's workload.
Over the previous 10 years, NRC's budget, staff, and backlog of
licensing actions have steadily increased while the number of
operating reactors and total licensing actions has decreased.
These trends are troubling and are not indicative of an
organization committed to efficiency. The NRC now has a number
of initiatives underway to examine the cause of these trends
and recommend a strategy to improve performance. I look forward
to hearing how the Commission will consider these efforts in an
effort to improve the organization's efficiency.
Thank you again for appearing before us today, and I look
forward to hearing your testimony.

Mr. Shimkus. I thank my colleague, and now I recognize the
ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr. Tonko, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TONKO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, and good morning. I thank Chair
Shimkus and Chair Whitfield for holding this hearing, and
certainly to Chairman Burns and Commissioner Svinicki and
Commissioner Ostendorff and Commissioner Baran, thank you for
appearing before the subcommittee today.
And, Commissioner Baran, congratulations on your new
position with the Commission. It is great to see you again here
at the committee in a new role.
The electric utility sector is undergoing significant
changes, and the nuclear power industry certainly is affected
by these given changes. The utility model that has prevailed
for over the past century is now in great midst of change.
Overall electricity demand is stable; power plants have aged;
new technologies and markets are changing grid management;
renewable power has grown; and the relationship between
utilities and their customers is, indeed, changing.
Policies to encourage greater energy efficiency and lower
emissions are also important factors, along with the expansion
in domestic natural gas supplies. And we are experiencing
shifts in weather and climate. All of these factors are working
together to reshape this vital sector of our economy.
Chairman Burns' testimony includes some statistics that
illustrate the current situation for nuclear power. Five
reactors began the process of decommissioning, and 14 others
are in some stage of that process. Economic conditions may
result in additional plants being shut down. These retirements
are not being offset with any new units. Chairman Burns'
testimony cites five new plant authorizations and another six
active applications for new licenses. In some areas, similar
trends can be seen for older coal and oil-fueled generation.
The nuclear industry also continues to face the difficult
problem of waste disposal. We still have not resolved this
issue, and I believe that an exclusive focus on the Yucca
Mountain facility will not provide the comprehensive solution
that we need and that we deserve. Nuclear power still accounts
for a significant amount of our baseload generation. And in
some areas, it plays an important role in the mix of power
supply and to ensure, indeed, reliability.
But for nuclear power to continue as a viable power
generation option, we need to look beyond the traditional
policy framework that has been with us for decades and consider
how nuclear power will best fit into the new grid and sector
structures that are emerging.
One thing, however, has not changed: The need for strong
safety standards and rigorous enforcement of those standards.
The Commission's role in regulating this industry is crucial to
public safety and to the future of this industry. The industry
clearly is facing some economic challenges, but these
challenges cannot and should not be overcome by sacrificing
safety. This is an interesting and challenging time for the
nuclear power industry and for the Commission. And I look
forward to hearing from all of our witnesses today about the
Commission's efforts to guide the nuclear industry through its
transition that is underway.
Again, I thank all of you for appearing before the panel
here today, and I yield back the balance of my time, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman yields back the balance of his time.
The Chair is looking for the chairman of the full
committee, but he is going to submit his opening statement for
the record.
Does anybody on the majority side seek time for an opening
statement?
Anyone on the minority side?
Chair recognizes ranking member of the full committee Mr.
Pallone for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
ranking members as well for holding this hearing.
This is a critical moment in time for the nuclear industry
and its regulators. The Commission should be commended for its
ongoing efforts to adapt the size and structure of the NRC to
today's regulatory realities. And it is clear that moving
towards a safe, efficient, and modern nuclear fleet should be
an important part of our Nation's effort to combat climate
change. And that is why I am pleased to see progress is being
made on the construction and licensing of the first four new
commercial power reactors in decades. Advancements in nuclear
technology, particularly in the area of small modular reactors,
hold the possibility of a newer safer generation of nuclear
power.
However, nuclear power and technology still have challenges
to overcome. For new reactors, the test is to show that such
units can be brought online in a timely and cost-effective
manner; a question that, for now, remains unanswered.
For existing units, it is critical that they be able to
meet the safety needs of a post-Fukushima world, the security
challenges of a post-9/11 world, and the financial requirements
of a market characterized by some of the lowest natural gas and
renewable prices in recent history.
We also still need to address the storage and disposal of
nuclear waste and the rapidly accelerating phenomena of
decommissioned units. I believe there is an important role for
nuclear energy to play in addressing global climate change, but
I want to make perfectly clear that safety must come first. I
am, therefore, both interested and concerned about recent votes
by the Commission to reject the recommendation of the NRC's
professional staff with regard to certain post-Fukushima
safeguards. In no way, shape, or form can safety take a
backseat to cost or competitive pressures, and that would be a
recipe for disaster.
So the job of the Commission is to regulate nuclear power
for the benefit of all Americans, not just one industry or
sector. So we must work together to find a way forward for
nuclear energy without sacrificing safeguards.
And, again, I thank the Commissioners for coming today and
look forward to their testimony. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

I want to thank the subcommittee chairmen and ranking
members for holding this Nuclear Regulatory Commission
oversight hearing. Welcome Chairman Burns, Commissioners
Svinicki and Ostendorff, and welcome back to the committee
Commissioner Baran.
This is a critical moment in time for the nuclear industry
and its regulators. The Commission should be commended for its
ongoing efforts to adapt the size and structure of the NRC to
today's regulatory realities.
And it's clear that moving toward a safe, efficient and
modern nuclear fleet should be an important part of our
Nation's effort to combat climate change. That is why I'm
pleased to see progress is being made on the construction and
licensing of the first four new commercial power reactors in
decades. Advancements in nuclear technology, particularly in
the area of small modular reactors, hold the possibility of a
newer, safer generation of nuclear power.
However, nuclear power and technology still have challenges
to overcome. For new reactors, the test is to show that such
units can be brought online in a timely and cost effective
manner --a question that, for now, remains unanswered. For
existing units, it's critical that they be able to meet the
safety needs of a post-Fukushima world, the security challenges
of a post-9/11 world, and the financial requirements of a
market characterized by some of the lowest natural gas and
renewable prices in recent history. We also still need to
address the storage and disposal of nuclear waste and the
rapidly accelerating phenomenon of decommissioned units.
As I stated previously, I believe there is an important
role for nuclear energy to play in addressing global climate
change, but I want to make perfectly clear that safety must
come first. I am, therefore, both interested in and concerned
about recent votes by the Commission to reject the
recommendations of the NRC's professional staff with regard to
certain post-Fukushima safeguards. In no way, shape or form can
safety take a back seat to cost or competitive pressures. That
would be a recipe for disaster. The job of the Commission is to
regulate nuclear power for the benefit of all Americans, not
just one industry or sector, so we must work together to find a
way forward for nuclear energy without sacrificing safeguards.
Again, I want to thank the Commissioners for coming today,
and I look forward to hearing the testimony.

Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
The Chair now would like to welcome the full--well, the NRC
Commission as presently seated, and recognize Chairman Burns
for a 5-minute opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF STEPHEN G. BURNS, CHAIRMAN, NUCLEAR REGULATORY
COMMISSION; KRISTINE L. SVINICKI, COMMISSIONER, NUCLEAR
REGULATORY COMMISSION; WILLIAM C. OSTENDORFF, COMMISSIONER,
NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION; AND JEFF BARAN, COMMISSIONER,
NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN G. BURNS

Mr. Burns. Thank you, Chairman Shimkus and Chairman
Whitfield and Ranking Member Tonko and members of the
subcommittee. I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you
today to discuss NRC licensing and regulatory activities.
Just as we did 40 years ago when the agency first began
operation, NRC finds itself in a changing environment. Over the
past 15 years, the NRC grew to meet a variety of challenges. In
response to industry's announced plans in the early 2000's to
construct a new fleet of reactors, the NRC recruited staff and
restructured the agency's licensing organization for reactors.
The NRC needed additional resources following the terrorist
attacks of September 2001, with a focus on security,
safeguards, and emergency preparedness. And also affecting
agency priorities were the implementation of safety
enhancements as a result of the March 2011 accident at the
Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear power station in Japan, as well as
the unexpected decommissioning of several reactors before the
end of their licensing term.
It is a different picture today, particularly in the new
reactor area. The projected workload has scaled back, with now
only six applications remaining active out of the 18 combined
license applications that were filed.
The Commission, in acknowledging these changing priorities,
recently endorsed a number of recommendations from our staff on
changes the agency could make now, and over the next 5 years to
its structure, workforce, and regulatory processes. While these
efforts are ongoing, the Commission will continue to emphasize
both the importance of our safety and security mission and the
excellence with which we strive to achieve it.
After the Fukushima Dai-ichi accident, the NRC assessed the
significance of the event for the U.S. nuclear fleet, and
developed with industry and stakeholder comment proposed
actions to enhance the safety of plants in the United States.
We have been diligent in ensuring that priority is given to
implementation of the most safety-significant of the post-
Fukushima enhancements, and most licensees will complete the
majority of the high priority enhancements by the end of 2016.
And this is a significant achievement.
In the rulemaking area, the Commission recently directed
the staff to provide a proposal for increasing the Commission's
involvement in the early stages of the rulemaking process. The
staff's proposal is due to the Commission by mid October. The
agency's use of quantitative and qualitative factors in
regulatory decision making has been of high interest to
stakeholders in recent years, and I acknowledge the committee's
interest, as demonstrated by the letter we received, and you
will be receiving an answer in the near future.
The Commission recently approved the staff's plans for
updating guidance using the--regarding the use of qualitative
factors to improve the clarity, transparency, and consistency
of the agency's regulatory and back-fit analyses.
Finally, I want to note in the area of advanced reactors,
being prepared to evaluate potential applications for light
water-based small modular reactors and non-light water reactor
technologies presents some challenges to the NRC. But we are
prepared to receive and review any such applications under our
existing framework. The NRC expects to begin reviewing one
small modular reactor design application in late 2016. Our
current licensing framework is adequate for conducting reviews
of the advanced reactor application, but we recognize that some
work needs to be done with respect to establishing acceptance
criteria for non-light water technologies. Within the
constraints of our budget, the agency is working on advanced
reactor activities with the Department of Energy, industry
standard-setting organizations, and with the Generation IV
International Forum.
In conclusion, the NRC, through its long history, has been
a responsible regulator. Our staff have always represented the
best of the best in terms of competence, professionalism, and
dedication to the agency's mission to protect public health and
safety and the common defense and security. The world at large
often looks to the NRC as a standard for nuclear regulation. We
are reshaping the agency to meet the changing environment in
which we find ourselves, while retaining the right skill sets
to fulfill our unchanging and challenging safety and security
mission.
I thank you and I will be pleased to answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Burns follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes Commissioner Svinicki for 2
minutes if you have any opening statement to give.

STATEMENT OF KRISTINE L. SVINICKI

Ms. Svinicki. Thank you, Chairman Shimkus and Ranking
Member Tonko for the opportunity to appear here today.
Chairman Burns has given an overview of a number of
important issues before the Commission. I think I will just
share one observation.
I was privileged to join this Commission in 2008. So I have
been observing the NRC and participating in these activities
for a long time now. That has validated me in a conclusion that
for large organizations, performance is generally cyclic in
nature. And so I have the burden and the blessing of knowing
the very high levels of performance that NRC is capable of as
an organization. But we have had a lot on our plate, and I
think now we have not been perhaps as agile at times as
external events might have made us be. So Project AIM, to me,
is--it is a challenge, but it is also a very sincere
opportunity for NRC to refocus on some of its internal
processes and perhaps do that inward look. And as we right-size
and adjust our resources, I am very, very confident that this
is an opportunity for the NRC to tackle a number of internal
challenges. And if we are successful at that, I think we can be
very proud of it.
Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes
Commissioner Ostendorff for 2 minutes.

STATEMENT OF WILLIAM C. OSTENDORFF

Mr. Ostendorff. Chairman Shimkus, Ranking Member Tonko, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
be here today.
Chairman Burns has already provided an overview in his
testimony of key issues in the budget, Project AIM, and the
changing nuclear industry environment. I am in complete
alignment with his testimony. I do, however, want to expand a
bit upon the status of post-Fukushima safety enhancements.
Along with Commissioner Svinicki, I have been involved in
all of the Commission's decisionmaking related to what safety
changes should be resulting from Fukushima lessons learned.
Looking back over the actions of the NRC over the last 4 years
as a result of Fukushima, I firmly believe the agency has acted
on a foundational basis of solid science and engineering. We
have also acted consistently with the NRC's principles of good
regulation. Most importantly, the Commission has evaluated new
requirements in a structured manner, faithfully adhering to the
NRC's longstanding regulatory framework.
Specifically, new requirements beyond those required for
adequate protection cannot be imposed unless they constitute a
substantial increase in the overall protection of the public
health and safety, and this satisfies a cost-benefit analysis.
The Commission recently approved what I consider to be the
capstone rule of our response to Fukushima, the mitigation of
beyond design basis events rulemaking. This rulemaking codifies
significant enhancements for station blackout, spent fuel pool
safety, onsite emergency response capabilities, and emergency
preparedness. As evidence of our disciplined approach and
adherence to the agency's back-fit rule, the Commission did not
approve a proposed regulatory requirement for Severe Accident
Management Guidelines over similar industry voluntary
initiatives because such a requirement was not cost-justified.
Seeing the light at the end of the tunnel, the Commission
also directed the staff to provide a plan to us by late October
to resolve remaining Fukushima action items.
I appreciate the opportunity to be here today and look
forward to your questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
And the Chair now recognizes Commissioner Baran. Welcome,
and you are recognized for 2 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JEFF BARAN

Mr. Baran. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Shimkus,
Ranking Member Tonko, and members of the subcommittees, thank
you for the opportunity to testify today. It is a real pleasure
to be back in this hearing room, this time with my fellow
Commissioners, to discuss NRC's work.
First and foremost, NRC is focused on our mission of
protecting public health and safety. Yet the agency faces a
different environment than what was expected just a few years
ago when substantial new reactor construction was anticipated
and no licensees had yet announced plans to shut down any
reactors.
To meet our responsibilities now and in the future, we need
to enhance the efficiency, effectiveness, and agility of the
agency. Toward this end, the Commission has approved
implementing a number of the Project AIM recommendations. This
is a critical effort for NRC that will continue to require
significant Commission and staff attention in the coming months
and years. While we take steps to increase the agency's
efficiency and agility, we need to ensure that NRC also
maintains its focus on its ongoing safety work.
Currently, five new reactors are being built in the United
States, and five reactors recently ceased operations and are
entering decommissioning. At the construction sites, NRC is
conducting oversight to ensure that the new plants are built
safely and meet regulatory requirements. Meanwhile, the NRC
staff is beginning their rulemaking to take a fresh look at a
number of decommissioning issues.
NRC continues to address post-Fukushima safety enhancements
and lessons learned. Progress has been made in several areas,
but we recognize that more work remains to be done. NRC also is
responsible for having an efficient and effective licensing
process for new designs and facilities. While NRC continues its
work on pending applications for new reactors, we need to be
ready to accept and review applications submitted for new
technologies. NRC is already reviewing an application for a new
production facility for medical isotopes and anticipates
additional applications of this type in the future. We also, as
Chairman Burns mentioned, are expecting to receive the first
application for a small modular reactor design in late 2016.
In closing, I recognize that our congressional oversight
committees are more interested than ever in NRC's mission and
the way we are carrying out that mission. I firmly believe that
NRC can provide Congress with the information it needs to
perform its oversight duties while preserving the independence
that is essential to accomplishing our safety and security
mission.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much, and I will now recognize
myself 5 minutes for starting the questioning. So here we go.
On August 25, 2015, the Commission released the votes
concerning the cumulative effect of regulation process
enhancement and risk prioritization initiative. From a review
of the votes, it appears that Commissioners Svinicki and
Ostendorff voted to approve staff option one, which is the
continuation of NRC efforts to address the cumulative effects
of regulation. On the other hand, Chairman Burns and
Commissioner Baran approved one aspect of staff option two,
which is to allow licensees to request compliance schedule
changes using a risk prioritization methodology.
Chairman Burns, with the vote split as it was in this
manner, can you help the committee understand how the NRC staff
will proceed in this manner? What exactly has the staff been
directed to do?
Mr. Burns. Certainly, Mr. Chairman. Essentially, the staff
will continue, and that was part of the instruction that we
gave in our staff requirements memo, our direction to the
staff, that it should continue the ongoing efforts with respect
to the cumulative effects of regulation. And I think that--in
simplest terms, that is the outcome. This was not an effort to
sort of draw back the staff, but I think there was a difference
of view as to the value added of one of the suggested options
that the staff gave us.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
Commissioner Ostendorff, in your vote, you support a
status-quo approach and emphasize that the NRC staff can
already apply risk-informed decision making in reviewing
licensee exemption requests, and that risk insight should be
considered through existing agency processes. Do you believe
current NRC regulations and guidance provide adequate risk
prioritization authorities for the staff? And are there other
improvements that could be made to ensure that the focus of NRC
work remains on safety-significant actions?
Mr. Ostendorff. Yes, sir. I believe, Chairman Shimkus, that
the staff does have existing authority to use risk insights in
making decisions. In particular, with respect to the timing of
completion of individual nuclear power plant compliance with
various requirements. And though there was a 2/2 split on the
vote, I would say there is a lot of consensus among the four of
us, if I can just add my personal view here, and that we were
somewhat hesitant, Commissioner Svinicki and I, to look at
adding an additional bureaucratic step to the process that we
don't think was necessarily needed.
Mr. Shimkus. Great. Thank you.
Chairman Burns, what will the next steps procedurally be
when the Commission receives the staff paper expected in
October concerning the remaining post-Fukushima Tier 2 and Tier
3 activities? Will the Commission close out any of these?
Mr. Burns. I think we have to wait to see what the paper
says. But in requesting that paper, I think you can--from my
sense, at least, it sort of foreshadows. I think the Commission
is interested in seeing what do we have left with respect to
the Tier 2 and Tier 3, and are we at a point where we can make
the judgment about value added, if any, of pursuing some of
those options. So I would expect the Commission to give careful
consideration to what the staff puts before us in terms of
looking at a path forward.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
The Commission is currently developing its fiscal year 2017
budget request. As you all know, the courts directed the NRC to
resume consideration to fulfill its statutory obligation to
review the Yucca Mountain license application. You have
previously stated the current plan activities will use the
remaining available funding for Yucca Mountain and need
approximately $330 million to complete the license.
I would like to ask each of you individually for a simple
yes-or-no answer. Will you support requesting funding in the
NRC's budget to continue review of the Yucca Mountain license
application?
Mr. Burns. For me, no, not in the absence of other
indication that the agency, the Department of Energy, would
also be going forward with it.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. Commissioner Svinicki?
Ms. Svinicki. Yes, consistent with my previous votes.
Mr. Shimkus. Commissioner Ostendorff?
Mr. Ostendorff. Yes, consistent with my previous votes.
Mr. Shimkus. Commissioner Baran?
Mr. Baran. No. I don't support requesting funding because
as a practical matter, I don't see how the adjudicatory process
at NRC could work if the Department of Energy does not support
its own efforts.
Mr. Shimkus. But we do all agree that the Nuclear Waste
Policy Act is the law of the land, which states that the long-
term repository in the statute is to find this Yucca Mountain.
Correct?
Chairman Burns?
Mr. Burns. The Waste Policy Act identifies Yucca Mountain
as the one for evaluation.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
Commissioner Svinicki?
Ms. Svinicki. Yes. It is the law until modified or changed.
Mr. Shimkus. Commissioner Ostendorff?
Mr. Ostendorff. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. And Commissioner Baran?
Mr. Baran. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. I only have 12 seconds left. I will yield back
my time, and yield to the ranking member, Mr. Tonko, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Commissioner Baran, I believe we agree with each other that
safety at nuclear plants is of paramount importance. I want to
ask you about the way in which our changing climate affects
safety and operations at nuclear power plants.
In July, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration confirmed that 2014 was the hottest year on
record. The world experienced record high surface temperatures,
ocean temperatures, and continued sea level rise all in 2014. A
number of areas in our country are experiencing prolonged
severe drought conditions, and since greenhouse gas emissions
continue to rise, these trends are likely to continue or worsen
going forward.
So it is not surprising that this summer, the Pilgrim
nuclear power plant in Massachusetts was forced to shut down
because its cooling water supply was too hot. The NRC license
for Pilgrim requires that the intake water be less than 75
degrees and that the discharge water not exceed 102 degrees.
The intake water was above 75 degrees and the discharge water
was at 101.2. Also, this is not the first time that the water
there has risen above those permitted levels. It happened twice
in 2013 as well. And the Pilgrim facility is not the only one
to have experienced this problem in recent years. So I ask:
What exactly happened at Pilgrim and should we expect that it
could happen again?
Mr. Baran. Well, thank you for the question. I think you
articulated this particular event very well. We have seen a
number of plants temporarily shut down, reduce power, or seek
regulatory exemptions when their cooling water supplies either
got too warm or were insufficient. And we have seen several
instances of that over the last several years, as you
mentioned, at a number of different plants. Currently, those
issues are evaluated on a case-by-case basis. So the technical
specifications ofeach of those plants, as you indicated,
indicate the temperatures that are acceptable for cooling water
intake and discharge, and the plants have got to meet those
technical specifications.
If they can't because the wateris too hot or there isn't
enough of it, they are going to scale back power, they are
going to shut down, or they are going to come to the NRC and
say. ``We think it is safe to operate a little bit warmer than
that with the water'' and seek an exemption. And then we at the
NRC, the staff, would look at that exemption request on a case-
by-case basis.
Mr. Tonko. So the plants are given a 30-year license, and
most designs require significant availability of water for the
cooling process. So what is the NRC doing to ensure that
proposed plants will have sufficient water and sufficient cool
water to operate? And, again, spanning over a 30-year plant.
Mr. Baran. Well, it is an interesting question because, as
you point out, with the time scales, we could see changes in
that on climate. You know, another piece of this that I want to
raise is related to the climate risk of flooding. And so there
is a lot of analysis being done at NRC right now on that issue
as a result of the post Fukushima flood hazard re-evaluations.
Right? So for plants across the country, the current flood
hazard based on the latest science is being re-evaluated, and
that is going to include all the latest information of what to
expect in terms of flooding issues.
Mr. Tonko. OK. And does the NRC review of a license
application consider water availability and competition for
water use within the watershed or coastal zone in the plant's
proposed location over the 30-year span of the license?
Mr. Baran. I believe all those issues would be addressed in
the environmental impact review, environmental impact
statement.
Mr. Tonko. And Chairman Burns, and to our other two
Commissioners, your thoughts on this matter as we look at a 30-
year window that reviews a license review or application, given
the climate change challenge, what are your thoughts as to how
we proceed forward?
Mr. Burns. Well, Mr. Tonko, as I think Commissioner Baran
said, those issues are taken into account in terms of the
licensing review, and actually, our licenses are issued
generally for 40 years--it is a 40-year license that is
generally issued. So those are looked at whether from--and
there may be safety as well as environmental aspects to it.
Part of the licensing of the plant does look at longer term in
terms of not just operation today, but operation over a period
of time. So I think those would be taken into account in that
regard.
Mr. Tonko. So has there been an adjustment in the thinking
in the applied science of all of this with the changed data
compilation that we have understood to be making a statement
now?
Mr. Burns. Well, I think what there is, there is an
evaluation. I would hesitate, and I have to check with the
staff and we could probably provide you an answer for the
record with respect to how that has changed. As Commissioner
Baran says, there are--on occasions, there have been plants
that may experience the high temperatures in the water source,
and that license conditions and all deal with that. I don't
know that we have actually looked at a particular trend or seen
a particular trend.
Mr. Tonko. Are existing plants assisting them in any way?
Mr. Burns. Pardon me?
Mr. Tonko. Is there any effort to help existing plants to
adapt to changing water temperature and drought?
Mr. Burns. Well, I think, again, that what they look at is
what those parameters are, and there may be an assessment of
what the margins are in terms of the levels or the temperature
levels, I would expect.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back the time.
The Chair now recognizes the chairman emeritus of the full
committee, Joe Barton from Texas, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
What happens to high-level waste at civilian reactors that
are decommissioned, Mr. Chairman? Mr. Burns?
Mr. Burns. Currently that waste is stored at the site.
Mr. Barton. Permanently?
Mr. Burns. Well, until there is a repository or a
consolidated storage site to take it to.
Mr. Barton. OK. I listened to the answers that each of the
Commissioners gave to Chairman Shimkus' question about Yucca
Mountain, and, you know, you were all agreeing that it was a
repository, but you weren't sure if you could put any funding
for it. Wouldn't it be--and I support Yucca Mountain as a final
repository. So there is no daylight between Chairman Shimkus
and myself on that. But I do think that given the status of
Yucca Mountain or the lack of status, you might say, that it
might be prudent to consider some sort of an interim storage
solution.
Mr. Chairman, each of the Commissioners, what are your
thoughts about moving forward with interim storage while we
hash out the final resolution to permanent, given the fact that
we are beginning to decommission these reactors? And I don't
think it is a good solution at all to have a high-level nuclear
waste at a decommissioned civilian reactor site out in the
country. So what are your thoughts on let's try to figure out a
way to do interim storage while we hash out permanent storage.
Mr. Burns. Well, Mr. Barton, the NRC, as you know, is the
regulatory--is a regulatory body. And what will come before us,
whether it is an application for the repository Yucca, or
whether interim storage facilities, we are prepared to look at
that and make a safety and security judgment on that. We have,
in the past, we did consider the licensing and approve the
licensing of an interim storage site which did not go forward,
the private fuel storage site I believe in Utah, and we have
had expressions of interest, and we may get an application from
waste control specialists----
Mr. Barton. Chairman, you are open to it.
Mr. Burns. We will do what, as you say, in that area, we
are prepared to receive an application and consistent with the
law----
Mr. Barton. Let's hear the other three Commissioners. Ms.
Svinicki?
Ms. Svinicki. Sir, again, as a safety regulator, our
obligation is to make sure that if there is no alternative and
this fuel ages in place for very, very long periods of time,
that we have the safety judgment that it can be safe on the
sites where it is located right now. So as a Commissioner, that
is our singular focus, is on whether or not it can be safely
stored in the absence of other national----
Mr. Barton. You all are very good at not answering
questions.
Ms. Svinicki. I don't have a----
Mr. Barton. I just asked a straight question. You know, you
are citizens. You all are some of the smartest people. You know
more about nuclear storage than anybody else in the country. I
am not asking for the Obama position, I am just asking
generally, if you are open to an interim storage proposal. You
know, that is all I am asking. So far I am 0 for 2.
Ms. Svinicki. I am confident that it is safely stored, but
as a citizen, I think that if it could be stored in fewer
locations, that would be desirable.
Mr. Barton. Thank you.
Mr. Ostendorff. Congressman Barton, I am open to an interim
storage solution with the caveat that I think our storage
security right now, those practices at operating as well as
decommissioned sites, is being done safe and securely now.
Mr. Barton. OK. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Baran. Congressman, this is, as you know, ultimately a
policy question for Congress. The Blue Ribbon Commission
recommended consolidated interim storage as part of the overall
solution to the Nation's high-level waste problem. You know, as
a citizen I could say that interim storage could allow some
decommissioned reactor sites to close completely. It would
create a place for the spent fuel that is being kept on site to
go. And it could reduce the FederalGovernment's liability for
failure to take title to the waste.
I just want to mention, though, that currently under the
Nuclear Waste Policy Act, I think you'd have to have a change
in the Nuclear Waste Policy Act to allow the Department of
Energy to take title to that waste, which I think would be
likely kind of a necessary predicate for interim storage as you
are imagining it.
Mr. Barton. Thank you. I will say it is refreshing, Mr.
Chairman, to hear people say that it is a policy question for
the Congress to address. That is a good thing. And I appreciate
their openness to it. With that, I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from California,
Mrs. Capps, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Capps. All right. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank you all for your
testimony today. I represent Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Plant
in San Luis Obispo, California. And this is a power plant that
is owned and operated by PG&E, a key part of our local economy
supporting hundreds of quality jobs in the area, and also
supplying efficient clean energy for a lot of people.
But it also sits very close to two significant earthquake
faults, the Hosgri Fault was discovered during construction of
the facility, but the Shoreline Fault was only discovered in
2008, and it comes within just a few hundred yards of the power
plant. These faults have raised numerous important safety
questions, particularly in the wake of the Fukushima disaster.
These question are particularly important as NRC considers
PG&E's applications to re-license Diablo Canyon's two reactors
for an additional 20 years.
After Fukushima, I urged the NRC and PG&E to suspend this
process, this renewal process, until seismic risks at Diablo
were better understood. And consideration of re-licensing was
suspended soon after, but now the NRC has recently started the
process.
So, Chairman Burns, can you provide a status update on the
license review process, and also outline the next steps and the
timeline going forward.
Mr. Burns. Yes, ma'am. There are two primary aspects to the
review: a safety review and the environmental review required
by the National Environmental Policy Act. The staff re-
initiated the safety review I think earlier this spring, and
more recently, published a notice on it with respect to the
scoping process for the environmental statement. And I think we
are about at the end of that comment period for the scoping. I
believe that the timeline for the decisionmaking would be for
the staff to make a decision by about 2017 with respect to the
renewal. Now separately, I think as you know, we are also--and
this comes in part out of post-Fukushima actions, but also, I
think, the ongoing interests with respect to an evaluation on
seismic issues--we also have a seismic evaluation underway.
PG&E provided information like other licensees did with
respect to the seismic re-analysis, and we have accepted that
for review, and we are doing that, and I think that is about on
the same timeframe.
Mrs. Capps. And would you highlight the steps that NRC is
taking and has taken to ensure the public participation and
transparency in this process? As you know, there is a great
deal of interest in the communities surrounding the Diablo
Canyon facility.
Mr. Burns. Yes, ma'am. Again, we have had a number of
public meetings, some related to the seismic analysis as well
as license renewal. The license renewal, I believe that there
is formal intervention in the proceeding, so that public
hearing process would go on. We have a couple other issues with
respect to how to treat--I guess the easiest way to say it--how
to treat PG&E's updates as a seismic review, whether as a legal
matter that involved a license amendment. I believe that is
still pending--that issue is still pending.
So that, again, is a participation process, and I know our
regional administrator has gone out as just part of the normal
process of the performance of the plant and will try to engage
the public.
Mrs. Capps. Great. Thank you. And after the discovery of
the Shoreline Fault, I worked with then-State Senator Sam
Blakeslee, who is a physicist who has studied these things, and
others, to require additional seismic testing of the areas
surrounding Diablo Canyon and the State did comply. And the
results of these studies were released last year by PG&E.
These studies will be examined by NRC and by an independent
panel of experts appointed by the State. I know you are aware
and part of that. I know that there are experts that you have
as well, but this independent--I have always said, you know, if
you are going to study something, have an outside third party,
independent team to come in and assess the seismic risk. Can
you assure us that no decision regarding re-licensing will be
made until the State's independent review of the seismic data
is competed?
Mr. Burns. Ma'am, my understanding is we are taking into
account the information developed by all the reviews with
respect to the seismic characteristics of this site. That is my
understanding.
Mrs. Capps. And I know my time is out, but is this going
to--are these results going to be incorporated into your own
analysis?
Mr. Burns. I believe we would take them into account, yes.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentlelady yields back her time.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Mississippi,
Mr. Harper, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks to each of
you for being here, and certainly your agency is charged with a
very important mission. It is important for the security of our
country, and it is an agency that must function properly. And I
would like to ask you a few questions, if I could, Mr.
Chairman. In 2012, the Advisory Commission on Reactor
Safeguards recommended the Commission not undertake any
revisions to the limits of occupational radiation exposure. Are
you aware of those recommendations?
Mr. Burns. In general terms I am, yes.
Mr. Harper. OK. And do you support this recommendation?
Mr. Burns. Well, I think we would take that recommendation
and evaluation into account in determining whether to go
forward with any particular changes to our rules. I think this
would probably bear mostly on our exposure, or radiation
protection, rules and in 10 CFR Part 20 of our regulations.
Mr. Harper. And are you aware that on March 18, the
Commission published an advanced notice of proposed rulemaking
to receive public comment on revising these standards?
Mr. Burns. Yes, I am.
Mr. Harper. What was the basis for pursuing this rulemaking
giving the ACRS recommendation?
Mr. Burns. Well, the rulemaking, as I recall, involves more
than the question of whether or not occupational standards
ought to be changed. In part, I think the question is whether
they ought to be changed in conformance with some international
recommendations. But there are other aspects, as I recall, of
the rule that might be considered. And right now at this point,
the point of the advanced notice is to receive public comment
to determine whether or not we ought to go forward at all with
a proposed rule, much less a final rule. And we haven't gotten
to that point as yet.
Mr. Harper. So what other aspects may have been considered?
Mr. Burns. I think there are ways of dose calculation.
There is some--some, say, probably more administrative type
changes. I would be happy to provide that for the record. But
it is more than, as I recall, more than just a question of
whether or not to reduce the permissible occupational dose.
Mr. Harper. And I would ask that you provide that
additional information for the record and the purposes of this
hearing.
And if I may ask you also, Chairman Burns, due to the
Federal Government's inability to open Yucca Mountain,
utilities currently store spent nuclear fuel in dry cask
storage at reactor sites in what are known, as you know,
independent spent fuel storage installations. In 2007, the
Commission directed that the design basis threat for these
facilities were adequate and safe. However, there is now an
effort to impose new security requirements upon licensees which
will necessitate licensees incurring significant costs and
require additional safety and training requirements. Has the
design basis threat changed since 2007?
Mr. Burns. I am not aware that it has.
Mr. Harper. So the answer would be no, is what you are
saying, Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Burns. I believe so.
Mr. Harper. OK. And if not, why is the Commission pursuing
additional safety requirements on dry cask storage facilities?
Mr. Burns. I presume--and some of my fellow Commissioners
may have something to say on that--that in looking at it, this
is in terms of trying to assure that the design basis threat is
met and that other upgrades that we deem necessary through the
public comment process.
Mr. Harper. OK. But it hasn't changed, and so, but now we
have got these additional safety requirements. Yes, sir, Mr.
Commissioner.
Mr. Ostendorff. Congressman Harper, if I may add, the
design basis threat review did not indicate a change to the
design basis threat. What we have as an agency, it is called
implementing guidance, which is used by licensees to execute
our regulations. So there are clarifying steps taken in that
guidance. It is my understanding--I was briefed on this just 2
weeks ago--it is my understanding there is not any ratcheting
up of standards in this new guidance.
Mr. Harper. I believe my time is up. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The Chair
now recognizes the gentlelady from Florida, Congresswoman
Castor, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning NRC
members. Thank you very much for your service to the country
and for being here this morning.
In Florida, consumers are still quite angry over--due to
the fact that they are on the hook for repairs and closeout to
the Crystal River nuclear plant. This will blow your mind, but
customers are on the hook for over $3 billion because the
utility in a repair situation did some things out of the norm
on their own and, in essence, broke the plant. They sometimes
refer to it as the ``Humpty Dumpty'' plant.
As the nuclear plants across the country age, and more of
these type of repairs have to be done. At Crystal River this
was the steam generator. I guess it's--one, a former NRC member
called this a mega screw up. They said something similar about
San Onofre as well.
Could you go through right now what is the NRC's role when
a utility embarks on these type of repairs?
Mr. Burns. Essentially, our role is an oversight role. We
may inspect, observe what what changes or, in effect,
construction type activity at a site. In some respects, we have
an approval role with respect to issuing amendments to a
license if that is necessary, because the nature of the repair
or the change to operation is such that it is beyond the
current license and it requires a change to the license.
Ms. Castor. So in a case like Duke Energy and its
predecessor and Florida Power at Crystal River, when they
embarked on doing some repair that was out of the norm. At that
point, does the NRC have oversight? Do you have the ability to
come and say, you know, what you are doing does not meet the
current standards there where we--can you say, no, do not
proceed with that repair, we do not agree?
Mr. Burns. We have--again, if it is an activity that would
not be within the scope of their current license, we would have
a role in terms of reviewing a proposed change before it is
implemented. But there are many types of activities at a plant
which are--which can be done within the scope of the license.
What the licensee is supposed to do is to do an adequate and
high quality evaluation of the nature of that activity.
Ms. Castor. Do any of the other members have a comment?
Yes, sir.
Mr. Ostendorff. Thank you for the question. I had a chance
to visit Crystal River back in 2010 when I first joined the
Commission. What we had here, think of a sphere that is made of
concrete called containment, and there is a tensioning cable
that went around the circumference of the sphere. Detentioning
that cable is part of a maintenance period. There is criticism
as to the technique that was used to detention this cable,
resulting in concrete cracks. NRC does not, from a regulatory
standpoint, go and micromanage exactly how the licensee
conducts its maintenance. We do make sure that plant is safe to
start up.
Ms. Castor. OK. How many nuclear plants are there in the
U.S. right now?
Mr. Burns. There are 99 operating plants in the United
States.
Ms. Castor. Are there many being built now, new plants?
Mr. Burns. There are five under construction. One, Watts
Bar plant, the Tennessee Valley Authority, will probably enter
operation next year.
Ms. Castor. And most of the nuclear plants that are in
existence today were constructed during what time period?
Mr. Burns. 1980s.
Ms. Castor. So these are aging plants. And it is likely,
over time, to meet their useful life that they are going to
need repairs. Do you feel that the NRC has the capability now?
I know you said your responsibility is just to--you don't want
to micromanage, but this is a $3 billion cost to customers in
Florida. They are on the hook for it, even though it was the
responsibility of the utility. We have got to do a better job.
Don't you see any future now with the NRC with these aging
plants, you have to take a more active role in ensuring that
the utilities meet a standard of care?
Mr. Burns. Well, we do take an active role, we have
rigorous requirements quality assurance in terms of activities,
in planning for the way activities are undertaken. We have a
maintenance rule that focuses on equipment in the plant and the
license--to the extent plants go into license renewal, we focus
on the aging of components. I think, as Commissioner Ostendorff
said, at some point, the operation and maintenance of the
facility is the responsibility of the licensee, they need to
conduct it in conformance with our safety requirements, and
that is where it is. I think from my standpoint and the
Commission's standpoint, we have significant requirements that
address----
Ms. Castor. Would you be willing to look into this moving
forward so that customers can avoid these kind of major costs
that are passed on to them?
Mr. Burns. And part of our oversight of plants, we
certainly will look at the question of maintenance and the
quality in terms of how operations and maintenance operations
are conducted.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentlelady's time has expired. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman form Kentucky, Chairman Whitfield,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much. On August 3rd, EPA
finalized its Clean Power Plan under section 111(b) of the
Clean Air Act. Of course, that regulation has created a lot of
controversy around the country, and many people think illegal
lawsuits have been filed. And as you know, EPA arbitrarily
selected CO
2
emission limits for each State, but
also, they allow for power upgrades--uprates in that
regulation.
And I was just curious if you all, or maybe you, Mr. Burns,
or anyone else would like to comment, tell me, did EPA actually
talk to you all about that plan before it was finalized? Did
anyone from EPA come and discuss this with you before they
finalized it?
Mr. Burns. No, not that I am aware of.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Now, what is the NRC's normal timeframe
for reviewing and approving these power uprate requests?
Mr. Burns. I think it will depend on the complexity of it,
but I usually think within probably a couple years.
Mr. Whitfield. Now you all have some pending uprate
requests before you?
Mr. Burns. I think we might, but I would have to check for
the record. It certainly is addressing power uprates and
reviewing it is something we have done over the years.
Mr. Whitfield. Have you all given thought whether or not
you need to adjust or otherwise accelerate your process for
reviewing and approving these power uprate applications as a
result of the Clean Power Plan?
Mr. Burns. No.
Mr. Whitfield. OK, OK. Well, your Web site says you have
four pending applications for power uprates. And there is a
table showing seven expected applications for power uprates.
And I am--of course, I don't know how many States going to go
submit their State implementation plans on time or anything
else. But this is an area is that obviously States are looking
vigorously for ways to meet the CO
2
standard, or
limits. And if you can produce more nuclear power, obviously
that is one way to do it. So I think that certainly is very
important issue to be focused on.
Let me ask you another question. We hear a lot about
modular nuclear power plants, would you give me your--are you
all taking the applications for modular nuclear plants or is
that premature, or--I know there are groups that are meeting
with DOE on a regular basis about modular plants, so what is
your all's perspective on that?
Mr. Burns. We do expect an application for a design
certification for a small modular unit. I think the application
will be filed in late 2016. And also, the Tennessee Valley
Authority has indicated it will seek what we call an early site
permit, basically a site approval, at the Clinch River site,
the site for a small modular reactor.
The other thing I would emphasize, Mr. Whitfield, in fact,
we had a workshop, I guess, last week jointly sponsored with
the Department of Energy where we are trying to engage the
community that may be interested in a small modular reactor or
advanced reactors to assure that when the time comes we are
prepared in terms of looking at the acceptance criteria and
things like that. So as I say, we have a couple of things
coming, coming and then we are trying to make sure we are
prepared for the longer term.
Mr. Whitfield. At one time I heard that the Commission was
not in a position regulatory to deal with these issues. Is that
accurate, or is that just a wild rumor that I heard?
Mr. Burns. What I think we are prepared for from the
licensing process, I am confident we can manage these types of
applications with the licensing process. What the difference
is--and these are some of the issues we have been working on
with DOE--is because some of the technology, the current is
nonlight water reactor technology, so that is where you want to
see what the gaps are in terms of the acceptance criteria,
things like that.
Department of Energy, in its R&D role, has prepared some
reports they shared with us, and as I say, we are keeping an
open dialogue there with them and as well as those who may be
interested in the industry.
Mr. Whitfield. Do you want to----
Mr. Baran. Sure. I just wanted to add, there are some
differences between small modular reactors and larger
traditional reactors, and those differences raise some
technical and potentially some policy issues that the agency is
actively working through. There are questions about control
room staffing, the size of emergency planning zones, how our
annual fee is going to work. And so the Commission, actually,
briefly addressed a couple of those issues with rulemaking and
looking at the fee question, and the emergency planning
question, and the staff interacting with the Commission are
looking at these other issues as well, so that there is good
regulatory certainty for potential applicants about what is the
path forward to get a license if you have a small modular
reactor design.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr. McNerney for
5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. I want to congratulate Mr. Baran on your
confirmation. I wouldn't want to go through that process
myself.
Mr. Chairman, is the NRC capable of managing its
significant growth in nuclear power if the Nation should decide
to go down that path?
Mr. Burns. I think we are capable of managing that. One of
the issues we are dealing with today is trying to look out 5
years, this is the Project AIM 2020 from the standpoint of
looking at what do we need to prepare for as well as looking at
where we are today. And because we grew a lot in the last
decade, we have, in terms of on our plate, a fewer number of
reactor applications. We had the discussion with Mr. Whitfield.
One of my concerns is that we are prepared if we get additional
applications, not only for small modular reactors or advanced
reactors----
Mr. McNerney. You get upgrades, you get new power plants,
you get small modular reactors. You get a whole slew of things.
Mr. Burns. Yes. I think part of what we want do and what we
are trying to look at through our Project AIM at positioning
ourselves that we maintain the technical expertise that we need
in those areas.
Mr. McNerney. Commissioner Svinicki, could you explain
Project AIM briefly please?
Ms. Svinicki. Well, as Ranking Member Tonko and a number of
members of the subcommittees addressed in their opening
statements, we have seen a very dynamic electricity industry
over the last few years. As a large organization, we lag a
little bit behind in adjusting as the regulator to the changes
to the regulated industry. So we find ourselves right now at
resourcing and staffing levels, and an organization not always
aligned to the regulatory work that is in front of us. So
Project AIM is a whole set of initiatives looking at bringing,
simply put--our H.R. Director said we need to move expertise in
alignment with the work in front of us and look at being able
to be efficient and effective, but maintain the expertise to be
agile, because based on the Clean Power Plan and other things,
it is very difficult for us to forecast 5 years from now or 10
years from now exactly how we need to be staffed and resourced,
but we are going to work on that efficiency and agility piece.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. Commissioner Baran, is there a
cumulative effect of regulation on the new licensing process?
In other words, is there an effect that would require licensing
to take another 5 years or something like that?
Mr. Baran. Well, we have several processes in place to look
at cumulative effects of regulation issues. One of the things
we do, for example, and these were instituted prior to my
arrival on the Commission. When a proposed rule for a new
requirement now goes out at NRC, that is accompanied at that
time with proposed implementation guidance, so that licensees
have a very clear sense of what is likely going to be required
of them. That makes it much easier for them to comment, it also
makes it easier for them to plan, to provide us with cost
estimates about what it might cost to comply. So that is one of
the things that we are doing already on an ongoing basis.
You know, licensing of new reactors and new reactor
designs, in some cases, it has taken a number of years.
Typically, in recent years, it has not been the fastest
process, and there are a variety of reasons for that. From my
point of view, and if I am looking toward a small modular
reactor being an application that we would expect next year,
what we, I think, as an agency are emphasizing to applicants is
you need to submit a high-quality application, and then we need
to be ready for it, and both sides really have to bring their A
game to it if we are going to get it done in a reasonable
timeframe.
Part of that is also thinking ahead, as I was mentioning to
Chairman Whitfield, what are the potential issues and the
potential challenges that we would need to resolve on a
particular license or type of application? Let's get that going
well in advance so that when that application actually comes
in, a lot of work has already been done to move us toward a
timely result.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. Commissioner Baran, what would it
take to get the Yucca Mountain project to move forward?
Mr. Baran. You are talking about for NRC's review of it?
Mr. McNerney. To get the project moving forward.
Mr. Baran. For NRC's review of it, the estimate that the
staff came up with for the cost of our adjudicatory proceeding
is somewhere in the range of 300 to 350 million. That would be,
I believe, the largest adjudication.
Mr. McNerney. This isn't just about money, the economic
project. There are other impediments in the way.
Mr. Baran. Well, as I mentioned earlier, and the reason I
haven't supported asking for that money is, you have to have an
applicant that's committed to their application. And so, you
are looking at years of an adversarial trial-like process to
get that license. I believe it's currently 288 contentions or
claims. That number could go up if the adjudication resumed.
And if you don't have an applicant that wants to defend its own
application, ultimately, they have the burden of demonstrating
that their application is going to be safe, I just don't see
how that process works.
So, you'd have to have an engaged applicant. DOE would need
money to do that, we would need money to do that. There are a
lot of things you need to make the process work.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time is expired. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Olson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the Chair. Welcome to our witnesses.
Nuclear power is an important part of America's energy
portfolio. Not far from my home is the south Texas project in
Bay City. It is a stable and reliable source of power to the
entire Gulf Coast, and a cornerstone of our grid. Either one
came online August 25th of 1988 to June 19th of 1989. The
electricity prepared provides 1,200 good-paying jobs for our
local economy, and brings prospects for the next generation of
science and engineering students. As I have mentioned to this
committee before, local schools, like Wharton County Junior
College led by President Betty McCrohan, have stepped up to
train the next generation of nuclear power workers.
As older employees retire from the plant, where they have
worked for decades, since it opened in late 1980s, training
like this is more critical than ever to fill these gaps.
Nationwide nuclear power is critical, as one continues to shut
down based on power, nuclear helps keep our grid running.
We love wind in Texas. We are number 1, but you can't run
an entire grid on wind.
My first questions are for Chairman Burns. We are not
building nuclear plants these days, new ones, the applications
for unit 3 and 4, NRC--at NRC for south Texas were filed on
September 20 of 2007. They are going nowhere quickly. So older
plants remain incredibly important.
In the coming years a number of these plants will begin the
process of asking for another extension beyond the typical 30-
year extension. How the Commission approached these requests to
extend the life of these older plants? What sort of time line
does NRC use to sort out these issues?
Mr. Burns. Thank you for the question. I had the pleasure
of going to South Texas site a few months ago and visiting down
there. I know what the support--I talked to some folks down
there in terms of the support in the community and the
importance with which they see it.
Our license renewal rule essentially provides for initially
a 20-year life extension. We are also in the process of
considering, and there has been research done--again, this is
something that the Department of Energy has also supported--
that looks at the potential for extension up to 80 years. That
is still on the horizon. We may hear something from industry
within the next few years, but we are trying to position
ourselves in terms of the research and all on that. But we have
a well-tested licensing renewal process. Now, about 75 of the
99 units currently in operation, I believe, have received
renewed licenses under that process.
And we have others either in the review process or expect
to come in the review. So I think we are well-equipped to
handle and have demonstrated the effectiveness of the license
renewal process.
Mr. Olson. Question for Ms. Svinicki and Commissioner
Ostendorff: If you could pick one change of law at the NRC that
would put that in place immediately--you are the all-powerful
king or queen--what would that be? Ms. Svinicki? Mr.
Ostendorff? You are the king, what would you want to do? What
would you want to change, one change?
Mr. Ostendorff. Well, that is a great question. I wish I
had a pithy answer to respond to you, Congressman. I would like
to give it some thought so I can get back to you.
Mr. Olson. Ma'am any ideas through you head? You are the
queen for a day.
Ms. Svinicki. I would do the same. I think Commissioner
Ostendorff and I were both also congressional staff in earlier
parts of our career, so I put aside my thought of changing law,
and now I just focus on complying with it.
Mr. Olson. OK. Chairman Burns, if this is not the
Commissioners' ideas, what would you change as a citizen, any
ideas? No?
Mr. Burns. One of the issues--and I know we, not struggle
with, but have had a lot of attention to, and I will venture a
guess--is that there is a provision that applies with respect
to power reactors on foreign ownership, domination and control.
And while that has, I think, a role, I think there is actually
greater flexibility in the materials area. This has been an
interesting area for investment and all. And it is something,
to some extent, it is a little bit out of what I call the
normal wheelhouse of the NRC.
So, I wondered if that is--but that is not a fully gelled
thought, maybe, but that is something I think about. And the
reason I think about that is because I remember--I think it may
have been in the Energy Policy Act--for example, originally we
had antitrust responsibilities which were also being done by
the Federal Trade Commission and Department of Justice, and
that was something that, I think, that we were relieved from.
Because again, if we are focused on safety and security, that
is where we want to be focused. So that is just sort of a
random idea.
Mr. Olson. Well, thank you. I am out of time.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman's time is well expired.
Mr. Olson. You have the crown on. For the record, what you
want to do, for the record, please, sir.
Mr. Baran. I am a small ``r'' republican. I leave it to you
all to write the laws and we will implement them.
Mr. Olson. I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of
the full committee, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Commissioner Baran,
my questions are to you. I understand that the nuclear industry
developed Severe Accident Management Guidelines, or SAMGs, in
1996 to respond to severe events involving multiple failures of
safety equipment in nuclear plants. So my question is, I have
four, but first: What are the benefits of emergency planning at
nuclear power plant facilities? And how can the focus on safety
protect the public and prevent the massive costs associated
with the Fukushima-style disaster?
Mr. Baran. Well, I think everyone agrees, and I don't think
there is any question, that Severe Accident Management
Guidelines, that kind of emergency planning, is crucial and
really valuable. The debate we had recently was about--or, the
question we had presented to us recently is, Should we make
that a requirement? It has been a voluntary initiative, as you
mentioned, it went into effect basically 1998. It wasn't really
inspected by NRC from 2000 on until after Fukushima. I think
you could ask industry, you could ask anyone who is a player in
this area, and they would tell you these are really important
planning tools, and SAMGs are a very good idea you want to have
at a plant.
Mr. Pallone. Well, can I ask you second, have these
requirements led to increased plant safety or increased
protection for public health and safety?
Mr. Baran. Yes, I think everyone views the Severe Accident
Management Guidelines as an enhancement to safety. And the
question is, really, Should they be enforceable? My view is
that they should be. The experience that we had in that period
where it was a--it still is a volunteer initiative--where it
was a volunteer initiative, we hadn't inspected; after
Fukushima, NRC inspectors went out to plants. And for the first
time in maybe 12 years, they had looked at what was the status
of these voluntary SAMGs. And it was pretty troubling what they
found. There were SAMGs that were outdated, hadn't been updated
in years. There were emergency responders that weren't trained
on the SAMGs. And as a result of that, the near-term task force
after Fukushima and NRC staff both recommended making that a
requirement so that it would be enforceable. I agree with that
view.
Mr. Pallone. OK. So obviously there they are still
voluntary, you answered that question.
Mr. Baran. Yes, yes.
Mr. Pallone. Can the Commission make them mandatory? Are
you moving in that direction? Do you have that power?
Mr. Baran. We could, we are not moving in that direction.
There was a recent Commission vote on a proposed rule that
covered, more broadly, a number of areas that Commissioner
Ostendorff referred to earlier post-Fukushima mitigation
issues. So it is a larger safety rule. The staff recommended
that in that proposal, we include a proposed requirement, for
the first time, for Severe Accident Management Guidelines. And
I supported including that as a requirement. I was the minority
on that. The majority felt we should not include it. And from
my point of view, that is a mistake. Everyone agrees you get a
safety benefit from it, and enforceability has a lot of value.
And when we had a Commission meeting on this, a public
Commission meeting, I asked industry representatives, Well, is
this going to be a burdensome thing to require this? The answer
we got back was ``Well, no, we are doing this voluntarily
now.'' It will not be a burdensome cost, it is little or no
additional cost to make it enforceable. From my point of view,
when you have a substantial safety enhancement and you have
something that is not burdensome, that is something we should
include in a proposed rule and the public should have an
opportunity to comment on that.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Well, I appreciate that. Let me
just ask one more thing. It may be the right answer. After
Fukushima, was there another review of these SAMGs and has that
made a difference in terms of updating the guidelines or
training personnel in response to Fukushima?
Mr. Baran. Yes, that was the review I referenced. After
Fukushima, there was an inspection of the status of the SAMGs
in all the plants across the country. And it was spotty, so
they--every plant had SAMGs, and the overall conclusion from
the staff was that they thought they would be effective. But
recently, when looked at the question should they be made
enforceable, we asked the staff, well, are you confident that
we would have effective SAMGs at every plant of the country if
we ever needed them if it remains a voluntary initiative? And
the answer I got back was no, we are not confident, based on
the history that they would be there when you needed them. For
me, that means it should be a requirement, or we should at
least propose it as a requirement and the public should have an
opportunity, all stakeholders should have an opportunity to
comment on it.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you very much.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Latta, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and
Chairman, Commissioners, thanks very much for being with us
today. Appreciate your testimony.
And over the work period, I was at Davis-Besse, which is
really a stone's throw from my district. And when I was there,
I saw firsthand some of the really significant investments that
have been made or are making--post Fukushima. And this mass
construction taking was the emergency water feed system, where
I learned about how nuclear facilities are working with the NRC
to continue their safe operations. I mean, there is a lot of
investment going on out there.
But if I could, Mr. Chairman, if I could start with you. If
I could ask this question: It has been touched on a little bit
by Chairman Whitfield. But I would like to approach a little
different area. You stated that last week that the NRC and
Department of Energy had a 2-day public workshop with
stakeholders for options for increased efficiency from both a
technical and regulatory perspective and the safe development
and deployment of innovative reactor technology.
I know that Chairman Whitfield talked to you mainly on this
small modular reactor. I would like to ask is more how can the
Commission establish a regulatory and licensing framework for
advanced technologies that reasonably assures private industry
a pathway towards commercial development? And I know that you
talked about, in regards to Chairman Whitfield saying that you
could manage it, and also--but if you could really get into the
advanced technologies and how you could get some detail in that
place?
Mr. Burns. Certainly. Again, what we tried to do with the
workshop, which we jointly sponsored with the Department of
Energy, was to engage those who are thinking about potentially
pursuing the advanced technology. Again, what I try to say is,
I think the basic ``how to license'' and the framework we have
for licensing, that is essentially sound. Whether you use the
one-step licensing, which the larger evolutionary reactors,
such as the AP 1000 being built that some are using, or you use
the older two-step-type licensing.
I think a couple of things, one of the things I think the
staff heard during the conference was whether there are ways of
perhaps, maybe stepwise, looking at systems and basically
getting to the point you are not so much issuing a license
because you issued a license for the entire facility, but you
get to some sort of a design approval or a stepwise process. I
think that is something I think the staff wants to explore some
more.
The other piece of this is, too--and this is the report I
alluded to that came in from the Department of Energy at the
beginning of this year to us--is to make sure that our general
design criteria, also acceptance criteria for the technology,
are they really in sync with what we are going to see with the
new technology?
The general design criteria have been there for many years.
They have served us well in terms of light-water technology,
but looking at how we may need to adjust that, so we are
continuing to engage with that.
Mr. Latta. Let me follow up with that, because this is
important for a lot of folks out there is that how can the NRC
establish the organization be responsive to the potential
applicants, but not forcing the existing licensees to fund
those costs as part of the annual fee assessment?
Mr. Burns. I think you put your finger on it in terms of we
are, I think as you know, we are basically a fee agency. Ninety
percent of our appropriation is recovered in fees, primarily
from the industry and the operating fleet.
There are probably ways, I think this is probably a
discussion with the Department of Energy in terms of whether,
again, because in their role in research and development,
whether there are ways in terms of providing assistance that
way. I know the DOE has done some of that.
Mr. Latta. I saw Commissioner Ostendorff, you were shaking
your head on that, would you like to respond to that?
Mr. Ostendorff. I would agree with the Chairman's comments,
I would just add that there are other technologies out there
that we have not received license applications for or design
certifications for, pebble bed reactors, molten salt, sodium-
based cooling systems. And these are technical areas that we
might have, at best, three or four people in the agency that
have some knowledge of these new technologies. And as we are
going forward looking at our fee-based rule requirements under
law, it is very difficult for us to justify, under our current
fee recovery arrangements, spending dollars for expertise that
is not going to benefit an existing or likely applicant in the
near term.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Latta. My time has expired, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas,
Mr. Green, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, like my
colleague from Texas, I wasn't happy that south Texas project
didn't expand. Of course, the market conditions changed with
Fukushima and Tokyo power, but I appreciate our Regulatory
Commission being here today.
Chairman Burns, with regards to Yucca Mountain, the NRC
safety evaluation report recommended should not authorize
construction because of certain land and water ice. I have been
to Yucca Mountain a couple years ago with our subcommittee, and
it is in the middle of Federal land owned by DOD and DOE.
Exactly what are the land and water rights requirements that
the safety evaluation report references?
Mr. Burns. The specifics, Mr. Green, unfortunately, I don't
know. We can certainly provide for the record, but they would
be, I think, outlined in the safety evaluation report. I
presume that they have do with State or local rights. And
again, that is what the staff is identifying, they are
identifying a legal constraint.
Mr. Green. The Federal Government doesn't own the water
rights to that land?
Mr. Burns. Again, I can't speak specifically to it. I think
the State owns the water.
Mr. Green. I can see the water there, but I can see the----
Has the NRC determined the funding level necessary to
complete the application, including adjudicatory hearing on
contested issues? If so, what is the amount that would finish
the application?
Mr. Burns. Again, our estimate would be somewhere on the
order of 300 to 330 million to complete the review, which would
be the adjudication and the outcome of any steps that would be
necessary at the outcome of the adjudication.
Mr. Green. Is that money available?
Mr. Burns. It has not been appropriated to the NRC.
Mr. Green. If that was appropriated, how long do you think
it would take for the NRC to complete proceedings, including
adjudicatory?
Mr. Burns. I don't have a firm guess. You would have to
sort of reengage the participants. Again, if I am looking at
what the original conception was under the Nuclear Waste Policy
Act, I would imagine it is a 3- to 4-year period, but that is a
guess.
Mr. Shimkus. Would the gentleman yield for one second? It
would be helpful if the NRC would place that in their budget
request so then we would get it authorized and then we would
get it appropriated. I yield back.
Mr. Green. Thank you. Obviously I support long-term interim
storage--I mean, long-term storage, now would go to interim
storage.
This year the NRC received two letters of intent to file
for consolidated energy storage facility, including one in
Andrews County, Texas, can you outline what the NRC's current
regulation for authorizing an interim storage facility?
Mr. Burns. Yes, the regulations that we have in place,
particularly that apply to that type of facility, they would be
applied. And as I indicated in answering an earlier question,
we actually have gone through a licensing process for a
similar-type facility some years ago to private fuel storage
which did not go into operation. So the basic licensing safety
framework, if you will, is there.
Mr. Green. Under current regs, I assume a public hearing
would be required?
Mr. Burns. It is not required, but an opportunity would be
noticed.
Mr. Green. Would the NRC request funds for fiscal year 2017
for the review of consolidated interim storage applications?
Mr. Burns. It is not in the budget that was submitted,
because basically when we got the letters of intent, that was
after the budget was in the process. What we would do is, I
think, we would look at our resources and reprioritize within--
to the extent it would begin in 2017.
Mr. Green. Well----
Mr. Burns. And if we were going on beyond--I mean, part of
this is a problem of timing, in terms of the development of
reviewed process of the budget was well underway before we had
the applications come in, but within our resources, we would
look and----
Mr. Green. Court decision--in light of the court decision,
I would hope the NRC would move not only on long term, but also
interim storage as required in the funding. First, you have to
ask for it to get it. Although maybe we could do that; but,
again, we are not the Appropriations Committee. But, Mr.
Chairman, I know I am out of time, but it is a frustration we
haven't been able to move to either interim storage or,
obviously, even long-term storage. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. I thank my colleague. The Chair recognizes the
gentleman from West Virginia, Mr. McKinley, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. During the recently
concluded Iranian nuclear deal, France and Russia both made
offers that if the Iranian government would suspend its nuclear
enrichment program, that they would provide them with reactor
rods, reactor fuel, and would process the spent fuel rods. An
interesting concept. Were you all approached from the NRC, the
American side that said--also say whether or not that--that was
an alternative to the Iranians continuing their enrichment
program? Were you approached to see whether or not America
would join in that?
Mr. Burns. No, we were not.
Mr. McKinley. Really? Interesting. Mr. Chairman, you also
said that you went down to the nuclear facility down in Texas.
I guess out of the 3,700 employees you have, probably numbers
of times, are out inspecting nuclear facilities; is that
correct?
Mr. Burns. I am sorry, I couldn't hear your question.
Mr. McKinley. I am assuming of the 3,700 employees or so
you have or whatever that final number is today, that some of
your spending time inspecting nuclear facilities; is that
correct?
Mr. Burns. That is correct. We have resident inspectors.
Mr. McKinley. So my question is, what if you weren't able
do that, would you be comfortable in having the perspective
utility companies just give you a report, or would you insist
on doing an inspection yourself?
Mr. Burns. No, I think we would be uncomfortable. I think
inspection as well as reporting is an important part of
oversight.
Mr. McKinley. I would think so. So should we be
uncomfortable with this agreement that the Iranians are going
to provide us with their own inspection of their nuclear
facilities and prevent western nations or others to come in and
do this inspection? Should we be uncomfortable with that?
Mr. Burns. I think that is something--as the NRC, we are
not involved in the issues.
Mr. McKinley. I can hear the music starting and the dance
is starting. I want to know, you wouldn't be comfortable with
it in America, so why should we be comfortable with it in Iran?
And I think it is pretty simple you set forth. Thank you on
that.
My last question to you is, has to do with this archaic
process of burying our waste. I am an engineer, a licensed
engineer, and I have problems with municipal waste, where we
are burying it; we are burying batteries and motor fuel; we
have the issue of carbon sequestration, we are burying that
into the ground; medical wastes are being thrown into the
ground; and now we have coal slurry that potentially is causing
some issues.
Why are we perpetuating this idea with our spent fuel rods
of having to program where we are going to bury that way. I
know France is recycling their material. And everyone says it
is very expensive and the French acknowledge that it is, but
isn't that better than burying our material and telling our
grandchildren its your problem to deal with later on?
Mr. Burns. The question--President Reagan in the 1980s
lifted the ban on reprocessing of nuclear waste at the time,
but basically said it would have to be a commercial enterprise.
Mr. McKinley. Is France wrong?
Mr. Burns. I am not saying France is right or wrong, but
France, in terms of the economy and its structure, is very much
different than the United States.
Mr. McKinley. But if we subsidized our alternative fuel so
dramatically, why aren't we doing that with spent fuel rods
instead of burying it and allowing the next generation to have
to deal with it?
Mr. Burns. I think that is a policy choice. It can be
safely disposed of. There is a possibility of reprocessing, but
it, again, that is a choice outside the purview of the NRC.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you very much. I yield back my time.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired. The word is
retrievable, not buried, just to help out here.
Chair recognizes the gentleman from Vermont, Mr. Welch.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much. I am delighted to be here
with the Commission. As you may know, I represent the State of
Vermont, and this is my opportunity on behalf of the Vermonters
I represent to talk about a couple of issues related to the
decommissioning of Vermont Yankee, an Entergy plant.
A little bit of background, as I understand it, this is the
first merchant plant that is going through the decommissioning
process. It is long, involved, expensive, and, obviously, very
consequential to Vermont. It is going to cost, by current
estimates, $1.42 billion. And that is going to take decades to
be accomplished.
But there are two recurring issues that I think it is
timely to discuss with you, not just because of the
implications they have for Vermont, but for this process going
forward of decommissioning plants. It is new and you are going
to have to make some critical decisions.
The two issues that have emerged in Vermont are one, public
participation and how extensive will that be or how limited
will it be.
And then second, are the decisions that your Commission
must make about the use of the decommissioning fund. There is
an inherent conflict, to some extent, between the merchant
generator, in this case, Entergy, which want to put as many
costs on that as possible, and the community that wants strict
limitations related to managing the radioactive contamination
situation.
Just a couple of things, and on the question of local
community involvement, the nuclear industry is involved through
the NEI, as you know. And recently, the Commission had a
teleconference that lasted several hours, about 2 \1/2\ hours
were devoted to hearing from NEI, which was essentially
Entergy, and only 20 minutes for the Vermont Public Service
Department. We have got a Governor who is very engaged from our
public service department, very engaged. And, of course, this
community in southern Vermont, it is critical what is going to
happen.
So the question I have for you, I want to finish with my
statement here, is how extensive are you going to allow
legitimate public representatives to have a seat at the table?
Right now, it appears to be almost limited to the public
comment period, and I am sure you read the comments and take
those into account, but when there is actual discussion having
our attorney general, or public service department that is
appointed by our Governor, and certainty community
representatives from the southern Vermont area, is really
consequential to considering the decision--getting evidence for
the decisions you are going to make.
Second, the decommissioning fund, how is that Trust Fund
going to be used? Among the positions advocated by Entergy was
to allow for spent fuel management and to store this in dry
caps. They are also asking for attorney fees to be paid,
membership dues at NEI. And our view is that this should be
strictly tied to the purposes that are allowed by the statute.
So the two things, as I mentioned, that we are really
seeking in Vermont is one, a seat at the table for legitimate
representatives of the community and the State through the
public service department. And number two, strict monitoring
and limited uses of that decommissioning fund itself.
And then, finally, this whole question of SAFESTOR, which
will have a 59-year lifespan minimum, means that site
restoration is going to be postponed literally for generations,
and there is a real big question as to whether or not we should
try to proceed with decommissioning sooner rather than later,
in 5 years rather than 60 years.
So that is my opportunity to speak to you on something that
is an enormous concern to our Governor down to the select
boards in the region of southern Vermont where Entergy is
exposed.
So, Mr. Commissioner, I will start with you. Thank you all
for your service. What can you tell me that I can tell my
Governor and my select boards about their ability to have a
seat at the table in an ongoing way as this decommissioning
unfolds?
Mr. Shimkus. And you have 5 seconds to do that. No, no, no.
Mr. Welch. Thank you.
Mr. Burns. Thank you for the question. What the NRC tries
to do is ensure through part of its oversight program that
there are opportunities for public engagement, public
information and the like. There are, for example, I believe the
attorney general has sought to intervene or raise contention in
proceedings, one of our proceedings, I think, actually related
to some of the decommissioning funding issues. So that is a
more formal opportunity to participate, and that is a real
opportunity to the extent there are issues that are within the
scope of the particular action under consideration, the
amendment, license or the like. Those are, I think, real
opportunities to participate.
With respect to SAFESTOR, our regulations allow for
different options on for decommissioning, and that includes
SAFESTOR, which is a longer period, in effect, into, if you
will, stabilization of the facility until ultimate
decommissioning occurs.
From the NRC standpoint and the safety standpoint, we
believe that that is a safe and legitimate way to go. Whether
other means, for example, more immediate decommissioning,
occurs is probably more a matter of the dialogue between the
State and the company itself, because we have found that
SAFESTORs is legitimate.
Mr. Welch. Well, legitimate, but you understand there is a
huge price that the community pays for that. You basically have
this very important facility and location, in this case, along
the banks of the Connecticut River, that essentially cannot be
used or developed, and there is an enormous economic impact on
the community when it loses the jobs that is associated with a
nuclear plant; that is something they will have to contend
with.
And the aspect of your answer that is of some concern to
me, is yes, you come to the conclusion that that is safe, but
the question I am asking is, Are there other safe ways to do
this that don't impose such an ongoing burden on the community
where they can't use this resource and redevelop it?
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time is close--I mean, way
over, but if the Chairman would respond.
Mr. Burns. Essentially, the options are primarily SAFESTOR
or going to a more immediate decommissioning and----
Mr. Welch. Right.
Mr. Burns. But again, the NRC, because it has found either
of those options to be a safe option, we don't compel one
versus the other.
Mr. Shimkus. The Chair----
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. The reason I
do----
Mr. Shimkus. No. It is very important to you, I know.
Mr. Welch. This is going to face all of us who have any
kind of nuclear facility, and having a legitimate way for the
community to be heard through their Representatives, I think,
is absolutely essential to the decommissioning process.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes.
Mr. Baran. Mr. Chairman, could I take just 10 seconds to
add one more thing?
Mr. Shimkus. If you take 10 seconds. I got my colleagues
who have been waiting patiently.
Mr. Baran. I just want to make sure that Mr. Welch knows we
now have initiated a rulemaking to take a fresh look at a
number of these issues, including what is the appropriate role
for State and local governments and the public, when--is the
current level public participation adequate; and also, looking
at this question of right now there are these three options
generally for decommissioning, including SAFSTOR. Is that
appropriate or is that something we should reconsider? We are
going to have an advanced notice of proposed rulemaking,
looking at those and other decommissioning issues.
Mr. Welch. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Flores, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Do I get 8 \1/2\ minutes
too?
Mr. Shimkus. Maybe 9 if you are nice.
Mr. Flores. I am just teasing.
I want to thank the Commissioners for joining us today. I
have got a slide I would like to have up on the screen if we
could, please.
While the slide is coming up, I wanted to talk about macro
issues, and this is the overall size and efficiency of the NRC.
Look, I am a pro-nuclear person. I think it is the ultimate
green fuel. It is the path forward for a low-carbon future,
particularly when it comes to the generation of baseload
electric power. But I have been somewhat concerned about the
expansive growth of the NRC to fit what we thought was going to
be a growth in nuclear generated electrical facilities, but it
hasn't materialized. But nonetheless, the agency continued to
grow. Hopefully this graphic will make it up pretty quickly.
And so the growth that materialized because of market
conditions, natural gas got very competitive in terms of
generation capability, and there was some change in the
regulatory environment that I think had an impact.
[Chart follows.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Flores. If you look at this chart, you will see that
the number of reactors and the number of licensing actions in
2005 is about 1,600, different metrics that the agency, the
Commission, was dealing with. Today there are, you said, 99. In
2016, I think there is going to be another one coming online.
So you will have 100. And then we are down to 900 licensing
actions.
So the total drop in activity for the NRC is around 38
percent on a weighted average basis. But, the head count has
grown by 21 percent over that time period. And the budget has
grown by a whopping 54 percent. So, I mean, this squarely fits
with what Reagan used to talk about when he talked about how
the only thing that continues to--that have eternal life and to
continue growing is a Federal agency.
So my questions are this, and also some of the things I saw
when you provided the document that is called the NRC Fiscal
Year 2016 High-Level Impacts in Further Reduction, the
Commission talked about these dire things that would happen for
just a 3 percent cut in its budget, or 4- or 5 percent cut in
its budget, and I was surprised. Was this document approved by
the full Commission before it was sent to this committee?
Chairman Burns, we will start with you.
Mr. Burns. The document--again, I am sorry----
Mr. Flores. The document was entitled ``NRC FY 2016 High-
Level Impacts in Further Reduction.'' And what it says, it
purports to describe anticipated reductions in NRC activities
with staffing at various levels of funding reductions. For
example, the document claims that a reduction of $30 million,
or just 3 percent of the NRC's current budget, and a reduction
of 140 full-time equivalents, which, again, has grown by 21
percent over the last 10 years, would result in a long list of
severe impacts, including a reductions by 25 percent in NRC
investigations of alleged criminal wrongdoing and termination
of the program to supply potassium iodide tablets. So are you
familiar with that document?
Mr. Burns. Yes. And I think we provide--we developed that
document, or staff developed that document, to give a picture
of the impacts of budget levels at different levels.
And, again, I think what--as we have tried to discuss here
this morning through Project AIM, through our processes of
planning and forecasting out, we are trying--we are taking
steps to be more efficient. We see a longer term, a smaller
NRC, that talks about 3,754 FTE. The Commission has put as a
control point at the end of 2016, to be at 3,600 employees.
Mr. Flores. Correct.
Mr. Burns. So those--I think those are responsible, again,
responsible steps. What I want to say, too, is we are looking
at that in terms of, I think the priority of some of the work
we need to get done. And some of that is working off, for
example, licensing backload. And I think our staff has gone a
great job doing that. So I think we are trying and taking the
steps to be a responsible regulator recognizing the changed
environment we are in, and we recognize we are going to be
smaller in the long term.
Mr. Flores. OK. Well, I mean. OK. Well, let me give you one
example that says ``The new reactor's office is budgeted to
review 14 applications, and is likely to have nine at most.''
And so it looks like that the Commission is over budgeted in
just that one area by $30 million for work that really won't
happen in 2016. So that is money that could be used somewhere
else to help catch up and not cause all the dire consequences
for a 3 percent cut in the budget.
I have other questions, but I will submit those for the
record in the interest of time. Again, I thank you for being
here. Look, I want to reiterate. I am a pro-nuclear person, but
we can't have this kind of unregulated growth when the market
is saying: Hey, we are not there anymore. So thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. I want to thank my colleague, and appreciate
his focus.
I would now like to turn to the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Johnson. But before I do so, he spent his summer being an
Undercover Boss. So I hope the NRC will not allow him to be an
undercover boss in a nuclear control room.
Mr. Johnson. That was on my list.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes. I hope not.
Mr. Johnson. I wouldn't want to be. I wouldn't want to be.
Trust me.
Well, thank you folks for being with us today. Very, very
important things we are discussing.
You know, on August 27 of this year, the Commission
released the voting record on mitigating strategies for severe
accident scenarios. A majority of the Commission voted to
exclude Severe Accident Management Guidelines, or SAMG, S-A-M-
G, from NRC requirements primarily because SAMGs are not
necessary for adequate protection and converting these
voluntary industry efforts to a mandatory requirement supported
by the kind of quantitative cost-benefit analysis mandated by
the back-fit rule.
Commissioner Ostendorff, in your vote on mitigation
strategies, you expressed surprise that the staff decided to
include new reactor design requirements as part of their
proposal. Your vote explained that, and I quote, ``This
provision should have been raised to the Commission as a
separate matter in advance of the draft proposed rulemaking
package,'' unquote. There were also significant concerns with
the staff's reliance on various qualitative factors.
So here is the question: Is there a tendency within the
staff ranks to, perhaps, engage in mission creep, to take on
activities or make proposals that are beyond the scope of the
task that the Commission has assigned the staff? And how does
the Commission guard against that tendency?
Mr. Ostendorff. Thank you for the question. I personally
believed in the context of this vote that the staff proposal to
the Commission for a new reactor piece was outside the scope of
what the Commission had previously directed. I would say that
that is not a routine occurrence. It has happened just on a
rare occasion, but, in this case, I disagree with what the
staff did and I--I don't want to say I called them out on the
vote, but I said I did not agree with how the staff approached
it in this vote.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Ostendorff. So this is not a--this is not a routine
type occurrence by the staff. I would say it is rarely done. At
the same time, we also want to foster an atmosphere at the NRC
where the staff feels free to raise their best ideas,
recognizing at the end of the day the Commission will make a
decision.
Mr. Johnson. Sure.
Mr. Ostendorff. That is what we did.
Mr. Johnson. I get that. I get that, that this may have
been an outlier. But what is the proper role of the Commission
in overseeing and directed the work of the NRC staff? Do you
think this kind of thing could be prevented?
Mr. Ostendorff. In this particular case, and, again, I
think it is a little bit of an anomaly, Congressman, the
Commission provides direction via what we call staff
requirements memorandum that represent a majority view of the
Commission that provides written direction to the staff. I
think that process works very, very well. And I would say, by
and large, our staff has been very diligent in complying with
the staff requirement memorandums from the Commission. From
time to time, there may be a difference of opinion. We don't
want to squelch these other ideas, recognizing at the end of
the day, the decision rests with the four of us at this table.
Mr. Johnson. OK. The NRC folks has a long list of
rulemakings in various stages of development. Will the
Commission review all ongoing activities to prioritize and
eliminate rulemakings with no safety-significant benefit as a
part of the Project AIM baselining? Any of you?
Mr. Burns. We look at the rulemaking, and in terms of our
development process, but one of the--I think we will be looking
at in terms of the re-baselining, and there is also what we
call an add/shed process. You know, if you are going to add new
things in, what--how it helps in terms of priorities. So we
will be looking at that, I think, as part of that process. What
we are getting from the staff is a proposal for how to do the
re-baselining and which would--the Commission will act on.
Mr. Johnson. OK. A 2014 Government Accountability Office
report found the NRC had an average annual attrition rate of
5.4 percent between 2004 and 2012. This equates to nearly 200
NRC staff leaving the organization each year. However, Project
AIM has a target of 3,600 staff for fiscal year 2016, a
reduction of less than 100 from current staffing levels, and
has suggested that only a slow and modest workforce reduction
is achievable. So how is the Commission encouraging NRC staff
to provide ambitious and achievable recommendations?
Mr. Burns. With respect to attrition, it is not always
where you want it or necessarily want it to be. For example, if
you have in one area--you know, one of our, I think, challenges
is in the administrative area, but not all those who decide to
go to another job or retire go that way. So what we are trying
to do is smartly focus that. We are looking at early outs and
buy-outs using those authorities in consultation with the
Office of Personnel Management. But, again, the Commission set
this sort of a target point at 3,600 for the end of fiscal year
2016. And, again, we hope we smartly can do that.
Part of it is, too, is when you get some of that attrition,
for example, if you have resident inspectors or inspectors
attrited, those are things you want to replace to keep, you
know, the key oversight aspects available. So it is not as easy
sometimes as just the pure drift down from the 5 or 5.4
percent.
Mr. Johnson. OK. All right. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time is expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Kinzinger, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kinzinger. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you
all for being here and the service that you do. Really
appreciate it.
You know, given that efficiency is one of the NRC's core
values regarding the principles of good regulation on its Web
site, one of which states that the American taxpayer, the rate-
paying consumer, and license fees are all entitled to the best
possible management and administration of regulatory
activities. I have a few questions regarding the budget and
rulemaking process at the Commission as things currently stand.
As a fee-based agency, your Commission is statutorily
required to recover 90 percent of your budget through the
annual collection of fees from licensees. And referring back to
the value of efficiency as one of the NRC's principles of good
regulation, it is pretty obvious that the need for an
established credible process for developing a budget based on
workload projections is necessary to determine responsible fee
assessments. Unfortunately, the lack of an effective budget
development process has long been an issue. In 2013, the NRC
Inspector General found that the Commission had an incomplete
implementation of planning, budgeting, and performance
management process, and noted that the budget formulation and
execution process are not actually aligned.
Today, the lack of an effective budget development process
is something that is still outstanding, which is why I raise
this issue of particular concern through a letter to the GAO.
In that letter is a request for the GAO to study and make
recommendations on how best to improve the budget process for
the NRC.
Mr. Chairman, what is the status of the Commission's
implementation of a new budget process?
Mr. Burns. I believe a revised management directive, if it
has not been issued, is pending. And I think it was created to
address that aspect of----
Mr. Kinzinger. So it is done? It is fixed?
Mr. Burns. I need to just consult with our CFO just to
confirm, but I believe that was a process underway. Whether
that revised management directive has been issued, I am just
not sure. Be happy to provide that----
Mr. Kinzinger. Any other--go ahead.
Ms. Svinicki. Under standing Commission direction, the
revision to this budget process will have to be a vote of our
Commission. Although I believe the chairman is probably
reflecting the fact that the staff has prepared something for
our consideration, it has not been submitted to us yet.
Mr. Ostendorff. I would just say, Congressman, that we
agree that there are some areas of needed improvement in the
budget process. Maureen Wylie is our new chief financial
officer who was brought into the agency from elsewhere in the
Federal Government. We are very confident, under her
leadership, we will be able to move forward and make these
improvements.
Mr. Kinzinger. So you all think by 2017 this is going to be
the case? We are going to be in good shape on the budget
process?
Mr. Burns. I couldn't----
Mr. Kinzinger. By 2017 we are going to be good? Hopefully?
Mr. Burns. I think we will be.
Mr. Kinzinger. OK. Good.
Mr. Burns. I am confident.
Mr. Kinzinger. I like to hear that. The NRC last updated
its management directive governing the long-range planning
budget formulation and resource management in 1989. Since that
time, the organization has seen significant changes, both
internally and with industry. NRC's inability to update this
directive resulted in an inefficient process that complicates
the overall effectiveness of the organization. Do you have any
idea when the Commission will finalize updating its management
directive?
Mr. Burns. This is the one I was referring to, and
Commissioner Svinicki reminded me, too, needs to come to the
Commission. Again, the timing--we expect by the end of the
year. That would be the objective, by the end of the year.
Mr. Kinzinger. OK. And so I guess more generally, how can
the Commission ensure that it is responsible to the--or
responsive to the changing environment of the nuclear
regulatory industry?
Mr. Burns. Well, I would let others speak as well, but I
think part of it is us listening, engaging with industry, other
stakeholders. Some of what I think we have described here today
in terms of thinking in the future in terms of are we going to
get new types of applications, being open and hearing what
people are thinking, what is on the minds of the industry. I
think being responsive in things like the cumulative effects of
regulation, that is, again, a way of us, I think, getting
better doing our work in a more effective way and still
focusing on what, at the end of the day, is our core mission:
safety and security.
Mr. Kinzinger. Good. Well, I appreciate, again, all your
work. I have four nuclear power plants in my district. So this
is very important to ensure that, you know, these are
successful. They provide a lot of power for Illinois, lot of
power for my district, and good-paying jobs. So we appreciate
the security and safety, but we also appreciate you doing it
without unnecessary burden on these fantastic power plants. So
with that, I will yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. And one of
the questions I was going to ask, but I am not, I am just going
to make a statement, is that when plants get decommissioned, if
we don't look at adjusting the rate to pay for the process, the
burden can get so high then you may have unintended
consequences. So that is part of the budgetary questions I
think my colleagues were trying to point to.
But I want to thank you, right off of our break to be able
to be in here, sit through two subcommittees for as long as you
have. We appreciate the work you do. We appreciate the
responses you provide to us, and also the work you do for this
country.
I want to remind you all that the hearing record will
remain open for 10 business days. You may receive additional
questions submitted for the record. We would ask you respond to
any of those questions in 10 business days.
And with that, seeing no other members, I will call this
hearing adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:09 p.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Today we continue our oversight of the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission and thank the Commissioners for joining us today. I
would especially like to welcome Chairman Burns and
Commissioner Baran on their first appearance with us since
being confirmed a year ago.
Clean, safe nuclear energy is, and will continue to be, a
vital component of our diverse energy portfolio. Currently, 99
operating nuclear power plants generate approximately 20
percent of the electricity we consume. In 2016, the first new
nuclear power plant in a generation is expected to begin
operations in Tennessee, while four more reactors continue to
make significant construction progress in Georgia and South
Carolina.
Just last week I visited the Cook Plant with my friend and
former colleague, West Virginia Senator Shelley Moore Capito.
Cook is one of the two nuclear power sites along the shoreline
of Lake Michigan in my district. During our tour, we saw
firsthand the safety and emergency preparedness upgrades that
have taken place over the last 4 years as a result of the
Commission's response to the Fukushima accident in Japan. NRC's
``lessons learned'' process was a beneficial reexamination of
the United States' nuclear fleet and identified improvements in
safety and performance.
While the Commission resolves the remaining safety
significant post-Fukushima priorities, I encourage the NRC to
next address issues and take action to increase the efficiency
of the organization. Like all Government agencies, the NRC has
a responsibility to be a good steward of taxpayer resources, be
responsive in a transparent and timely manner to its licensees,
and adhere to its organizational principles to execute its
mission. An NRC well positioned for the 21st century will help
ensure nuclear continues to help power the United States for
generations to come.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Mr. Burns' response to submitted questions for the record
has been retained in committee files and also is available at
http://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF18/20150909/103923/HMTG-
114-IF18-Wstate-BurnsS-20150909-SD057.pdf.]
