- EXAMINING LEGISLATION TO IMPROVE MEDICARE AND MEDICAID

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING LEGISLATION TO IMPROVE MEDICARE AND MEDICAID

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 3, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-98

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

99-572 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California7
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          KATHY CASTOR, Florida
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina         Massachusetts
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TONY CARDENAS, California
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
CHRIS COLLINS, New York                  officio)
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Gene Green, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     3
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Hon. Brett Guthrie, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     6
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, prepared statement........................    68

Witnesses

Hon. Lynn Jenkins, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Kansas.........................................................     7
Prepared statement...........................................    10
Katherine M. Iritani, Director, Health Care, Government
Accountability Office..........................................    12
Prepared statement...........................................    15
Anne L. Schwartz, Ph.D., Executive Director, Medicaid and CHIP
Payment and Access Commission..................................    37
Prepared statement...........................................    39
Answers to submitted questions...............................   105

Submitted Material

H.R. 2878, Section 1 of Public Law 113-98 Amended, submitted by
Mr. Pitts......................................................    70
H.R. [1362], the Medicaid REPORTS Act, submitted by Mr. Pitts....    72
H.R. 2151, the Improving Oversight and Accountability in Medicaid
Non-DSH Supplemental Payments Act, submitted by Mr. Pitts......    76
H.R. [1361], Section __ Amended, submitted by Mr. Pitts..........    81
Discussion Draft, H.R. ___, the Quality Care for Moms and Babies
Act, submitted by Mr. Pitts....................................    83
Statement of American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
November 3, 2015, submitted by Mr. Pitts.......................   104

EXAMINING LEGISLATION TO IMPROVE MEDICARE AND MEDICAID

----------

TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 3, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:15 a.m., in
room 2322 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joseph R. Pitts
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Pitts, Guthrie, Shimkus,
Blackburn, Lance, Griffith, Bilirakis, Long, Bucshon, Brooks,
Collins, Green, Castor, Sarbanes, Schrader, Kennedy, and
Pallone (ex officio).
Also present: Representative Loebsack.
Staff present: Clay Alspach; Chief Counsel, Health; Rebecca
Card, Assistant Press Secretary; Karen Christian, General
Counsel; Graham Pittman, Legislative Clerk; Michelle Rosenberg,
GAO Detailee, Health; Chris Sarley, Policy Coordinator,
Environment and the Economy; Heidi Stirrup, Policy Coordinator,
Health; Josh Trent, Professional Staff Member, Health;
Christine Brennan, Democratic Press Secretary; Jeff Carroll,
Democratic Staff Director; Tiffany Guarascio, Democratic Deputy
Staff Director and Chief Health Advisor; Rachel Pryor,
Democratic Health Policy Advisor; Samantha Satchell, Democratic
Policy Analyst; and Arielle Woronoff, Democratic Health
Counsel.
Mr. Pitts. OK. I will ask our guests to please take their
seats, and the subcommittee will come to order. The Chair will
recognize himself for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Today's hearing will examine five bipartisan legislative
bills designed to make commonsense improvements to the Medicare
and Medicaid programs.
First, the committee is happy to have with us one of our
own colleagues, Representative Lynn Jenkins from Kansas.
Representative Jenkins will be testifying on our first panel
about a bill she is sponsoring, H.R. 2878.
This bill would simply prohibit Medicare contractors from
enforcing supervision requirements for outpatient therapeutic
services and critical access in small rural hospitals for
another year.
The Senate companion to this bill was approved by the
Senate Finance Committee in June, so we are pleased to be able
to review this bill today.
On our second panel, we will hear from representatives of
the Government Accountability Office, GAO, and the Medicaid and
CHIP Payment and Access Commission, MACPAC.
GAO and MACPAC will help us in our review of four
bipartisan bills to improve Medicaid. The first Medicaid bill
is an updated version of H.R. 1362, the Medicaid REPORTS Act,
by Vice Chairman Guthrie.
This bill seeks to address GAO and MACPAC findings that the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, CMS, does not
collect accurate and complete data from all States on the
various sources of funds to finance the non-Federal share.
This bill requires States to submit a report at least once
a year on sources of funds used to finance the non-Federal
share of expenditures in the Medicaid program.
This issue is important policy because State financing
approaches affect Medicaid payment methodologies and payment
amounts, which may affect enrollees' access to services.
The next Medicaid bill is H.R. 2151, sponsored by our
colleague, Representative Chris Collins, the Improving
Oversight and Accountability in Medicaid Non-DSH Supplemental
Payments Act, would improve the calculation, oversight, and
accountability of non-DSH supplemental payments under the
Medicaid program.
This is important because GAO founds gaps in Federal
oversight of high-risk supplemental payments including a lack
of information on the providers receiving them, inaccurate
payment calculation method and a lack of assurances the
payments were used for Medicaid purposes.
In 2014, MACPAC recommended that the HHS collect, and make
publically available, provider-label non-DSH supplemental
payment data in a standard format that enables analysis.
Thirdly, the updated version of H.R. 1361, Medicaid Home
Improvement Act, sponsored by Representative Guthrie, would
establish a Federal cap on the home equity allowance consistent
with the current Federal default of $552,000.
This bill would preserve existing beneficiary protections
but help protect taxpayers by updating the limit of allowable
equity interest a beneficiary can have in their home. This is a
commonsense step to prevent cost shifting from the private to
the public sector.
And finally, the Quality Care for Moms and Babies Act,
sponsored by Representatives Engel and Stivers, seeks to
improve the quality, health outcomes, and value of maternity
care under the Medicaid and CHIP programs by developing
maternity care quality measures.
This bill would authorize the appropriations of $16 million
for HHS to identify and publish quality measures for maternal
and infant health.
Together, these five bills continue the commitment that
this Congress has to strengthen the Medicare and Medicaid
programs to help sustain these important safety net programs
for those most relying on them.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for agreeing to
testify today, and I yield back and now recognize the ranking
member of the subcommittee, Mr. Green, 5 minutes for his
opening statement.
[The legislation appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Joseph R. Pitts

The subcommittee will come to order.
The chairman will recognize himself for an opening
statement.
Today's hearing will examine five bipartisan legislative
bills designed to make common-sense improvements to the
Medicare and Medicaid programs.
First, the committee is happy to have with us one of our
own colleagues, Representative Lynn Jenkins from Kansas.
Representative Jenkins will be testifying on our first panel
about a bill she is sponsoring, H.R. 2878. This bill would
simply prohibit Medicare contractors from enforcing supervision
requirements for outpatient therapeutic services in critical
access and small rural hospitals for another year. The Senate
companion to this bill was approved by the Senate Finance
Committee in June, so we are pleased to be able to review the
bill today.
For our second panel, we will hear from representatives of
the Government Accountability Office (GAO) and the Medicaid and
CHIP Payment and Access Commission (MACPAC). GAO and MACPAC
will help us in our review of four bipartisan bills to improve
Medicaid.
The first Medicaid bill is an updated version of H.R. 1362,
the Medicaid REPORTS Act, by Vice Chairman Guthrie. This bill
seeks to address GAO and MACPAC findings that the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) does not collect accurate
and complete data from all States on the various sources of
funds to finance the non-Federal share. This bill requires
States to submit a report at least once a year on sources of
funds used to finance the non-Federal share of expenditures in
the Medicaid program. This issue is important policy because
State financing approaches affect Medicaid payment
methodologies and payment amounts, which may affect enrollees'
access to services.
The next Medicaid bill is H.R. 2151, sponsored by our
colleague, Rep. Chris Collins. The ``Improving Oversight and
Accountability in Medicaid Non-DSH Supplemental Payments Act''
would improve the calculation, oversight, and accountability of
non-DSH supplemental payments under the Medicaid program. This
is important because GAO found gaps in Federal oversight of
high-risk supplemental payments, including a lack of
information on the providers receiving them, inaccurate payment
calculation method, and a lack of assurances the payments were
used for Medicaid purposes. In 2014, MACPAC recommended that
the HHS collect and make publicly available provider-level non-
DSH supplemental payment data in a standard format that enables
analysis.
Thirdly, the updated version of H.R. 1361, Medicaid HOME
Improvement Act -sponsored by Rep. Guthrie-would establish a
Federal cap on the home equity allowance consistent with the
current Federal default of $552,000. This bill would preserve
existing beneficiary protections, but help protect taxpayers by
updating the limit of allowable equity interest a beneficiary
can have in their home. This is a common-sense step to prevent
cost-shifting from the private to the public sector.
Finally, the Quality Care for Moms and Babies Act,
sponsored Reps. Engel (NY) and Stivers (OH) seeks to improve
the quality, health outcomes, and value of maternity care under
the Medicaid and CHIP programs by developing maternity care
quality measures. This bill would authorize the appropriation
of $16 million for HHS to identify and publish quality measures
for maternal and infant health.
Together these five bills continue the commitment this
Congress has to strengthen the Medicare and Medicaid programs
to help sustain these important safety net programs for those
most relying on them.
I want to thank our witnesses for agreeing to testify
today. I will yield to anyone on my side seeking time.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GENE GREEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome our
colleague from Kansas. Thank you for being here today.
We are here to examine five legislative proposals. One
impacts the Medicare Part B program and the others affect the
Medicaid program. As we know, the Medicaid program has served
as a critical safety net for the American public since its
creation on 1965, 50 years ago this year.
Today, over 70 million low-income Americans rely on
Medicaid for comprehensive affordable health care. Medicaid
covers more than one in three children, pays for nearly half of
all births and accounts for more than 40 percent of the
Nation's total cost for long-term care.
One in seven Medicare beneficiaries is also a Medicaid
beneficiary--dual eligible. The Quality Care for Moms and
Babies Act, the discussion and draft put forth by Reps. Engel
and Stivers, will improve health outcomes for women and
children who depend on Medicaid.
This legislation will authorize funding for HHS to develop
quality measures for maternal and infant health and award
grants related to care quality and I support this important
legislation.
I am concerned about the other legislation we are
considering, such as the Medicaid REPORTS Act and proposals
requiring additional auditing on States that are overly
burdensome, proscriptive, and likely intended to chip away at
the Medicaid program.
Additional transparency on Medicaid payments is a goal we
all share. My priority is always including ensuring Medicaid
beneficiaries have access to the care that they need by
supporting providers that serve beneficiaries who otherwise
have nowhere else to go for the necessary care.
However, these bills as structured will not achieve our
goal of fully understanding Medicaid payments and whether these
payments are adequate to guarantee equal access for
beneficiaries within the Medicaid program.
My State of Texas uses supplemental and Medicaid DSH
payments in a unique way. These sources of funding are an
incredible and important revenue stream for hospitals and
providers that serve a large portion of Medicaid beneficiaries
and the uninsured.
For example, in Texas supplemental payments are used for
DSRIP and I want to make sure we maintain the flexibility so
CMS and States can deliver each Medicaid program the best way
for its unique patient base.
Providers in a Medicaid program must be paid a fair rate.
Given the complexities and the 56 distinct Medicaid programs,
there is a nuanced way to address these issues.
The question you need to ask is its full payment that a
provider receives for treating a Medicaid enrollee fair and
sufficient to ensure equal access.
Unfortunately, legislation like Medicaid REPORTS Act, H.R.
2125, won't get us the information we need to see the full
picture and it may actually put more burdens on the States.
They are not in line with the actions CMS has taken to improve
in the area and I look forward to learning more about this
complex issue.
Reforms done for the right reasons and nuance in an
intelligence way can truly improve how CMS ensures that
payments to Medicaid providers are sufficient and enforce equal
access to Medicaid beneficiaries.
Such proposals should be a priority for our committee and I
look forward to a comprehensive discussion on ways we can
improve transparency, strengthen coverage and expand access to
providers and increase the quality of health care.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Green follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Gene Green

Good morning and thank you all for being here today. We are
here to examine five legislative proposals. One impacts the
Medicare Part B program and the others affect the Medicaid
program.
As we know, the Medicaid program has served as a critical
safety net for the American public since its creation in 1965,
50 years ago this year.
Today, over 70 million low-income Americans rely on
Medicaid for comprehensive, affordable health insurance.
It is a lifeline for millions of children, pregnant women,
and people with disabilities, seniors, and low-income adults.
Medicaid covers more than 1 in 3 children, pays for nearly
half of all births, and accounts for more than 40 percent of
the Nation's total costs for long-term care.
One in 7 Medicare beneficiaries is also a Medicaid
beneficiary.
The Quality Care for Moms and Babies Act, a discussion
draft put forth by Representatives Eliot Engel and Steve
Stivers, would improve health outcomes for the women and
children who depend on Medicaid.
This bipartisan legislation builds on the Pediatric Quality
Measures Program, which is the only program targeting quality
performance measurement reporting in the Medicaid and CHIP
programs.
Remarkably, it does not currently include a maternal and
infant quality core set.
This legislation will authorize funding for HHS to develop
quality measures for maternal and infant health, and award
grants related to care quality. I support this important
legislation.
I am concerned about other legislation we are considering,
such as the Medicaid REPORTS Act and proposals requiring
additional auditing on States that are overly burdensome,
prescriptive, and likely intended to further chip away at the
Medicaid program.
Additional transparency on Medicaid payments is a goal we
all share.
My priorities have always included ensuring Medicaid
beneficiaries have access to the care that they need by
supporting providers that serve beneficiaries, who would
otherwise have nowhere else to go for necessary care.
However, the way these bills are structured will not
achieve our goal of a full understanding of Medicaid payments,
and whether those payments are adequate to guarantee equal
access for beneficiaries within the Medicaid program.
My State of Texas uses supplemental and Medicaid DSH
payments in unique way.
These sources of funding are an incredibly important
revenue stream for hospitals and providers that serve a large
portion of Medicaid beneficiaries and the uninsured.
For example, in Texas, supplemental payments are used for
the DISRIP (``dis-rip''), and I want to be sure we maintain
that flexibility so CMS and States can deliver each Medicaid
program in the best way for each unique patient base.
Providers in the Medicaid program must be payed fair rate.
Given the complexities and the 56 distinct Medicaid
programs, there is a nuanced way to address these issues.
The question we need to be asking is, ``is the full payment
that a provider receives for treating a Medicaid enrollee fair
and sufficient to ensure equal access?''
Unfortunately, legislation like the Medicaid REPORTS Act
and H.R. 2125 won't get us the information we need to see the
full picture and may actually put more burdens on States.
And, they are not in line with actions CMS has taken to
improve in this area.
I look forward to learning more about this complex issue.
Reforms done for the right reasons, in a nuanced and
intelligent way, can truly improve how CMS ensures that
payments to Medicaid providers are sufficient and enforce equal
access for Medicaid beneficiaries.
Such proposals should be a priority for this committee, and
I look forward to a comprehensive discussion on ways to improve
transparency, strengthen coverage, expand access to providers,
and increase the quality of care.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

Mr. Green. And Mr. Chairman, I will yield the remainder of
my time to my colleague from Iowa, Dave Loebsack.
Mr. Loebsack. I thank Mr. Green for yielding.
I also want to thank my colleague, Congresswoman Jenkins,
for testifying here today on our bill. I am happy to be the
lead Democratic cosponsor of H.R. 2878.
It has been a pleasure to work with her on this issue. As a
native Kansan, she truly understands the needs of rural
Americans and I thank her for her bipartisan work on the bill.
Basically, what 2878 would do is suspend the physician
direct supervision requirement for outpatient therapeutic
services furnished at critical access hospitals and small rural
hospitals until January of 2016.
I often visit critical access hospitals in my district.
There are many, given that I represent rural Iowa, and the
number-one concern I have heard about recently was this direct
supervision issue.
In 2009, CMS issued a rule that mandated direct supervision
for all outpatient therapeutic services at these hospitals.
In response to concerns over the implementation of this
policy they delay the enforcement through 2013, which was
extended by Congress to 2014.
Direct supervision requires that a physician is immediately
available when the service is provided. This is difficult in
many of these rural settings.
Many outpatient services such as continued chemotherapy,
administration of IV fluids or drawing of blood can be safely
administered under general supervision, a fact that CMS itself
recognized in its delay of the policy.
Further, small rural hospitals often face staffing and
workforce shortages that make direct supervision of these
services incredibly difficult.
There are a lot of challenges facing our rural hospitals,
as you know all too well, Congresswoman Jenkins. This
legislation, I think, would go some distance to remedying at
least one of those issues facing them and I thank you for
introducing this legislation. I am happy to be a part of it,
and I yield back.
Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman and now recognizes
the vice chair of the subcommittee, Mr. Guthrie, 5 minutes for
an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BRETT GUTHRIE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate my
classmate from the 2008 class coming in, being here with us
this morning, Ms. Jenkins.
But thank you, and I appreciate you holding this hearing on
the number of important bills. Today, the committee is
examining two bills that I introduced--H.R. 1361, the Medicaid
Home Improvement Act, and H.R. 1362, the Medicaid REPORTS Act.
These are both good Government bills that help strengthen
the Medicaid program and protect valuable taxpayer dollars.
H.R. 1361, the Medicaid Home Improvement Act, caps the maximum
allowable equity for beneficiaries to qualify for long-term
care under Medicaid.
Currently, in some States those with home equities--not
home values but home equities--above $828,000 can qualify for
Medicaid assistance. My bill reindexes the maximum threshold of
$500,000, adjusted for inflation.
With an average home sale in the United States at $221,000,
the current limits allow those not truly in need to access
Medicaid dollars, draining Federal and State dollars.
H.R. 1362, the Medicaid REPORTS Act, requires States to
submit an annual report that identifies the sources and amounts
of funds used by the State to finance the non-Federal share of
Medicaid.
With the growing burden the Medicaid program is placing on
the Federal budget and those of each of our States, it is
important that we know how States are coming up with the
dollars necessary to meet their Medicaid match.
Again, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate you holding this hearing
to examine these and other important issues and I look forward
to talking more with our witnesses and yield back the balance
of my time.
Anybody seeking time? I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman.
As usual, all written opening statements of the committee
will be made part of the record and we will proceed to our
first panel.
On our first panel today we have the Honorable Lynn
Jenkins, Second District of Kansas, and we thank you for coming
to talk about your legislation.
You may proceed.

STATEMENT OF HON. LYNN JENKINS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF KANSAS

Ms. Jenkins. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Green,
honorable members of the committee, thank you for holding this
hearing and inviting me to speak on H.R. 2878, a critical piece
of legislation.
The bill would delay Medicare's physician direct
supervision requirement for outpatient therapeutic services in
critical access and small rural hospitals until 2016.
In January of 2014, the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare
Services began enforcing a requirement that physicians must
supervise outpatient therapy at critical access hospitals and
other small rural hospitals.
CMS' decision meant that routine outpatient procedures such
as drawing blood or undergoing active therapy would have to be
directly supervised by a physician.
This decision by CMS would have put a severe strain on
providers, particularly those in rural areas, while providing
no quality improvements for the patients they serve.
Most of these outpatient procedures are relatively simple,
are very safe and would not benefit from a Federal mandate that
that physician always be in the room, and as a practical matter
in rural hospitals across Kansas such a requirement is simply
not feasible.
I was proud to introduce legislation last Congress that
delayed this Medicare direct supervision requirement through
2014 and it was signed into law with bipartisan support.
It has been widely recognized as an effective tool to
improve care in rural hospitals and keep the regulatory burden
in check.
Unfortunately, rural hospitals are once again staring down
the threat of this Federal mandate from CMS. The existing law
delayed enforcement action from CMS has expired.
Accordingly, I have now reintroduced similar legislation
this Congress, further delaying enforcement until 2016. It is
about this legislation, H.R. 2878, which this committee has
graciously invited me to speak today.
When I think about the healthcare needs facing my district,
there is nothing more challenging than ensuring access to
quality and accessible rural health care.
Rural America is struggling and the 84 critical access
hospital in Kansas are the lifeblood of our rural communities.
The presence of facilities such as a critical access
hospital in a community could be the deciding factor in whether
or not the next generations of children decide to raise their
family in their home town or perhaps whether or not a business
decides to locate there.
Easy access to emergency care can be a life and death
situation and we cannot threaten the existence of these
facilities by piling on the regulatory burden from Washington.
Earlier this year I invited the CEO of Holton Community
Hospital to testify about this issue before the Ways and Means
Committee's Subcommittee on Health.
Holton Community Hospital happens to be responsible for
serving my hometown, Holton, a community of just over 3,000
Kansans.
She explained in great detail that direct supervision would
be extremely burdensome, costly and is simply unrealistic at a
hospital serving rural America. The result of enforcing this
mandate would be to severely limit the type of services rural
healthcare hospitals could offer and it would threaten their
financial stability at a complicated and uncertain time in our
Nation's healthcare system.
H.R. 2878 will correct this problem. It will do so by
reinstating the moratorium on enforcement of this unnecessary
regulation. It has broad bipartisan support in Congress and the
support of key stakeholders including the American Hospital
Association, the National Rural Health Association and the
Kansas Hospital Association.
As a small town girl, I feel strongly that folks in rural
communities deserve access to quality health care. I can't
emphasize enough that rural hospitals--rural communities in
Kansas and across the country depend on access hospitals like
critical access hospitals which are directly threatened by CMS'
action.
I hope the Members from both parties can come together once
again to ensure high quality and timely care is available to
you no matter where you live in America. Companion legislation
was introduced by Senators Thune, Moran and Jon Tester.
It has passed the Senate back in September. I also want to
thank my lead cosponsor on the legislation, Congressman Dave
Loebsack and for all his hard work and advocacy on the issue as
well.
I urge my colleagues to support the legislation and move it
forward in a timely fashion.
Thank you all for allowing me to join you today.
[The statement of Ms. Jenkins follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentlelady. Really appreciate
you taking time out of your busy schedule to come and present
testimony to us today.
As usual, we will not have any questions for our Members
presenting testimony. So we will excuse the gentlelady with our
thanks and call our second panel to the witness table. And
while they are setting up the table I would like to submit the
following document for UC request for the record. It is a
statement from the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Without objection, so ordered. I will introduce our second
panel in the order they will testify. First, Ms. Katherine
Iritani, director of Health Care, Government Accountability
Office, and then Ms. Anne Schwartz, Ph.D., executive director,
Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission.
Thank you very much for coming today. Your written
testimony will be made a part of the record. You will each be
given 5 minutes to summarize your testimony.
So with that, Ms. Iritani, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENTS OF KATHERINE M. IRITANI, DIRECTOR, HEALTH CARE,
GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE, AND ANNE L. SCHWARTZ, PH.D.,
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, MEDICAID AND CHIP PAYMENT AND ACCESS
COMMISSION

STATEMENT OF KATHERINE M. IRITANI

Ms. Iritani. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Green and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to
be here today as you consider ways to strengthen the jointly
financed Federal and State Medicaid program, now the largest
healthcare program in the Nation by enrollment.
My testimony today will cover a body of GAO work from
recent years on two complex topics--Federal oversight of
certain large payments States often make known as supplemental
payments and how States finance the non-Federal share of their
programs.
Supplemental payments are above and beyond regular payment
rates for services and States have considerable flexibility for
making them. States can distribute them to only a small number
of providers, often hospitals.
Congress and CMS have taken important steps to enhance
Medicaid program integrity through better oversight of these
payments. We believe there are opportunities for even more
improvements.
Our recent work on certain Medicaid supplemental payments
that States often make has shown that better Federal
information is needed to understand and oversee them.
The payments have been growing in size and now total over
$20 billion a year and can amount to tens or hundreds of
millions a year to a single provider.
CMS and others need better information to understand who
States are paying, how much they are paying and how such
payments relate to services provided to Medicaid beneficiaries.
Many States have made supplemental payments that greatly
exceed the provider's cost of providing Medicaid care. In 2012,
we found that 39 States had made supplemental payments to over
500 hospitals that resulted in total Medicaid payments
exceeding the hospitals' costs of providing Medicaid care by
$2.7 billion.
Payments are not limited to costs under Medicaid but
payments that greatly exceed costs may not be economical and
efficient as required by law.
Now, let me turn to our work on State financing, which has
concluded that better information on State sources of funds to
finance Medicaid is also needed. States are allowed within
certain limits to seek funds from providers and local
governments to fund Medicaid payments.
States can, for example, tax providers or seek
intergovernmental fund transfers from local governments to help
finance the non-Federal share.
We have found that States are increasingly depending on
local governments and providers for financing, which can
ultimately shift Medicaid costs not only to providers and local
governments but to the Federal Government.
On the basis of our National survey of State Medicaid
programs, in 2012 about $46 billion or 26 percent of the non-
Federal share of Medicaid was financed with funds from
providers and local governments, a 21 percent increase from
2008.
Taxes on healthcare providers almost doubled in size during
that time from $9.7 to $18.7 billion. Such taxes are subject to
certain restrictions, for example, to ensure that taxes are
broad based and uniform.
Cost shifts to the Federal Government can occur through
financing arrangements that concentrate financing of the
payments on those providers who receive the payments.
For example, a State can increase payments for Medicaid
providers such as hospitals, impose a tax on those providers
for the nonFederal share and draw down Federal matching funds
for the payments.
CMS and other stakeholders are not well positioned to
assess payments States make to individual institutional
providers. Federal data on certain supplemental payments States
often make is not complete, reliable, uniform or accessible.
CMS has important initiatives underway but CMS has reported
that legislation is needed to compel States to report such
payments uniformly and to subject them to audit.
CMS also lacks good data on State financing sources. Such
data are needed to ensure financing is appropriate and to
understand how payments affect beneficiary access to care.
In conclusion, a needed step towards strengthening the
Medicaid program is to make payments and financing more
transparent.
For this large and growing program, CMS and others need to
know who States are paying and in what amounts and right now
CMS lacks sufficient data to know this.
We have suggested that Congress consider requiring CMS to
require States to report and audit these payments. We have also
recommended that CMS develop a strategy for improving
information on State sources of funds for Medicaid.
In view of growing costs and enrollments, such transparency
can help ensure the program is efficiency and effectively
meeting the promise of providing medical assistance to our
Nation's low-income populations.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my testimony. I am happy to
answer any questions.
[The statement of Ms. Iritani follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentlelady and now recognizes
Ms. Schwartz, 5 minutes for her opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ANNE L. SCHWARTZ

Ms. Schwartz. Good morning, Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member
Green, and members of the Subcommittee on Health.
I am Anne Schwartz, executive director of MACPAC, the
Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission.
As you know, MACPAC is a congressional advisory body
charged with analyzing and reviewing Medicaid and CHIP policies
and making recommendations to Congress, the Secretary of HHS,
and the States on issues affecting these programs.
Its members, led by Chair Diane Rowland and Vice Chair
Marsha Gold, are appointed by GAO, and the insights I will
share this morning reflect the consensus views of the
Commission itself anchored in a body of analytic work conducted
over the past 5 years. And we appreciate the opportunity to
share our views this morning.
My comments today will focus on reporting of provider-level
data on non-DSH supplemental payments and contributions to the
non-Federal share, the subject of two bills being considered by
the subcommittee--H.R. 2151 and H.R. 1362.
The Commission shares the objective of transparency
reflected in these two bills. There are several compelling
reasons that providers' specific data should be reported.
First, these data are necessary for assessing whether State
payments and rates are consistent with Federal statute.
While States have considerable flexibility in setting rates
and payment methods, Section 1902(a)(30)(a) of the Social
Security Act requires that Medicaid payments be consistent with
efficiency, economy, quality and access and that they safeguard
against unnecessary utilization.
But information on the base Medicaid payments that
providers receive--that is the per-case or per-diem payment
associated with the delivery of specific services to specific
Medicaid beneficiaries--provides only a partial picture of how
much Medicaid is paying a given provider.
To assess payment fully, policy makers need to know the
amount of Medicaid payment that providers receive including
both claims-based and supplemental payments less the amount
that providers contribute towards the non-Federal share of
Medicaid expenditures.
The level of payment can be considered the most basic
measure of economy and is essential to an assessment of patient
efficiency. A measure of value compares what is being spent--
economy--to what is obtained--quality, access, use of specific
services.
Typically, an analysis of whether a healthcare payment is
economical includes comparison to the cost to provide a given
service and comparison to what other payers pay for a
comparable service in a given geographic area.
Other healthcare payers including Medicare commonly conduct
such assessments. In Medicaid, however, Federal policy makers
and program administrators do not have complete data to make
such assessments and therefore to ensure that payments are
consistent with the delivery of quality necessary care to
beneficiaries.
The second reason for collecting provider-level data is
that Medicaid spending for supplemental payments is substantial
and growing.
In fiscal year 2014, States reported making $24.2 billion
in non-DSH supplemental payments to hospitals, more than 20
percent of total Medicaid fee for service payments to hospitals
nationally and more than 50 percent in some States.
The amount of funds raised through providers and local
government contributions is also significant and increasing.
As such, the Federal Government has a reasonable
expectation of having complete payment and financing data that
permit it to understand and oversee States' use of Medicaid
funds.
In light of these concerns, in March 2014 MACPAC
recommended that the Secretary of HHS collect and report data
on non-DSH supplemental payments at the provider level and just
last week in deliberations on a report on disproportionate
share hospital payments that is due to Congress on February
1st, the Commission voted unanimously on a recommendation
focused on reporting of data for both payments and the non-
Federal share.
Specifically, MACPAC recommends that the Secretary collect
and report hospital-specific data on all types of Medicaid
payments for all hospitals that receive them.
In addition, the Commission recommends that the Secretary
collect and report data on the sources of non-Federal share
necessary to determine net Medicaid payment at the provider
level.
Efforts to fully understand provider payment levels are
more relevant now than at any time in the program's history.
Use of supplemental payments is growing, particularly to
hospitals through Section 1115 expenditure authority.
In addition, interest in payment reforms that incentivize
greater value in the delivery of health services is also
growing. Even so, lack of solid data on net payments makes it
extremely difficult to assess the effectiveness of these
efforts.
MACPAC shares this subcommittee's interest in ensuring that
taxpayer dollars are spent appropriately on delivery quality
necessary care and preventing and reducing fraud, waste and
abuse.
Provider-level data on supplemental payments and
contributions to the non-Federal share would provide greater
transparency and facilitate Medicaid payment analysis including
assessments of Medicaid payment adequacy and analysis of the
relationship between payment and desired program objectives.
Again, thank you for this opportunity to share MACPAC's
work with the subcommittee and I am happy to answer any
questions.
[The statement of Ms. Schwartz follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady, thanks both of
the witnesses for your testimony. I will begin the questioning
and recognize myself 5 minutes for that purpose.
This is for both of you. We will start with you, Ms.
Iritani. What data does CMS currently collect about the sources
of the non-Federal share Medicaid funding?
Ms. Iritani. CMS collects some data on the sources of funds
on a case-by-case basis. When States submit a new request for
approval for a State plan, CMS asks several questions about the
sources of funds.
It is not very accessible--this data--and it is not in a
uniform manner. CMS also collects some data on provider taxes.
But CMS acknowledges that the data are unreliable and
incomplete.
Mr. Pitts. Anything to add, Ms. Schwartz? Let me ask you,
what additional data do you think they need and how will having
this data improve CMS' ability to oversee States' financing of
Medicaid? Both of you.
Ms. Iritani. Additional data that CMS needs includes data
on all sources of funds used to finance the Medicaid program.
Currently, CMS does not collect this data.
In order to understand net payments to providers, as Ms.
Schwartz has discussed the need for understanding, we need to
understand whether or not the financing of payments is being
concentrated on certain providers that also receive payments
and in order to understand this we need to collect complete
data on how States finance the non-Federal share of payments.
Mr. Pitts. Ms. Schwartz, do you want to add anything?
Ms. Schwartz. Just to add that our primary concern in
conducting this analysis is to get provider-specific data on
their contributions to the non-Federal share, which would allow
us then to net those contributions out from the total payments
that they are receiving Medicaid to get a true picture of what
they are being paid.
Mr. Pitts. OK.
Now, Ms. Iritani, in your written testimony you indicate
that HHS acknowledged that additional data was needed to ensure
that States comply with Federal requirements regarding how much
local governments may contribute to non-Federal share.
But despite this, HHS has said that no further action is
needed. Can you explain these seemingly contradictory
statements, explain why GAO believes that additional data is
necessary to properly oversee the program?
Ms. Iritani. Yes. We made a recommendation to CMS that they
collect--develop a strategy for collecting better information
and I think CMS disagreed because they did not believe that
information on the sources of Medicaid financing was needed on
a payment specific basis.
They collect information in the aggregate but they don't
collect information that would enable us to ascertain how much
individual providers are collecting, as Ms. Schwartz discussed
a need for.
Mr. Pitts. Now, what does the required reporting and
auditing of DSH payments tell us about the utility of requiring
similar reporting and auditing for non-DSH supplemental
payments?
Ms. Iritani. The DSH payments are subject to complete
reporting of both the financing of the payments and this--the
information for non-DSH payments is lacking.
And I am sorry, could you repeat the question?
Mr. Pitts. Yes. What does the required reporting and
auditing of DSH payments tell us about the utility of requiring
similar reporting and auditing for non-DSH supplemental
payments?
Ms. Iritani. Right. So the required reporting and auditing
of DSH payments has been very important for understanding who
the payments are going to and at what levels and the non-DSH
payments are currently not subject to similar requirements.
Mr. Pitts. OK.
Ms. Iritani. We have suggested that non-DSH payments really
need to be comparable to the DSH payments in terms of the
extent of the reporting.
Currently, one cannot tell with the non-DSH payments the
net payments that providers are actually receiving because you
cannot tell on a provider-specific basis what a provider is
actually contributing to the financing of a particular payment.
So the financing of a payment could be, for example, 100
percent concentrated on the providers who receive the payments.
Therefore, you know, the net payments that the providers
receive is actually much lower.
Mr. Pitts. My time is expired. The Chair recognizes the
ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr. Green, 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I would like to ask
the panel to provide information on how Medicaid payments work.
I think Medicaid payments are so complicated. Even as I was a
State legislator in Texas, it was tough.
I know that we would appreciate a little more information
about how this actually works. Ms. Schwartz, given that the
issue of rate setting is so complicated, explain how States set
these rates and what types of payments are provided to
providers and what is recorded to CMS.
Ms. Schwartz. Yes. Setting payment rates and methodologies
is one of the parts of the Medicaid program that varies the
most.
States pay hospitals in very different ways. Some of them
use a system similar to the prospective payment system in
Medicare where they make a per-case payment at the diagnosis
level for a number of different services that are provided in
the hospital.
Some States still pay hospitals per diem. The range is all
over the place in both how they pay, the special adjustors they
have for that, and the actual payment rate. We have collected
some of this information from MACPAC, and it is a rather
unwieldy spreadsheet that gives you a sense of the complexity
of those payments.
One of the things that MACPAC is most interested in is
trying to get a sense of how payments can be used to leverage
proper, appropriate, greater value care, and as part of that we
need to be able to know both the methods and the payment rates
and to be able to net out these additional payments.
So it is quite complex with considerable State flexibility
reflecting historical practices and the local markets.
Mr. Green. OK. Ms. Iritani, my understanding is it is very
hard to gather Medicaid data and indeed to compare Medicaid
data, given the time lag on availability of that data and how
different all these programs are from one another.
Is that a problem that you encounter regularly in your work
at the GAO?
Ms. Iritani. Regular payment data is available to us. But
the supplemental payments that States often make are not
reported in the claims data that go to the CMS.
So States really have all the data that shows who those
payments are going to, and so that is part of the transparency
that we believe is needed, is more data at the Federal level on
who supplemental payments are going to and for what purposes,
and in what amounts.
Mr. Green. Ms. Schwartz, I thought your point about linking
other sources of data to better understand a full picture of
the payments was interesting.
Can you expand on that recommendation?
Ms. Schwartz. Well, as Ms. Iritani says, claims are
available and are reported up to the Federal level. So we know
on a per-case or per-diem level what hospitals are making.
Supplemental payments are not paid associated with claims
and what is reported by the States to the Federal level is the
aggregate amount across all institutions in a particular class
and we can't associate that big chunk of dollars that is being
reported to the particular institutions that receive them.
States, clearly, know this information because they are
making the payments. But States also have many different data
systems and approaches to making those payments and so you
can't just go out and ask every State to report this
information and get the right answer.
So that is the desire to have the Secretary specify a
method by which those data would be reported so that they could
be consistently reported and available to analyze both at the
national level and across States.
Mr. Green. OK. Ms. Iritani, both you and Ms. Schwartz
mentioned that CMS is actually taking quite a number of steps
on the issue and I am glad the administration is taking those
steps in recent years to shed light on.
I know there has been a GAO recommendation through
administrations on both sides of the aisle. Can you talk about
CMS work on nonsupplemental payments in recent years?
Wasn't that work based in part on longstanding GAO
recommendations and isn't it true that CMS hasn't even finished
rolling out the new actions on the supplemental payments?
Ms. Iritani. Yes. CMS has taken some significant steps, we
would agree, to try to improve the transparency and
accountability of supplemental payments.
Recently, CMS has, for example, had initiatives to try to
require States to submit reports that would provide information
on the financing and payments for supplemental payments.
This information is more than what they have had before. It
is extensive. CMS has provided that information to a contractor
to assess how they can use it to improve oversight, for
example.
CMS also has a initiative known as T-MSIS, Transform
Medicaid Information System reforms to try to collect better
information on claims. That would include supplemental
payments.
Mr. Green. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman.
I recognize the vice chair of subcommittee, Mr. Guthrie, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and my questions to
Ms. Iritani will be directed at you, and I know you have talked
about some of the things I am going to ask you about but I
would like to give you a chance to elaborate with--through the
question I am going to move forward.
So in your testimony you point out that States generally
use general revenue funds for their Medicaid share but you
point out that States can use other financing options,
specifically that States are increasingly relying on providers
and local governments to finance their Medicaid share.
Can you discuss some of the ways States are financing their
Medicaid share? It is not just general revenue?
Ms. Iritani. What we have reported on, apart from the
general revenues, which is the majority of how States finance
Medicaid, is the growing reliance on taxes on healthcare
providers, for example, to help finance the non-Federal share
of payments. Intergovernmental transfers, which can be used
between units of Government to----
Mr. Guthrie. Can you give an example of one--an example?
Ms. Iritani. So, for example, a local government may
operate a hospital and an intergovernmental fund transfer might
be a transfer from the local government to the State that it is
in to provide the non-Federal share of a payment that is going
to the provider.
And another method is known as certified public
expenditures, which is basically certifying that an expenditure
was made for Medicaid. That can also be used as a non-Federal
share.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. And I think every member of this committee
wants to ensure that vulnerable beneficiaries are protected and
receive the Medicaid benefits, which are eligible.
But I know many of us also want to ensure that Federal
Medicaid policy doesn't unnecessarily crowd out private
sector's role.
Medicaid long-term care is the largest chunk of Medicaid
spending and represents one of the biggest challenges to the
program's sustainability over the long term.
My bill, H.R. 1361, the Medicaid Home Improvement Act,
seeks to address the concerns of GAO in this area and requires
States to submit an annual report identifying the sources and
amounts of funds used to--as the Medicaid report items are--use
funds to finance their non-Federal share of Medicaid.
Can you talk about how that will be beneficial as we move
forward?
Ms. Iritani. Yes. Currently CMS does not collect data on
the sources of funds that States use for Medicaid and there are
several reasons why we believe that information is needed.
One is just to enforce Medicaid requirements on limits that
are set on the extent that States can rely on providers and
local governments.
There is a limit that States cannot exceed. It is called
the 60/40 rule that States can only obtain a certain proportion
of funds from local governments and providers.
The other is just to understand net payments that providers
actually receive. Without having better data on the extent that
payments are being financed by the providers who receive the
payments, we can't really understand net payments to providers.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. Also a bill I have today is the Medicaid
Home Act that changes the equity requirement to $500,000 plus--
I mean, plus inflation.
Can you talk about if this policy were adopted how
individuals could access the equity interest in their home
through a variety of legal means such as reverse mortgages,
home equity loan or other financial vehicles?
Ms. Iritani. I am not prepared to answer that question but
I would be happy to get information for you--for a question for
the record.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. All right.
And can you talk about there is an exception under current
law which my bill does not change which allows an individual
with any level of home equity to qualify for Medicaid if an
individual spouse, child under 21 or child that is considered
blind or disabled also live in the home? Are you familiar with
that provision?
Is that--maybe, Ms. Schwartz, you have a--checking in on
that--do you have a----
Ms. Schwartz. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Guthrie. That is correct. OK.
And given that--there are few seconds here--given the aging
of the Baby Boomers and the growth of long-term care, have
MACPAC or GAO conducted any analysis about the challenges
unrestrained growth in this part of the program imposes on
Federal and State budgets?
For example, CBO estimates that Federal spending alone on
Medicaid long-term care will be $77 billion this year. So is
GAO or MACPAC looking at the long-term care and ensuing Baby
Boomer arrival, not just at retirement but also older in life
so that more demands on long-term care?
Ms. Iritani. We have several engagements underway around
long-term care and Medicaid.
Mr. Guthrie. Thanks.
Ms. Schwartz. Yes, and MACPAC is engaged in a long-term
work plan on analyzing spending trends and different aspects of
the Medicaid program, and we are just beginning that work, and
since long-term care is such a significant part of the program,
it will be included as part of that area of work.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. My time is expired and I yield
back.
Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman.
I now recognize the ranking member of the full committee,
Mr. Pallone, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to follow up on my colleague's discussion of long-
term care.
Dr. Schwartz, I would like to discuss how the proposed
Medicaid Home Improvement Act would affect beneficiary
eligibility for long-term care services.
As you know, the Medicaid program is the backbone of our
country's long-term care system. Sadly, even with Medicaid as
the safety net, the majority of Americans lack the options or
resources to sufficiently plan for future long-term care needs.
And, you know, my questions relate to, obviously, to the
spend down provision, which I think is a terrible way to pay
for long-term care--actually shameful, in my opinion.
The last thing I want to do is to take someone's home to
pay for their long-term care. Could you briefly describe the
purpose of the home equity exemption?
Ms. Schwartz. I think there are two purposes. One is to
allow living family members to remain in the home while the
beneficiary is in an institution and the other is to--there is
the limit that exists on there to ensure that the Government is
seeing a contribution of assets to their care. So that is the
purpose of the act.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
And States are allowed the option of maintaining a higher
home equity threshold. What is the purpose of allowing States
to choose between different equity allowances?
I know for New Jersey, you know, in our State it is much
higher. We have chosen the option of the higher equity.
Ms. Schwartz. Well, I am not an expert in this area and it
is not an area where MACPAC has done any significant work.
But in general, States exercise flexibility in definitions
within the program to reflect local circumstances in their
communities and I do believe New York and New Jersey are two of
the States that have allowed a higher exemption, presumably
reflecting the higher market value of real estate in those
areas.
Mr. Pallone. I mean, that is absolutely the case. I mean,
it is not unusual at all for, you know, a person of average
income, you know, to be living in a home that is worth
$800,000, which I think would qualify in New Jersey under the
higher--because New Jersey has opted for the higher equity but
I think wouldn't qualify if this bill became law because they
wouldn't allow States to have a higher threshold.
Would you expect the Medicaid Home Improvement Act to have
different effects in different States because it wouldn't allow
this higher threshold?
Ms. Schwartz. Well, certainly, to the extent that States
have a higher threshold now, that would affect those States
more than those who have a threshold similar to what is in the
bill.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
I mean, my concern, Mr. Chairman, you know, I find this
proposed piece of legislation to be very concerning with regard
to this home equity threshold and not allowing States to raise
the threshold.
I mean, our country, we know, has still not implemented a
thoughtful, comprehensive approach to long-term care, yet this
bill would only serve to restrict eligibility to long-term
services and supports, and I would--you know, I can't stress
enough that in States like New Jersey where real estate--you
know, you have this much higher ability--it costs a lot more,
essentially, to have a home in New Jersey. And, I mean, the
last thing I would want to see is people to have to sell their
home because the threshold is reduced.
Let me ask you, Dr. Schwartz, I understand that Medicaid
and CHIP have experience in quality performance measures
through the Pediatric Quality Measures Program and this program
was established in 2009 with the goal of improving the quality
of care delivered to our Nation's pediatric patients.
Could you briefly describe the Pediatric Quality Measures
Program and the effect it has had in advancing pediatric care
for Medicaid patients? I think you have a minute.
Ms. Schwartz. Sure.
The core set of measures, as you mentioned, was developed
in 2009, and all States are reporting at least two of the
measures.
The median is 14 measures, and they are things like the
share of kids between the ages of 3 and 17 with an outpatient
visit to a primary care practitioner, the share of children up
to the age of 2 who are up to date on their vaccines, the share
of births at low birth weight.
These are areas that are agreed have a clinical definition
as being meaningful for the purposes of high quality care.
MACPAC has commented on the importance of improving the
number of States reporting those measures, and increasing the
number of measures, and also strengthening the capacity of CMS
to calculate those measures for States from claims data to the
extent that it is possible.
Mr. Pallone. Do you have any suggestions for improvement? I
know my time is almost up but if you had to mention one or two.
Ms. Schwartz. To the extent that data from claims that
States submit up to CMS that those data can be used and that
require no additional data collection on the part of the
States, that would be a really valuable way to get more
information on the performance of different States in providing
quality pediatric care.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome back, it
is good to see you. This question would be for both of you as I
begin. Many of us are familiar with the Disproportionate Share
Hospitals, or DSH, supplemental payments. However, can you
please explain what non-DSH supplemental payments are, who they
go to and what purpose they serve? Ms. Iritani, why don't you
start?
Ms. Iritani. Yes, the non-DSH payments are a type of
supplemental payments that States often make under the upper
payment limit that is established under Medicaid or under
Medicaid demonstrations. The purposes are largely unknown,
which is part of why we believe there is a need for more
reporting so we can understand who these payments are going to
and for what purposes.
Mr. Shimkus. Ms. Schwartz, do you want to comment on it?
Ms. Schwartz. Sure. I can just say that the non-DSH
supplemental payments are calculated by a State looking across
a class of providers--say, public hospitals, nonprofit
hospitals--looking at the total payments under fee-for-service
that are paid, and then the difference between that payment
amount and what would have been paid under Medicare principles,
which is generally more. So the difference there is the amount
that the State can make in non-DSH supplemental payments, and
it uses those funds presumably to target different types of
hospitals.
But again, as Ms. Iritani said, that is one of the reasons
we would like to be able to get the provider-specific data to
see the relationship between the specific payments and which
hospitals are receiving them.
Mr. Shimkus. So in the question previously, Ms. Iritani,
you talked about--we were talking about general funds payment
and I think you did raise the issues of taxes. So some States
use provider taxes to finance the non-Federal share of Medicaid
cost which has been used to shift cost to the Federal
Government. Can you kind of talk through that?
Ms. Iritani. Yes, so to the extent that financing of large
payments is concentrated on the same providers receiving those
payments, there can be a cost shift. For example, when we
looked at this issue in a recent report, we looked at certain
new arrangements that States put in place where they increased
provider payments but they at the same time imposed a tax on
those providers, the same providers, to pay for the non-Federal
share.
And so then they drew down the Federal matching for those
payments, and in the end the Federal Government paid much more,
hundreds more, or tens of millions for those new payments. The
providers who received the payments funded the non-Federal
share and the State ended up not having to pay more for those
payments.
Mr. Shimkus. Ms. Schwartz, do you want to comment? No. That
is fine.
And last for Ms. Iritani, GAO has had longstanding
recommendation for CMS to require additional reporting and
auditing of non-DSH supplemental payments. Why don't you think
CMS has implemented those recommendations?
Ms. Iritani. CMS has agreed with our findings, but with
regard to that particular recommendation they said that they
would need to be required to do so; that because of the effect
on States that they would need legislation to be ordered and to
be able to do that.
Mr. Shimkus. OK, very good. I yield back my time. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. I now recognize
the gentle lady from Florida, Ms. Castor, 5 minutes for
questions.
Ms. Castor. Great. And that is where I want to pick up. So
CMS says that they do not have the authority to go out and
collect all of the data from States on their supplemental
payments. Do you agree with that, that legislation is needed?
Ms. Iritani. We defer to CMS on that. We believe that in
the past when CMS has tried to require States to report
information that States didn't necessarily want to report or
want to report at the level that CMS needed it, CMS needed
legislation.
Ms. Castor. Ms. Schwartz, do you agree with that?
Ms. Schwartz. CMS is collecting information from States to
demonstrate compliance with the upper payment limit
regulations. And for the purposes that MACPAC is interested in,
the payments on provider-specific data on the non-DSH
supplemental payments from those regulations might be
sufficient. We don't have any access to those data. CMS does
not share a lot of details.
We do know that they have been talking about a regulation
on supplemental payments, so it does seem that there is
activity going on and that as part of its oversight activity it
does have the ability to collect the payment information. I
believe an audit is another level in which I think it is
probably fair to say that they would need legislation to
conduct an audit as they had to do the additional----
Ms. Castor. And it certainly would give them the leverage
to say to States we need it to be accessible and we need it to
be uniform, because these supplemental payments go to all 50
States, correct? So oftentimes I imagine the data comes back in
different forms. What impact now has Medicaid expansion in some
States and not in others had on supplemental payments?
Ms. Schwartz. I am not sure that we have done the analysis
of the supplemental payments of expansion versus nonexpansion
States, and it is something we could do. In any case, it would
still be at the aggregate State level and not give you a
picture of what is happening to individual providers.
Ms. Castor. How about with the expansion of the 1115
waivers and supplemental payments? Has the trend towards States
having those Medicaid waivers changed the format of
supplemental payments at all?
Ms. Schwartz. Many of those waivers have allowed States to
continue making supplemental payments, and so we do know that
those payments under the 1115 waivers are increasing.
Ms. Castor. So, and in the Medicaid managed care rules that
were proposed recently, did those rules propose any type of
standardized reporting for supplemental payments through the
waivers or----
Ms. Schwartz. I am not sure if the rules specifically
mention that, but in general supplemental payments are not
permitted under managed care because in managed care the plan
is making a payment to the institution, not the State.
Ms. Castor. So it is more applicable to the 1115 waivers to
States than in managed care rules for sure.
Ms. Schwartz. That is my understanding.
Ms. Castor. OK. In one example, I wonder if GAO has looked
at States that have taken supplemental payments and done things
with them that really are outside the bounds of the intent of
the Medicaid laws. Do you know of any cases where States have
said, OK, we are going to provide, use supplemental payments,
that revenue, and pay providers that don't serve the Medicaid
population?
Ms. Iritani. Years ago in prior reports, we have looked at
how excessive supplemental payments were used by States and did
find that the payment revenues could be used for non-Medicaid
purposes. And in more recent years, we have just been looking
at the level of the supplemental payments and how that they
relate to costs of the providers for providing Medicaid and
that is where we have found that many States are making
payments that are much----
Ms. Castor. In Florida we had that crop up where the State
went in and said, here, we are going to take some of the
supplemental payments and give it to some providers that were
not serving the Medicaid population. And that is a real worry
in my home county that has a half-cent sales tax that they use
as an intergovernmental transfer and to bring down their
Medicaid match.
So I think this is a very good idea for us to standardize
the reporting from States and get all the data so we can ensure
the funds are being spent accordingly. Thank you, and I yield
back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentle lady. I now
recognize the gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Long, 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And Ms. Iritani, what
factors prompted CMS to require audits and reporting of the DSH
payments?
Ms. Iritani. CMS identified concerns with States making
excessive payments over the limits, and Congress had required
them to also establish reporting and auditing requirements. And
some of our work also found concerns with excessive payments
and also requirements on providers to return the non-Federal
share to the State, so effectively reducing the net payments
that some providers received. So CMS did, and now requires DSH
payments, Disproportionate Share payments to be reported on a
facility-specific basis and subject to audit.
Mr. Long. OK. These overpayments, were they an anomaly, or
do you know what percentage they found, find or think are
overpaid?
Ms. Iritani. Well, what I can say is the original, the very
first DSH audits found that the majority of States, I believe
it was 41, had overpaid at least one hospital. And one of our
reports reported on the findings of the DSH audits, and 41
States had paid over 500 hospitals $2.7 billion on the non-DSH
side, but they also reported on significant noncompliance on
the DSH side in terms of----
Mr. Long. Significant. Do you have any idea what percentage
when you said significant?
Ms. Iritani. So the DSH payments, payments that were in
excess of the hospitals' uncompensated care and/or not
calculated with acceptable data and methods, 41 States made DSH
payments that exceeded the hospitals'----
Mr. Long. Yes, but that doesn't tell me what percentage.
Ms. Iritani. So 24 percent of the hospitals were found to
have received DSH payments that were noncompliant.
Mr. Long. Twenty-four percent across the board.
Ms. Iritani. Twenty-four percent of hospitals.
Mr. Long. OK. OK, thank you. And Dr. Schwartz, on Thursday,
MACPAC Commissioners recommended that the Secretary of HHS
should collect and report hospital-specific data on all types
of Medicaid payments for all hospitals that receive them. In
addition, they said the Secretary should collect and report
data on the sources of non-Federal share necessary to determine
net Medicaid payments at the provider level.
As I have been told, HHS said legislation was necessary to
implement reporting and auditing requirements for DSH payments
and that legislation would be needed to implement similar
requirements for non-DSH supplemental payments. So why did
MACPAC target its recommendations to the Secretary?
Ms. Schwartz. Sure. We have not asked for nor received a
review from CMS of our recommendations, so I don't know what
CMS will say about our specific recommendation. MACPAC's
recommendation was for reporting of payment information,
which--we know from what CMS already is asking of States in the
UPL payment demonstrations that it is already asking for
similar types of information, and that is why we believe that
the Secretary had the authority to do this.
Auditing is a different step, and auditing is a much more
intense activity as seen in the DSH audits and that is not what
MACPAC was asking for. MACPAC was asking for collecting and
reporting payment data, and so we believe that the Secretary
has the authority to do that.
Mr. Long. OK, thank you. With that I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentleman from Oregon, Mr. Schrader, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess for GAO,
have you evaluated what the cost-benefit might be in changing
from reporting classes of overpayments versus going to the
individual providers?
Ms. Iritani. We have not evaluated the cost-benefit, but we
would note that this is required on the DSH side. And non-DSH
payments are now higher in amounts than DSH payments, but the
non-DSH payments are not subject to reporting and auditing as
with DSH.
Mr. Schrader. Has there been any consideration of just
increasing the Medicaid payments as opposed to going with the
DSH and non-DSH supplemental payments that we have got?
Ms. Iritani. Well, ideally, Medicaid payments would be
sufficient to ensure access in a local area comparable to what
others outside of Medicaid would be receiving.
Mr. Schrader. Like everyone in this committee and Congress
fully realizes, Medicaid payments are not sufficient and as a
matter of fact are so low that many providers can't accept
Medicaid patients. We have the same problem with Medicare. I
think a lot of folks need to be aware that that is a very, very
low reimbursement rate compared to the private insurance
market.
Ms. Iritani. Yes, our work has found that Medicaid payment
rates are lower generally for certain services than private.
Mr. Schrader. Has there been any move to just fund Medicaid
to the various States and providers based on outcomes? There
has been a lot of talk in health care recently about outcomes,
quality based health care.
Ms. Iritani. What I can say is that I think that there are
some demonstrations that are trying to incentivize outcomes by
making payments for that.
Mr. Schrader. MACPAC have any comments on that?
Ms. Schwartz. I think there is a lot of activity at the
State level to try and link payment to outcomes through
different approaches such as health homes, bundling of
payments, different approaches. We don't know very much yet
about the outcomes and whether they have affected outcomes.
That is something we would be very interested to know.
And it is also very difficult to conduct that research
because you have to be able to control for everything else that
is going on in the health system and in the patients' lives to
be able to attribute the outcomes to specific actions on the
part of the beneficiary and the provider.
Mr. Schrader. Well that is interesting and that is always
true whether it is an education bill or anything we do. But we
are doing that right now in Medicare. We are trying to get at
that in Medicare. We are doing that under the Affordable Care
Act. So I don't think it is impossible, and certainly there
could be risk based reimbursement to accommodate the types of
socioeconomic factors that people have.
And I would argue respectfully that rather than us trying
to micromanage all the States and the different providers, it
would be a heck of a lot easier for us, particularly non-
doctors, although I guess I am a veterinarian but I wouldn't
want to be the guy in charge of your healthcare, that we go to
an outcome based reimbursement system where we could easily
judge whether or not the people are staying healthier, staying
out of the hospitals, getting that quality based healthcare.
That should really be what we are about, then our task here
would be pretty easy. We would just be able to have a common
set of outcomes, and your job would be a little bit easier and
we could see whether or not things are doing well or not.
Another question. In the REPORTS bill why do we have the
40/60 rule? Why is that significant? What is the goal of having
that rule?
Ms. Iritani. I can't speak to the legislative history
around that rule, but I think that the concept generally is
that States should share in the non-Federal share of the
financing that----
Mr. Schrader. Well, why do we specify it can't be more than
40 or more than 60? What is the point of that? Who cares? Why
do we care? I am the Federal Government. As long as someone is
paying their fair share, why do I care?
Ms. Iritani. Well, I think that to make sure that the
incentives are for sufficient and economical payments that the
State should be sharing in the cost of the payment.
Mr. Schrader. Yes, but who cares if it comes from the local
government or a private enterprise or the State? Who cares?
Ms. Iritani. The concern around the reliance on providers
and local governments for financing the non-Federal share is
when the burden on financing Medicaid rests with, for example,
the providers who are serving the beneficiaries. From the
providers' standpoint, the payment they receive from Medicaid
is the net payment. It is not the full payment, it is the
payment less the taxes or other contributions they might be
making for the payment that they receive.
Mr. Schrader. Mr. Chair, I would just respectfully suggest
we are micromanaging and should let the States do what they do
best and just regulate the outcomes. I think that would be a
smarter proposal. And I yield back. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. I now recognize
the gentleman from Indiana, Dr. Bucshon, 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would agree with
what you just said and I think we are micromanaging. And I can
tell you why CMS wants to know the information, because they
want to decrease payments to the Medicaid program. They want to
save money. And I was a provider before I was a surgeon, and
you can't have access if you continue to decrease Medicaid
payments. Because you have a program that needs fundamentally
restructured in my view. You can't have both.
And so now, States, including Indiana with the Healthy
Indiana Plan 2.0, which is a HSA-based way to manage the
Medicaid population, now what basically your testimony is
telling me that, wow, you guys came up with a great system but
we don't want you to do it because we are concerned it is going
to cost the Federal Government more money and we are trying to
save money here.
So the question--I mean, I am playing a little devil's
advocate here. The question I have is, Why does the Federal
Government care? I mean, for example, Healthy Indiana Plan 2.0
uses hospital taxes to, as you probably know, to help fund the
expanded State share of the expansion under the Affordable Care
Act.
Why does that matter to the Federal Government? Because
what they are doing then is they are reimbursing providers at a
higher level than traditional Medicaid. Guess what that does?
It gets the providers to take Medicaid patients so that we get
access so low-income people actually can see a doctor. So why
does that matter to the Federal Government? Does that cost the
Federal Government any more money than it would if they did it
in a traditional way?
Ms. Schwartz. I think the most fundamental reason that the
Federal Government pays is that when you look at the
financing--Federal, non-Federal--the Federal Government is
still paying on average 57 percent of the cost of the Medicaid
program and much more than that in many States----
Mr. Bucshon. So?
Ms. Schwartz [continuing]. Notwithstanding how ----
Mr. Bucshon. So what?
Ms. Schwartz. So the interest is ensuring that that amount
of money is being used consistent with the aims of the statute.
Mr. Bucshon. OK, so they want to micromanage the Medicaid
program just like Dr. Schrader said. The basic, and what I am
getting is that the reason is, is because the Federal
Government wants to micromanage the States. I mean that is my
view on that and again I am all for reporting, and I think
States should be compliant with coverage and make sure people
are getting adequate coverage.
But other than that, I mean the question I have is why does
it matter to the Federal Government? That is why I support
fundamental Medicaid reform that gives the States a certain
amount of money and let them do what they need to do with it
versus having all these strings attached. I mean, I think we
are just finding today with this hearing why we need to
fundamentally restructure the Medicaid program, because people
are spending literally thousands of hours trying to figure all
this stuff out.
Like I said, I don't have a problem with needing to be
reporting if it has an impact on patient access. I mean, if
there is a concern that based on States using local or State
funding for the non-Federal portion is having an impact on
access and people are not getting the services that is one
thing. If it is just because the Federal Government wants to
say, well, look, we don't have to pay you as much because you
have found a way to use local money or State money to help
yourself, then I am against that.
And so why does it matter if a State reports, for example,
in the aggregate versus an individual provider? Why would the
Federal Government care? It is the same amount of money.
Ms. Iritani. Well, as you point out, we want to make sure
that Medicaid payments are going for Medicaid purposes and
improve access to Medicaid beneficiaries.
Mr. Bucshon. And I agree with that.
Ms. Iritani. Without knowing the amount that an individual
provider is contributing to the payment that they are
receiving, we can't actually understand whether or not the
payment is being used basically for fiscal relief for the State
or actually serving to improve access for Medicaid
beneficiaries.
Mr. Bucshon. That is fair enough. But that there what you
just said is making the assumption that States are purposely
violating Federal law for their own benefit. If you make--I am
just saying that CMS needs to know this because they want to
prevent States from purposely violating the law by using
Medicaid dollars for non-, for example, giving payments to
people who are not providing coverage to Medicaid patients. Is
that true or not true?
Ms. Iritani. And it is not necessarily even violating the
law. States can make payments and receive Federal matching up
to the upper payment limit, and there is no limit on Medicaid
payments in relation to costs. But this data is really needed
to understand the extent that payments are going to providers
who are actually financing the non-Federal share, therefore
reducing the net payments to the providers because----
Mr. Bucshon. My time is expired. So again I will just
finish by saying who cares? Because it is the same cost to the
Federal Government, who cares? I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Sarbanes, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I had a question
about--I am very interested in these demonstration projects to
explore alternative venues or settings for long-term care and
the financing of those. So I guess the obvious example of
experimenting with this is there are some waiver and
demonstration programs that have allowed for Medicaid
reimbursement for placement in, say, assisted living facilities
as opposed to long term in nursing care facilities. I don't
know that there has been, but you would know, I imagine,
demonstration projects that are reimbursing through Medicaid
for placement in somebody's home where they are getting some
home care.
But my question is, as those kinds of alternatives are
being explored are there also alternative kind of financing
structures or formulas being looked at at the same time? So
obviously you would be looking at different kinds of
reimbursement amounts depending on this setting, but is there
any reason, for example, to look at some of these asset
thresholds and other things depending on--my instinct would say
no, but I am just wondering, has that kind of analysis
accompanied the experimenting of just where you might reimburse
for this kind of care?
Ms. Iritani. We have work planned to look at Medicaid
payments for assisted living. We have not done work looking at
financing of Medicaid payments necessarily directed to long-
term care, if that is your question.
Mr. Sarbanes. OK. And are there, is it in your bailiwick to
tell me whether there are demonstrations that are actually
looking at Medicaid reimbursement for home care where somebody
is actually staying in the home?
Ms. Iritani. There are, increasingly, States moving from a
fee-for-service type of payment for long-term care services to
managed care which would be a capitated payment amount to cover
all services including long-term care.
Mr. Sarbanes. So in that instance there would be a
capitated payment for providing care along a continuum that
could include some component of home care along with
institutional care; is that what you are saying?
Ms. Iritani. Correct.
Mr. Sarbanes. OK. All right, thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Schwartz. I can just add to that that about half of
payments for long-term services supports in Medicaid are now
occurring in a noninstitutional setting, and this reflects a
very big shift over the past 20 years when it was primarily in
institutional settings. And that is primarily through 1915(c)
waivers that have allowed States to allow folks to stay in
their own homes and receive services if that is something that
is valuable to them.
And there have also been grants under the money follows the
person program to help States transition people from nursing
homes to home settings or to allow people to stay in their
homes and not end up in a nursing facility.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Bilirakis, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Bilirakis. Florida.
Mr. Pitts. I mean Florida, sorry.
Mr. Bilirakis. That is OK. No problem. Well, I have a
couple questions here, but I wanted to say how much, with the
moving the patient from a long-term care facility to the home,
obviously quality of life is number one, but are we saving
money at the same time?
Ms. Schwartz. Those waivers require a demonstration of
savings and so yes. And in the managed long-term services and
supports area, I think that is also an area to increase the
predictability of the amount that is being spent on long-term
services and supports. So fiscal concerns are obviously a part
of both of those efforts.
Mr. Bilirakis. Very good, thank you. A couple more
questions, Ms. Iritani and Ms. Schwartz. In your testimony you
talk a lot about non-State sources being used to fund Medicaid.
Can you explain what these non-State sources are such as
provider taxes and how they fund State Medicaid programs?
Ms. Iritani. States are allowed to use up to certain
sources of funds apart from State general revenues to finance
Medicaid. Provider taxes are an increasing method that States
use to fund Medicaid which would be a broad-based uniform tax
on healthcare providers, and it could be Medicaid providers, to
fund Medicaid.
And intergovernmental transfers and certified public
expenditures are other methods that are increasingly used to
finance the non-Federal share of Medicaid. These would be
methods that local governments or a local government provider
such as county hospitals might use to, for example, in the case
of certified public expenditures, to certify that they had
expended a certain amount on Medicaid for purposes of getting
Federal matching for the payment or the fund.
Mr. Bilirakis. Do you have anything else to add, please?
Ms. Schwartz. No, I don't have anything else to add to
that.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK, all right. OK, Federal law requires
that provider taxes must be broad based and uniformly imposed
and must not hold the providers harmless and cannot provide a
direct or indirect guarantee those providers will receive all
or part of the tax payment back.
How does the use of non-State funding sources such as
provider taxes reconcile with Federal law?
Ms. Schwartz. It is permissible under Federal law, and
changes have been made over time to clarify the circumstances
under which it is possible and the ones you just named are
examples of that. But it is a permissible activity. There is no
intimation that something shady is going on with these taxes
and they are clearly important in many States as a source of
funds to support the Medicaid program.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK, next question. Ms. Iritani, in 2014 you
asked CMS to ensure States report accurate and complete
information on all sources of funds used to finance the non-
Federal share of Medicaid. What data did you want to capture
and what was CMS' response to your recommendations?
Ms. Iritani. Yes, we suggested that CMS come up with a data
strategy for obtaining complete and reliable information on
sources of funds. Currently CMS does not collect specific
sources of funding. CMS agreed that they needed better data for
oversight purposes, but disagreed with our suggestion that they
needed this data at the provider level for in particular
institutional providers.
We felt like the data is needed at the institutional level
so that a net payment to the provider could be understood. For
example, if a hospital is getting 200 million from CMS in a
supplemental payment that CMS would also know that that
provider was being asked to finance a non-Federal share, a
hundred million or more, whatever the non-Federal share of the
payment would be.
This is important not only for understanding the trends in
financing and the net impact on the provider, but whether it
would be helpful to understand the extent the payments are
actually going to improve access to the beneficiaries as
opposed to cost shifting to the Federal Government or providing
fiscal relief to the States.
Mr. Bilirakis. So one final question, if I may, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. You may proceed.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK, thank you. Ms. Iritani, Medicaid is
listed by GAO as a high-risk program. Can you explain why this
program is listed as high-risk?
Ms. Iritani. Yes. There are multiple contributing reasons
based on our body of work over the last years, but Medicaid is
a significant program in terms of size, in terms of the number
of enrollees now, the largest healthcare program in the
country. It is a diverse program. The Federal-State nature of
it makes it very difficult for oversight. Our work has
identified concerns with gaps in oversight including the
transparency of supplemental payments and many other types of
issues that contributed to our putting Medicaid on our high
risk list.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you. Thank you very much. I yield
back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr. Collins, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank
our panel for being here. I think examining Medicaid programs
is very important and we have kind of been doing it many ways
today. I guess I would like to start by standing with Dr.
Bucshon in saying if we could block grant Medicaid back to the
States I don't even think there would be a need for today's
hearing. But unfortunately we haven't done that so that is one
of the reasons we are having this hearing, which I think is
timely.
And maybe to respond a little bit to Mr. Guthrie's comments
earlier, Medicaid is all over the place when it comes to how
States administer them. And maybe to sum up a little bit, I am
from New York, which New York with 20 million Americans spends
as much on Medicaid as California and Texas combined with 60
million people. That shows you how crazy this program is.
Thirty six or so States, as I understand it, absorb the
Medicaid cost at the State level and there is no local share.
It is about 36 out of 50.
Well, the 14 States, of which New York is certainly one,
pushed this back to the county level. In the case of Erie
County where I am from, Buffalo, I was the county executive,
and 100 percent of our property tax did not even cover our
Medicaid share at the county level; 100-plus percent of our
county tax covered Medicaid, which meant the county had to live
on sales tax.
Well, when it gets to DSH it is worse. In New York State,
when the Federal Government makes a DSH payment the State pays
nothing. They force 100 percent of the match for DSH payments
down to the local level for the county. Erie County, Erie
County Medical Center, we are talking about $40 million in a
year.
Now under the ACA, to speak to the folks on the other side
that was, the DSH payments were supposed to be reduced
dramatically by the expansion of Medicaid and Affordable Care.
Well, it hasn't happened. As I understand it now just maybe we
will see a DSH reduction in 2018, but that may go the same way
as SGR and just kicked down the road. And I just bring this up
to put into context how Medicaid is all over the place through
the country, and if you are living in Erie County, New York, it
doesn't get much worse when it comes to what we are having to
bear for that burden.
So briefly, the bill that I have put forth, H.R. 2151,
really addresses the non-DSH supplemental payments. And this
came from the GAO's own report on we need transparency. I have
a sign in my office, ``In God we trust, all others bring
data.'' We don't have the data on the non-DSH supplemental
payments.
And so, Ms. Iritani, I am assuming the bill that I am
putting forth, I am simply asking States, or not asking,
requiring States to do audits and CMS to do audits on non-DSH
supplemental payments as something GAO would support.
Ms. Iritani. Yes, we would agree that that bill is
consistent with our recommendations.
Mr. Collins. And really in learning from that I think all
of us would support payments going where they are supposed to,
but do you also have any data on the 50 States? I understand it
is very inconsistent from State to State. And the crazy thing I
have heard is I don't think New York does as much non-DSH
supplemental. Is that true? Do you know?
Ms. Iritani. I cannot speak to that right now, but be happy
to----
Mr. Collins. Yes, if you could get back to us it would be
interesting just to see as a percentage or absolute or both on
the non-DSH supplemental payments, and then that would also beg
the questions, and I think we would see, why variances from one
State to the other? And it would beg the question, why is one
State doing one thing and another doing something else, but
without the audits how do we know?
Ms. Iritani. There are great variations among States in how
they finance their programs and the extent of supplemental
payments.
Mr. Collins. And just from a commonsense standpoint it
doesn't make any sense to me. So I would certainly urge all my
colleagues to support that bill, H.R. 2151, which is simply
trying to gather data in a way that would help us all better
understand State by State even what is going on. So again, Mr.
Chairman, thank you for holding this hearing, and I yield back
the balance of my time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. Ms. Schwartz,
did you want to add anything to that?
Ms. Schwartz. Well, I have some data here that show that
nationally supplemental payments as a share of inpatient and
outpatient hospital payment is about 44 percent, and in New
York it is 36.8 percent so it is below the national average.
But the figures go all over the place from two percent to there
is several States in the '80s and one or two in the '90s. So
you are slightly below the average, but like all things
Medicaid, it varies by State.
Mr. Collins. And I think again we could use some data to
understand why that variation would be what it is. Thank you
very much.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes Mr. Griffith for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. As we have
discussed in some of the prior testimony, the State may impose
a broad-based healthcare tax on providers and use the revenue
raised from that tax to pay for the Medicaid program. Virginia
looked at that a couple of decades ago and it was rejected
because it was considered a sick tax or a bed tax and why would
we want to put more burden on those people who are already sick
by having a broad based tax on folks who are in the hospital?
But because of the way the FMAP works, the Federal Medicaid
Assistance Percentage, the effect of this is that a State can
draw down more and more Federal spending in its Medicaid
program. Currently these provider taxes are permissible, as we
talked about earlier, if they are applied at a rate that
produces revenues less than or equal to six percent of the
provider's net patient revenues.
Now I know, Ms. Schwartz, you said that is not cheating,
but from a Virginia perspective even though it is legal it
seems a little bit dicey that you get more money because you
charge your sick people more taxes, therefore you can get more
money drawn down from the Federal Government.
Can you talk about any work that either MACPAC or GAO has
done to explore provider taxes to see how they are utilized by
the States and how they drive up the spending or how provider
taxes can create what we believe in Virginia is a perverse
incentive in Medicaid? Either of you all want to tackle that
one?
Ms. Schwartz. We have written about provider taxes and
described the statute as you have, and there has been an
expression of interest in learning more. But it is a topic that
is difficult to study because you are having to look at the
finances of the entire State and their tax structure. So it is
not one that we have a lot to offer now, but I am hopeful that
in the future we will have more information to be able to share
on that.
Mr. Griffith. Well, as Mr. Bucshon said earlier, maybe we
would be better off if we just decided what was the right
amount for each State and sent it back to them, and then you
don't have all these little games being played about we are
going to charge our people a sick tax so that we can then draw
down more money.
I have introduced a bill, the Medicaid Tax Fairness Act,
which is co-sponsored by some of my colleagues on the
committee, Blackburn, Bucshon and Guthrie. It doesn't get to
the whole problem, but it does reduce the current provider-tax
threshold from 6 percent to 5.5 percent which is what it was
just a few years ago. What do you all think of that concept?
And there is a follow-up question too.
Ms. Iritani. We have looked at States' uses of provider
taxes at a broad level, at a national level, and have found
that States are increasingly relying on provider taxes as a
source of the non-Federal share of Medicaid. And we looked in
three States' financing arrangements where indeed there was an
increase in the Medicaid payments and some sort of
contribution, for example, through provider taxes, from the
same providers that were receiving payments.
And so we would agree that there needs to be much more
transparency on what is reported. And with regard to your
proposal about reducing the provider tax threshold that I would
just note that there have been several bodies including CMS in
its budget that have also suggested reducing provider taxes as
a way to improve the fiscal integrity of Medicaid.
Mr. Griffith. Yes, my bill is actually the first step, I
think, but it is H.R. 1400 and then we can go forward from
there. And what is interesting is, as folks on the other side
of the aisle will recognize, is oftentimes I am in conflict
with the administration. But in December 2010, President
Obama's Fiscal Commission said Congress and the President
should eliminate State gaming of Medicaid tax gimmick. They
recommended restricting and eventually eliminating this
practice.
While this policy would obviously need to be phased in
incrementally, does GAO or MACPAC, and I think you have already
answered it in part, but do either of you have a position on
that policy, and if not can you comment on benefits of reducing
the use of the provider taxes over time?
And you may have already answered it in your previous
answer and I recognize that but did want to get it out there
that this is a bipartisan thought. It is not something that we
own just on the Republican side or just on the Democrat side.
But gaming the system moves money around but it doesn't really
help the sick folk. Comments? Agree, disagree?
Ms. Schwartz. I would just say that from the Commission's
perspective that interest at the moment has been on
transparency and you need those data to be able to then
evaluate different policy options. The Commission as of this
time has no position on that.
Mr. Griffith. And I would just say at some point, and I
haven't introduced a bill and maybe I should, but at some point
we need to look at helping folks out. I had a little concept
when I was in the State legislature in Virginia that would
allow folks who needed medical care maybe not as intense as a
nursing home, but needed at least two things a day that were of
assistance, and we passed a law that--North Carolina has a
similar law--that would allow a medical cottage to be placed, a
temporary to be placed in a family member's backyard, side
yard, whatever, worked under the regular laws but it created a
zoning exemption for that.
It might be a way that we can save money for folks all the
way around because it is cheaper than a nursing home but the
person is still getting care and they are with their family. I
appreciate it, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the time, and I yield
back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman, and that
concludes the questions of the Members present. As usual,
Members who are in other hearings on our committee may have
questions who will submit those too in writing along with any
follow-up questions. We ask that you please respond promptly.
And I remind Members that they have 10 business days to submit
questions for the record, so Members should submit their
questions by the close of business on Tuesday, November 17th.
Very interesting hearing examining various Medicaid
programs, a very complex issue. Thank you very much for your
time and testimony today. Without objection, the subcommittee
is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:54 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Good morning, thank you Mr. Chairman for holding this
hearing to discuss a variety of bills related to healthcare in
our Medicare and Medicaid program.
I'm pleased that we will be discussing draft legislation
today on the Quality Care for Moms and Babies Act. Given that
Medicaid finances roughly half of all births in this country,
it is critical that we continue to advance the quality of care
our Medicaid beneficiaries receive. This bill not only develops
quality of care metrics for pregnancy and infancy, but would
also develop maternity care quality collaboratives. I look
forward to working in a bipartisan manner to advance this
important bill.
I do have some concerns over several of the other bills
under discussion today. H.R. 1362 and H.R. 2151 work in tandem
to increase reporting and auditing requirements on States'
Medicaid payments relating to non-DSH supplemental payments and
the non-Federal share of State Medicaid spending. I agree that
transparency in these areas is important to ensure that
payments to providers are sufficient in Medicaid. But these
bills are duplicative of ongoing CMS initiatives and add a
burdensome layer of administrative bureaucracy. We need a more
nuanced approach here, and rather than improving our ability to
ensure that Medicaid dollars go towards Medicaid beneficiaries,
I fear these bills will instead do the very opposite of that.
H.R. 1361, the Medicaid HOME Improvement Act eliminates
State flexibility in determining home equity levels for the
determination of long-term care assistance. Unfortunately, our
country has yet to provide a meaningful solution to our
country's long-term care crisis. Yet this bill limits State
flexibility to determine the right eligibility threshold for
long-term care in their own Medicaid programs. In short, the
bill does not address the underlying issues in our long-term
care system, but only serves to restrict access to critical
services.
Finally, H.R. 2878 provides an extension on CMS' decision
to temporarily suspend the enforcement of supervision
requirements for outpatient health services in critical access
and small rural hospitals through the end of the calendar year.
While these hospitals certainly face different workforce
staffing issues than those in urban areas, I hope my colleagues
will work to address concerns that this bill may not adequately
balance patient safety and access to care. I hope that we can
work in a bipartisan fashion to address this issue.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back the remainder of
my time.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
