- EXAMINING THE 340B DRUG PRICING PROGRAM

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE 340B DRUG PRICING PROGRAM

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 24, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-25

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

95-688 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

_____

Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          KATHY CASTOR, Florida
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina         Massachusetts
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TONY CARDENAS, California
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
CHRIS COLLINS, New York                  officio)
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Gene Green, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     3
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     8
Prepared statement...........................................     8

Witnesses

Diana Espinosa, Deputy Administrator, Health Resources and
Services Administration, Department of Health and Human
Services.......................................................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Answers to submitted questions...............................    76
Krista M. Pedley, Director, Office of Pharmacy Affairs, Health
Resources and Services Administration, Department of Health and
Human Services \1\
Debra A. Draper, Director, Health Care, Government Accountability
Office.........................................................    18
Prepared statement...........................................    20
Answers to submitted questions...............................    95
Ann Maxwell, Assistant Inspector General, Office of Evaluation
and Inspections, Office of Inspector General, Department of
Health and Human Services......................................    36
Prepared statement...........................................    38
Answers to submitted questions...............................   102

Submitted Material

Documents for the record, \2\ submitted by Mr. Pitts.............     3
Statement of Ascension, March 24, 2015, submitted by Mr. Green...    67
Letter of March 24, 2015, from Daniel R. Hawkins, Jr., Senior
Vice President, Public Policy and Research, National
Association of Community Health Centers, to Mr. Upton, et al.,
submitted by Mr. Green.........................................    70
Statement of Ryan White Clinics for 340B Access, March 24, 2015,
submitted by Mr. Green.........................................    73

----------
\1\ Ms. Pedley did not offer an oral or written statement.
\2\ The information has been retained in committee files and also is
available at http://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=103082.

EXAMINING THE 340B DRUG PRICING PROGRAM

----------

TUESDAY, MARCH 24, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:02 a.m., in
room 2322, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joseph R. Pitts
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Pitts, Guthrie, Shimkus,
Murphy, Blackburn, Lance, Griffith, Bilirakis, Long, Ellmers,
Bucshon, Brooks, Collins, Upton (ex officio), Green,
Butterfield, Castor, Sarbanes, Schrader, Kennedy, Pallone (ex
officio).
Staff present: Clay Alspach, Chief Counsel, Health; Gary
Andres, Staff Director; Noelle Clemente, Press Secretary;
Michelle Rosenberg, GAO Detailee, Health; Chris Sarley, Policy
Coordinator, Environment and the Economy; Adrianna Simonelli,
Legislative Clerk; Heidi Stirrup, Policy Coordinator, Health;
Josh Trent, Professional Staff Member, Health; Gregory Watson,
Staff Assistant; Traci Vitek, Detailee, Health; Ziky Ababiya,
Policy Analyst; Christine Brennan, Press Secretary; Jeff
Carroll, Staff Director; Tiffany Guarascio, Deputy Staff
Director and Chief Health Advisor; Meredith Jones, Director,
Outreach and Member Services; Rick Kessler, Senior Advisor and
Staff Director, Energy and the Environment; Rachel Pryor,
Health Policy Advisor.
Mr. Pitts. The subcommittee will come to order.
The Chair will recognize himself for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Today we will hear from witnesses about the 340B Discount
Drug Program. Section 340B of the Public Health Service Act
requires drug manufacturers who wish to participate in Medicaid
to provide discounted outpatient drugs to eligible healthcare
organizations known as covered entities who serve uninsured,
low-income populations.
This program designed to stretch scarce Federal dollars is
critically important for indigent and low-income patients who
may otherwise be unable to access needed drugs or afford
treatment.
Eligible covered entities are defined in statute and
include HRSA supported health centers and look-alikes, Ryan
White Clinics, State AIDS Drug Assistance programs, Medicare
and Medicaid disproportionate share hospitals, children's
hospitals, and other safety-net providers.
The Health Resources and Services Administration, HRSA, the
agency that administers the 340B Drug Discount Program,
indicates that approximately 11,000 covered entities currently
participate in the program, with more than 1 in 3 hospitals
participating. Some 800 or more manufacturers also participate
in the program.
Although the program was created in 1992, recent years have
seen significant changes and expansions of the program. For
example, from 2001 to 2011, the number of covered entities
roughly doubled. Since HRSA issued guidance related to contract
pharmacies in 2010, their use in the program has grown
exponentially.
Today we will hear from three witnesses who are experts on
the program. The witnesses from GAO and the Inspector General's
Office have both helped author reports advising Congress on the
program and continue to monitor HRSA's management of the
program.
GAO and OIG have reported that unclear program guidelines
and inconsistent oversight is partially responsible for some of
the challenges the program currently faces in being accountable
to taxpayers, patients, and stakeholders. Covered entities and
manufacturers understandably cannot comply with rules that are
unclear.
We benefit today from hearing directly from HRSA about the
agency's day-to-day work to respond to the findings of those
reports as they seek to more effectively oversee and
efficiently operate the 340B Program.
HRSA has taken steps and made improvements in recent years,
so we are glad they can be here today. Recent developments have
hamstrung their ability to promulgate regulations to better
manage the program, so we look forward to hearing from them.
One thing I hope we can all agree on is that to preserve
the 340B Program and ensure that it is serving those who most
need help, greater oversight and transparency is needed to
increase the program's accountability. Today's hearing marks
the first step in that direction.
I would like to welcome all of our witnesses today. We look
forward to your testimony on this important subject.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Joseph R. Pitts

Today, we will hear from witnesses about the 340B Drug
Discount Program.Section 340B of the Public Health Service Act
(PHSA) requires drug manufacturers, who wish to participate in
Medicaid, to provide discounted outpatient drugs to eligible
health care organizations known as ``covered entities'' who
serve uninsured, low-income populations.
This program, designed to stretch scarce Federal dollars,
is critically important for indigent and low-income patients
who may otherwise be unable to access needed drugs or afford
treatment.
Eligible covered entities are defined in statute and
include HRSA-supported health centers and look-alikes, Ryan
White clinics and State AIDS Drug Assistance programs,
Medicare/Medicaid Disproportionate Share Hospitals, children's
hospitals, and other safety net providers.
The Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA),
the agency that administers the 340B drug discount program,
indicates that approximately 11,000 covered entities currently
participate in the program, with more than one in three
hospitals participating. Some 800 or more manufacturers also
participate in the program.
Although the program was created in 1992, recent years have
seen significant changes and expansions of the program.
For example, from 2001 to 2011, the number of covered
entities roughly doubled. Since HRSA issued guidance related to
contract pharmacies in 2010, their use in the program has grown
exponentially.
Today we will hear from three witnesses who are experts on
the program. The witnesses from GAO and the Inspector General's
office have both helped author reports advising Congress on the
program, and continue to monitor HRSA's management of the
program.
GAO and OIG have reported that unclear program guidelines
and inconsistent oversight is partially responsible for some of
the challenges the program currently faces in being accountable
to taxpayers, patients, and stakeholders. Covered entities and
manufacturers understandably cannot comply with rules that are
unclear.
We benefit today from hearing directly from HRSA about the
agency's day-to-day work to respond to the findings of those
reports as they seek to more effectively oversee and
efficiently operate the 340B program. HRSA has taken steps and
made improvements in recent years, so we are glad they can be
here today. Recent developments have hamstrung their ability to
promulgate regulations to better manage the program, so we look
forward to hearing from them.
One thing I hope we can all agree on, is that to preserve
the 340B program and ensure that it is serving those who most
need help, greater oversight and transparency is needed to
increase the program's accountability. Today's hearing marks
the first step in that direction.
I would like to welcome all of our witnesses today. We look
forward to your testimony on this important subject.

Mr. Pitts. And at this point, I have a UC request today.
There are 31 documents that I would like to submit for the
record. There are letters, articles, policy statements,
reports, testimony, and various white papers on the 340B
program included submitted by a wide range of stakeholders we
have shared. Without objection, so ordered. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at http://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=103082.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Pitts. And I yield the rest of my time to Ms.
Blackburn.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I concur with everything that you have had to say on
this. We all appreciate the 340B Program. We do have questions
and we do have concerns. And we know we are responsible for the
oversight. We want to be diligent in that manner. I think the
rapid growth in the program has raised concerns including the
adequacy of oversight, so I appreciate the hearing.
Also questions on accountability and how that
accountability may vary from grantees who receive 340B funds
and hospitals who also receive those funds. Additional
questions have been raised concerning the definition of a
patient and how those 340B revenues are distributed.
And so I thank you all for being here.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady, and now
recognizes the ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr. Green,
for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GENE GREEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And good morning and thank you all for being here today.
And I want to thank our witnesses for coming here to testify.
The 340B Drug Pricing Program was created by Congress to
help safety-net providers care for their most vulnerable
patients and afford drugs that would otherwise be out of reach.
Since its inception in 1992, stakeholders and policymakers have
been discussing and debating the intended purpose and
appropriate scope of the 340B Program.
I thank the chairman for having this hearing today to
examine this critical program and the role that it plays in our
healthcare system.
It was the hope of policymakers when designing 340B that
lower drug prices would enable safety-net providers to stretch
scarce Federal resources as far as possible to reach more
patients and provide a more comprehensive service through these
savings.
The law does not specify how these savings incurred under
340B discounts must be used by covered entities, a point that
has been brought up by both opponents and proponents of the
program, yet a GAO study in 2011 confirmed that at large,
covered entities use these savings to provide more care to more
patients including medications that would otherwise be
unaffordable to those they serve.
For example, Houston Harris Health System which primarily
serves the indigent population in Houston, Harris County, Texas
saves approximately $17 million a year through participating in
the 340B Drug Program. Harris Health uses savings from the
program on patient care services which includes the cost of
treatment, administration, management of services and
facilities, and improving access to quality healthcare for our
community.
Harris Health System has, like other safety-net hospitals
across the country, provide access to cost-effective, quality
healthcare delivered to all the residents of Harris County
regardless of their ability to pay.
There is always more patient need than we have the capacity
to provide and the community's access to care depends upon the
contribution of every possible source of funding such as the
340B Drug Program.
I cannot underscore enough how important the 340B Program
continues to be for hospitals and other entities that provide
care to under-served patients in every district across the
country. It is a key part of the multi-prong approach to
provide all individuals with access to quality care.
With that said, the program has grown significantly and
oversight is appropriate to ensure that it is working properly.
Since 1992, the 340B Program has expanded significantly both
directly due to the categories of covered entities and
indirectly due to the broader eligibility criteria for existing
categories.
According to the GAO, the number of 340B covered entities
has doubled in a little over 10 years to more than 16,500
sites. Similarly, the number of contract pharmacy agreements
has expanded dramatically over the last decade, particularly
since April of 2010 when 340B entities were allowed to contact
multiple pharmacies.
The 2011 GAO study found that the Health Resources and
Services Administration or HRSA oversight of 340B was, quote,
``inadequate to provide reasonable assurance that covered
entities and drug manufacturers are in compliance with the
program requirements,'' unquote.
HRSA has taken great steps to implement recommendations
made by the GAO in its 2011 study including conducting selected
audits and clarifying 340B nondiscrimination policy. But
additional administration action and potentially additional
authorities may be needed for HRSA to conduct proper oversight
of such a large and important program.
I understand HRSA has been working to establish a formal
set of regulations to standardize the definition of an eligible
patient, compliance requirements for contract pharmacy
agreements, clarify hospital eligibility criteria, and
eligibility of off-site facilities.
Steps such as updating HRSA guidance on the definition of a
patient could address challenges that arise from different
interpretations of the current guidance. This would further
program integrity efforts and make certain that the 340B
Program is achieving its intended outcomes and maintaining the
long-term viability.
Congress should let HRSA release its guidance and analyze
its impact before making changes to the 340B Program that would
harm safety-net hospitals and our vulnerable patients. I know
HRSA strives to achieve the best outcomes for those they serve.
The agency does great work to fulfill its mission of improving
access to healthcare services for people who are medically
under-served.
As we examine the 340B Program and oversight efforts during
today's hearing, it is important to remember that for 23 years,
340B's mission has been to lower drug costs for safety-net
providers so they can buy more comprehensive services and reach
more individuals.
The program enables providers to decide how to best serve
their communities through obtaining and leveraging savings from
manufacturers so more patients can receive more care in their
communities.
I thank the agency for their continued efforts to implement
and oversee 340B and GAO and OIG for their work and look
forward to the hearing.
And, Mr. Chairman, I would also like to ask unanimous
consent to place into testimony a statement submitted by
Ascension on the 340B Program.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Pitts. The Chair now recognizes the chair of the full
committee, Mr. Upton, 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Good morning. Since its inception in 1992, the
340B Program has provided critically important pharmaceutical
drugs at a discounted price to a range of entities providing
healthcare to some of our Nation's most needy and most
vulnerable patients. These facilities include community health
centers, Ryan White Clinic, State AIDS Drug Assistance
programs, as well as a range of qualifying hospitals.
Through the years, the program has allowed covered entities
to stretch scarce resources to better serve millions of
patients in Michigan and across the country who are uninsured,
under-insured, or dependent on programs like Medicaid and
Medicare.
I have seen firsthand the great work that this program does
in my district in southwest Michigan. From the Bronson Health
System in Kalamazoo, to Lakeland in Berrien and Cass Counties,
to Allegan General Hospital in the north, to numerous family
health centers, the 340B Program has ensured that many of my
under-served constituents have access to affordable, life-
saving medicines that they otherwise would not be able to
afford.
There is no doubt that the 340B Program has played an
important role in helping reduce costs while also extending
access.
I am pleased that this committee today will have the
opportunity to learn more about some of these issues facing the
340B Program. This committee has not held a hearing on the
program since 2005, but there have been some very important
changes to the program in recent years.
The program was expanded, as we know, under the Affordable
Care Act and more types of providers were allowed to
participate as covered entities. Since HRSA guidance in 2010,
there has been a rapid expansion of the use of contract
pharmacies.
GAO and the Inspector General's Office have raised some
concerning findings for sure about the mixed successes of
current oversight of the program that need to be examined. And
more recently, HRSA, the agency charged with overseeing the
340B Program, has found itself unable to successfully
promulgate binding regulations, thus hampering its ability to
effectively manage the program as we would like to see it.
As a strong supporter of the 340B Program, I believe that
there has been and will continue to be an important role for
this program to continue. However, some of the findings from
the careful work conducted by the GAO and the IG's Office are
of concern.
I appreciate GAO, OIG, and HRSA coming today to help the
committee better understand the challenges before us. We look
forward to learning what steps HRSA has taken to strengthen the
program for all patients, the uninsured, seniors, Medicaid
patients, and the insured patients which are served by covered
entities.
It is in the interest of good Government to see program
integrity strengthened, the program's operating parameters
clarified, and the program's rules consistently enforced.
I believe that the biggest supporters of the program should
be the biggest champions of ensuring that the 340B Program is
well run in a manner that is transparent and accountable to all
stakeholders.
And I yield back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Since its creation in 1992, the 340B program has provided
critically important pharmaceutical drugs at a discounted price
to a range of entities providing health care to some of our
Nation's most needy and vulnerable patients. These facilities
include community health centers, Ryan White clinics, State
AIDS Drug Assistance programs, as well as a range of qualifying
hospitals.
Through the years, the program has allowed covered entities
to stretch scarce resources to better serve millions of
patients in Michigan and across the country who are uninsured,
underinsured, or dependent on programs like Medicaid and
Medicare.
I've seen the great work this program does in my district.
From the Bronson Health System in the Kalamazoo area, to
Lakeland in Berrien and Cass Counties, to Allegan General
Hospital in the north, to the numerous Family Health Centers,
the 340B program has ensured that many of my underserved
constituents have access to affordable, lifesaving medicine.
There's no doubt that the 340B program has played an important
role in helping reduce costs while also extending access.
I am pleased that our committee today will have the
opportunity to learn more about some of the issues facing the
340B program. This committee has not held a hearing on the
program since 2005, but there have been important changes to
the program in recent years.

The program was expanded under the Affordable Care
Act and more types of providers were allowed to participate as
covered entities.

Since HRSA guidance in 2010, there has been a
rapid expansion of the use of contract pharmacies.

GAO and the Inspector General's office have raised
some concerning findings about the mixed successes of current
oversight of the program.

More recently, HRSA--the agency charged with
overseeing the 340B program--has found itself unable to
successfully promulgate binding regulations, thus hampering its
ability to effectively manage the program.
As a strong supporter of the 340B program, I believe there
has been, and will continue to be, an important role for the
program. However, some of the findings from the careful work
conducted by the GAO and Inspector General's Office are of
concern. I appreciate GAO, OIG, and HRSA coming today to help
the committee better understand the challenges HRSA and the
program face.
We look forward to learning what steps HRSA is taking to
strengthen the program for all the patients--the uninsured,
seniors, Medicaid patients, and the insured patients--which are
served by covered entities. It is in the interest of good
Government to see program integrity strengthened, the program's
operating parameters clarified, and the program's rules
consistently enforced. I believe that the biggest supporters of
the program should be the biggest champions of ensuring the
340B program is well-run in a manner that is transparent and
accountable to all stakeholders.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses.

Mr. Pitts. Anyone on the majority side seeking time? We
still have 1 minute.
Mrs. Ellmers, you are recognized.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to our panel for being here.
And, Mr. Chairman, thank you so much for holding this
hearing on 340B.
I just want to start off by saying that I realize HRSA
received several million dollars in our last appropriations
bill and appropriate steps you have taken to increase oversight
in the program.
For the record, I would like to make it clear that I
understand and appreciate the importance of the 340B Program
and the critical role it plays for many patients in the U.S. To
be clear, this is a program set up by the Federal Government,
yet the Federal Government does not know where the money is
going. That is a big concern.
For example, an analysis by IMS Institute for Healthcare
Informatics calculated prices of 10 common chemotherapy
treatments and found that hospitals charge 189 percent more on
average or nearly triple what the same infusion would cost an
independent doctor's office.
These are the questions that we have. My hope is that we
are going to get transparency and we are going to understand
how the program is being utilized. Covered entities
participating in the 340B Program must be fully transparent and
accountable for dispensing medicines and ensuring the program's
integrity.
As the program has exploded in growth over the past 2
decades, Congress should have a clear understanding as to how
that money is being spent to ensure that it is still serving
its intended purpose.
Thank you very much. I yield back the remainder of my time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady, and now
recognize the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Pallone, 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In 1992, a bipartisan Congress established the 340B Program
to expand access to affordable healthcare by limiting the cost
of outpatient drugs paid for certain safety-net providers. And
since that time 22 years ago, the 340B Program has played a
critical role in our healthcare system to ensure that low-
income and vulnerable individuals have access to affordable
healthcare.
In supporting our vital Nation's safety net from community
health centers to safety-net hospitals, HIV clinics, and
hemophilia treatment centers, the 340B Program has made the
difference between patients getting access to life-saving
healthcare services and drugs or going without.
And Congress' intention when this program was created was
to help covered entities expand their capacity to serve their
patients. Through savings from the drugs purchased at a
discounted rate, 340B providers are able to stretch scarce
resources to reach more eligible patients and provide more
comprehensive health services.
It is without a doubt that the resources provided through
the 340B Program have a direct impact on augmenting patient
care throughout the country and will continue to play an
integral role in the future by supporting the mission of
safety-net providers to serve low-income, uninsured, and under-
insured patients.
Of course, for this program to continue to function as
Congress intended, proper oversight of 340B is of paramount
importance. And I think we can all agree here today that the
mission of this program is sound and a continued emphasis on
program integrity will make the 340B Program stronger now and
in coming years.
So I wanted to thank the chairman again for calling this
long-overdue hearing. I don't know if anybody on my side, I
don't think, wants any additional time, so I will just yield
back the balance of my time, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

I would like to thank the chairman for calling this hearing
on the 340B Program. And thank the witnesses for their
testimony here today.
In 1992, a bipartisan Congress established the 340B Program
to expand access to affordable health care by limiting the cost
of outpatient drugs paid for certain safety net providers.
Since that time 22 years ago, the 340B Program has played a
critical role in our health care system to ensure that low-
income and vulnerable individuals have access to affordable
health care. In supporting our vital Nation's safety net--from
community health centers to safety net hospitals to HIV clinics
and Hemophilia treatment centers--the 340B Program has made the
difference between patients getting access to lifesaving health
care services and drugs or going without.
Congress' intention when this program was created was to
help covered entities expand their capacity to serve their
patients. Through savings from the drugs purchased at a
discounted rate, 340B providers are able to stretch scarce
resources to reach more eligible patients, and provide more
comprehensive health services.
It is without a doubt that the resources provided through
the 340B Program have a direct impact on augmenting patient
care throughout the country and will continue to play an
integral role in the future by supporting the mission of safety
net providers who serve low-income, uninsured, and underinsured
patients.
Of course, for this program to continue to function as
Congress intended, proper oversight of the 340B program is of
paramount importance. I think we can all agree here today that
the mission of this program is sound, and a continued emphasis
on program integrity will make the 340B program stronger now
and in the coming years.
I thank the chairman again for calling this long-overdue
hearing, and I yield back the balance of my time.

Mr. Pitts. All right. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
As always, written statements from all Members, opening
statements, will be made part of the record.
We have 1 panel today and I will introduce them in the
order that they will present testimony.
First, Ms. Diana Espinosa, Deputy Administrator at the
Health Resources and Services Administration. She is
accompanied by Commander Krista Pedley, the Director of the
Office of Pharmacy Affairs at the Health Resources and Services
Administration; Dr. Debbie Draper, Director of Health Care at
the Government Accountability Office; and Ms. Ann Maxwell, the
Assistant Inspector General for Evaluation and Inspections in
the Office of the Inspector General at HHS.
Thank you all for coming. Your written testimony will be
made a part of the record. You will each be given 5 minutes to
summarize your testimony. And at this point, the Chair
recognizes Ms. Espinosa for 5 minutes for her summary.

STATEMENTS OF DIANA ESPINOSA, DEPUTY ADMINISTRATOR, HEALTH
RESOURCES AND SERVICES ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND
HUMAN SERVICES, ACCOMPANIED BY KRISTA M. PEDLEY, DIRECTOR,
OFFICE OF PHARMACY AFFAIRS, HEALTH RESOURCES AND SERVICES
ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES; DEBRA
A. DRAPER, DIRECTOR, HEALTH CARE, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY
OFFICE; ANN MAXWELL, ASSISTANT INSPECTOR GENERAL, OFFICE OF
EVALUATION AND INSPECTIONS, OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL,
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

STATEMENT OF DIANA ESPINOSA

Ms. Espinosa. Good morning, Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member
Green, and Members of the subcommittee. I appreciate the
opportunity to appear before you today to discuss the steps we
have taken to strengthen the oversight of the 340B Drug Pricing
Program and the challenges we face.
The Health Resources and Services Administration or HRSA is
the primary Federal agency within the Department of Health and
Human Services charged with improving access to healthcare
services for people who are medically under-served.
HRSA works to strengthen our primary care infrastructure,
bolster the healthcare workforce, and achieve health equity.
HRSA strives to achieve the best outcomes for those we serve
and make the best use of taxpayer dollars. To that end, program
integrity is essential to all HRSA programs including the 340B
Program.
The program was authorized to stretch scarce Federal
resources by substantially reducing the cost of covered
outpatient drugs to participating eligible entities also known
as covered entities.
In fiscal year 2013, covered entities saved an estimated
$3.8 billion on covered outpatient drugs. While the law does
not specify how 340B Program savings must be used, covered
entities have indicated that they use the savings to provide
more care to more patients and provide medications to those who
may not otherwise be able to afford them.
As part of our oversight of the 340B Program, HRSA verifies
that both 340B covered entities and manufacturers are in
compliance with program requirements. The Congress provided
HRSA with an additional $6 million in fiscal year 2014 which
has allowed us to expand our oversight.
In 2012, HRSA began conducting selective audits and
clarified the 340B nondiscrimination policy. As a result, GAO
closed 2 recommendations related to those issues from its 2011
report. The remaining 2 recommendations direct HRSA to clarify
hospital eligibility requirements and the definition of a 340B
patient. HRSA plans to address them in a proposed guidance we
will be issuing for public comment later this year.
The HHS Office of the Inspector General recommended that
HRSA develop a pricing system and we expect this pricing system
to be operational later this year.
HRSA uses a comprehensive approach to ensure compliance by
covered entities. An entity must apply for participation in the
program and recertify annually. Additionally, HRSA conducts
risk-based and targeted on-site audits of covered entities.
Entities are required to develop and implement corrective
action plans to respond to audit findings. Summaries of the
findings are posted for the public on the HRSA Web site and
this information is also used to help inform our technical
assistance efforts.
HRSA also has mechanisms in place to ensure manufacturers
comply with statute and offer the 340B ceiling price to covered
entities. In addition, we are currently developing protocols
for conducting additional audits of manufacturers.
Let me now turn to the forthcoming HRSA omnibus proposed
guidance and speak to our rule-making authority. As many of you
know, last year, HRSA planned to issue a proposed omnibus
regulation for the 340B Program to establish additional clear,
enforceable policy to advance our program oversight.
Before HRSA was scheduled to issue the omnibus proposed
regulation, the U.S. District Court issued a ruling
invalidating the 340B orphan drug regulation finding that HRSA
lacked explicit statutory authority to issue it. In light of
this ruling, HRSA withdrew the omnibus proposed regulation from
Office of Management and Budget review.
There are 3 areas of the 340B statute with explicit
regulatory authority, calculation of the 340B ceiling price,
imposition of manufacturer civil monetary penalties, and
implementation of a dispute resolution process.
We expect this year to issue notices of proposed rule
making on all 3 of these areas. We lack explicit regulatory
authority for the other provisions in 340B Program statute.
Absent that authority, HRSA intends to release a proposed
omnibus guidance for public comment later this year. We will
then consider the public comment and finalize the guidance.
HRSA will continue to use the full extent of agency
authorities in its efforts to ensure the integrity of the 340B
Program. With support from the Congress, we have strengthened
our management and operations to manage this program as
effectively and efficiently as possible.
I appreciate the opportunity to testify today and look
forward to your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Espinosa follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
Commander Pedley, do you have an opening statement?
Ms. Pedley. I do not.
Mr. Pitts. All right. Dr. Draper, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF DEBRA A. DRAPER

Ms. Draper. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Green, and
Members of the subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to be
here today to discuss the 340B Program including issues
concerning its oversight.
Administered by HRSA, the 340B Program was initially
created in 1992 with various legislative changes in the ensuing
years. While participation is voluntary, there are strong
incentives to do so.
For participating entities such as federally qualified
health centers and certain hospitals, substantial cost savings,
20 to 50 percent of the cost of outpatient drugs, can be
realized through the program. For drug manufacturers,
participation is required to receive Medicaid reimbursement.
The 340B Program has seen significant growth in recent
years. According to HRSA, for example, there were over 11,000
unique entities participating as of January 2015, a 30 percent
increase since 2008. Additionally, spending on 340B drug
purchases was estimated at $7.5 billion for 2013, up from $6
billion for 2011.
My comments today focus on inadequacies in 340B Program
oversight that we identified in our September 2011 report as
well as progress HRSA has made in implementing related
recommendations.
We found that HRSA primarily relied on participating
entities and manufacturers to self-police and ensure their own
compliance with program requirements. Beyond that, HRSA engaged
in few other oversight activities of the program.
At the time of our review, for example, the agency had
never conducted audits of participating entities to ensure
compliance with the program. We found that HRSA's guidance was
often inadequate, increasing the risk for interpretation of
requirements that might result in misuse of the program.
For example, HRSA's guidance was not specific in the
practices drug manufacturers were to follow to ensure that
drugs were equitably distributed to both participating and
nonparticipating entities when distribution was restricted,
such as when a drug was in short supply.
Additionally, HRSA's guidance on the definition of a
patient did not clearly define when an individual was
considered eligible for discounted drugs under the program.
Furthermore, HRSA had not issued guidance specifying the
criteria for participation in the program for hospitals that
were not publicly owned or operated.
To address these oversight inadequacies, we made a number
of recommendations to ensure the appropriate use of the 340B
Program. And in response, HRSA has taken actions to implement
them.
We recommended that HRSA conduct audits of participating
entities to better ensure compliance including ensuring that
340B drugs are not being diverted to ineligible patients. In
response, HRSA began conducting audits of participating
entities which they have done since 2012.
Through these audits, instances of noncompliance have been
identified including violations related to drug diversion. The
agency has developed a process to address noncompliance through
corrective action plans. Among other things, participating
entities may be required to repay manufacturers if they
inappropriately receive discounts.
We recommended that HRSA provide more specific guidance on
cases in which drug manufacturers restrict the distribution of
drugs at 340B prices. In response, HRSA issued updated guidance
in 2012 which outlined the agency's policy for manufacturers
who intend to restrict the distribution of a drug.
Although HRSA took steps to address our other two
recommendations, it has not yet implemented them. We
recommended that HRSA provide more specific guidance on the
definition of a patient eligible for drug discounts under the
340B Program. We also recommended that HRSA issue guidance to
clarify the criteria that hospitals not publicly owned or
operated must meet to be eligible for participation in the 340B
Program.
HRSA planned to address both of these recommendations in a
comprehensive regulation which had been developed and submitted
to OMB in 2014. However, a Federal Court ruling narrowly
defined HRSA's statutory rule-making authority for the 340B
Program which prompted the agency to withdraw its comprehensive
regulation.
HRSA officials told us that they expect to issue guidelines
that will address these remaining recommendations this fiscal
year.
Moving forward, it is essential that HRSA continue its
oversight activities including monitoring and audits of 340B
Program participants. Because of the complex nature of and
significant growth in the program, it is also critical that
program requirements are clearly and explicitly laid out in
guidance or regulations. Otherwise, much is left to
interpretation, increasing the risk of misuse of the 340B
Program.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my opening remarks. I am happy
to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Draper follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady, and now
recognizes Ms. Maxwell 5 minutes for opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ANN MAXWELL

Ms. Maxwell. Good morning, Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member
Green, and other distinguished Members of the subcommittee. I
am pleased to join you today to discuss the integrity and the
effectiveness of the 340B Drug Discount Program.
This program allows safety-net providers to purchase
outpatient drugs at a discount from drug manufacturers.
Specifically the law establishes a maximum ceiling price that
drug manufacturers are allowed to charge these providers.
To ensure robust program integrity, the OIG has recommended
numerous actions to improve this program. In response to OIG
and GAO recommendations as well as congressional action
informed by those recommendations, HRSA has strengthened its
oversight, but there is more that could be done to strengthen
program integrity.
OIG work shows some continuing challenges. These challenges
affect 340B providers like community-access hospitals,
community health centers, critical-access hospitals, and
children's hospitals, as well as State Medicaid agencies and
drug manufacturers.
OIG's work highlights two major areas of concern. One is
lack of transparency in the program and the other is a lack of
clarity in program guidance.
With respect to transparency, key stakeholders are in the
dark. Neither providers nor State Medicaid agencies have all
the information needed to ensure the integrity of 340B
transactions.
OIG recommends three steps HRSA can take to increase
transparency and ensure the program achieve its goals. The
first two have to do with sharing ceiling prices. We recommend
that HRSA shares ceiling prices with providers. This will allow
providers to ensure they are not being overcharged by drug
manufacturers.
We also recommend that HRSA shares ceiling prices with
State Medicaid agencies. This will allow State Medicaid
agencies to ensure they are not overcharged when they reimburse
340B providers for Medicaid patients. Making this happen would
require a new authority from Congress.
Finally, we recommend greater claims transparency. HRSA
should further improve tools intended to make 340B claims
transparent to Medicaid. Medicaid agencies need this
information to protect drug manufacturers from providing
rebates on drugs that have already received an up-front
discount through the 340B Program.
In addition to the lack of transparency, program guidance
lacks clarity, failing to keep up with the evolving and complex
marketplace. One key change that has taken place over the past
5 years is a growing reliance on retail pharmacies.
In retail pharmacy settings, we found that providers made
different determinations on what prescriptions were eligible
for the discount. Let me illustrate that with an example.
Let's imagine a doctor sees a patient at a community health
center. Later that same doctor sees the same patient at her
private practice. If that doctor prescribes a drug to that
patient at her private practice, is that prescription eligible
for the 340B discount?
One provider we talked to in our study said yes. Another
provider in our study said no. And yet another provider said
maybe. So who is right? We couldn't tell based on current
guidance.
HRSA's guidance addresses patient eligibility, leaving room
for interpretation as to which of a patient's prescriptions
might, in fact, be eligible for the program.
Furthermore, guidance doesn't address how to handle
uninsured patients at retail pharmacies. We found that because
of the way retail pharmacies operate, uninsured patients may
end up paying full price for their prescriptions.
We believe it is important that HRSA update program
guidance to more clearly and specifically define patient
eligibility as well as address other complexities introduced by
the use of retail pharmacies. Without more clarity, it is hard
to determine or enforce compliance.
We appreciate and share your interest in the integrity and
the effectiveness of the 340B Program. Towards that end, we
have ongoing work in this area that we plan to issue later this
year and can share with you at that time.
At this time, I am happy to be of assistance if you have
any questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Maxwell follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
And we will now begin questioning. I will recognize myself
5 minutes for that purpose.
First for the GAO. Dr. Draper, in your report, you noted
that using the DSH adjustment percentage as part of the 340B
eligibility criteria for hospitals has the effect of making
eligibility for 340B expand as more people become insured due
to broader Medicaid coverage.
Since your report was written, we have seen the uninsured
rates decline at hospitals in States that have expanded
Medicaid.
The question is, do you think it makes sense for hospitals
in those States to gain full access to 340B just as their
charity care burden is decreasing due to patients gaining
Medicaid or do you think there might be another metric for 340B
eligibility that could work better than the DSH metric to help
ensure the program reaches the hospitals that are truly serving
a disproportionate share of uninsured and vulnerable patients?
Ms. Draper. Well, it is probably best if I first explain
what DSH is. It is actually an inpatient indicator. The 340B
Program is an outpatient program. DSH is actually the sum of
the percentage of Medicare inpatient days attributable to
patients entitled to both Medicare Part A and Supplemental
Security Income and the percentage of total inpatient days
attributable to patients eligible for Medicaid but not eligible
for Medicare Part A.
So it really is an inpatient indicator and it is sometimes
used as a proxy for uncompensated care or the amount of low-
income clients a particular facility serves.
So the question is an interesting one. And part of the
issue is that it is a difficult question to answer because much
has changed in the healthcare landscape over the last several
years since the 340B Program was created in 1992.
One of the big things, of course, is the healthcare reform
that was recently enacted which provided coverage for more
people than originally was the case when the program was
initially established.
However, I think the bigger question is, what is the intent
of the 340B Program. And there is a lot of uncertainty or lack
of clarity around what is this program intended to do.
In our prior work when we issued our 2011 report, there
were a lot of varying interpretations of what the 340B Program
was. HRSA talks about the program. And the purpose of the
program is to enable covered entities to stretch scarce Federal
resources to reach more patients and provide more comprehensive
services. And this was based on the committee report for the
House Energy and Commerce that accompanied the--when this was
first created in 1992.
Others believe that this is a program to assist low-income
individuals in need of medications. And while it does that,
there is no criteria in terms of patient eligibility, no
criteria related to level of income. So it could benefit
anyone, any level of income as long as they meet the other
criteria for an eligible patient.
And I can just tell you when we conducted our work in 2011,
we found a range of payer mixes in the hospitals that we
interviewed. We asked them about their Medicaid and uninsured
payer mix and it ranged anywhere from 15 percent to 85 percent.
So it is really all over the board, and I think it is just
really being able to add more clarity. It is important to add
more clarity and more specificity to what is the intent of the
program, what is it intended to do.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you.
Ms. Espinosa, under the 340B Program, prisons and jails are
not 340B covered entities eligible to purchase drugs under the
340B Drug Pricing Program. However, according to HRSA's prime
vendors Web site, in some case, quote, ``State law or other
arrangements create programs where a covered entity provides
healthcare services to incarcerated persons such that the
incarcerated persons can be considered patients of the entity
eligible for 340B drugs,'' end quote.
In these cases, to receive 340B drugs, incarcerated persons
must meet the 340B patient definition. But given HRSA's own
statements about the lack of a clear, enforceable standard
definition of the patient, this rings a bit hollow.
What is HRSA doing to address this issue?
Ms. Espinosa. The definition of a patient is a key aspect
of our oversight practice. And we plan to address that in the
omnibus proposed guidance that we will be issuing later this
year. We understand that clarifying the patient definition is
essential to oversight and it is a priority for us. We will
clarify it to the greatest extent that we can within our
ability.
Mr. Pitts. How many covered entities provide healthcare
services to incarcerated persons?
Ms. Espinosa. I don't think we have that specific data
point with us, sir, but certainly we can provide it to you in
follow-up.
Mr. Pitts. My time is expired. The Chair recognizes the
ranking member, Mr. Green, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Espinosa, HRSA was given more funding for the past two
budget cycles for program integrity activities in the 340B
Program.
Can you detail the actions that were taken with this
funding?
Ms. Espinosa. Yes, sir. We use the funding to strengthen
our oversight using various strategies. We have increased the
number of audits that are performed and we have also used it to
hire auditors. Those audits are conducted by auditors in one
part of HRSA that work together with program staff. So we have
that check and balance of different parts of our organization
that can kind of discuss the issues and ensure that we are
applying a uniform standard.
We have also strengthened and modernized the system, the
340B system that we use for keeping track of eligible entities
and their compliance. Frankly, we had a lot of disparate
systems and we have been working to connect them all to help
facilitate our oversight and use different pieces of
information to check against each other and also----
Mr. Green. Let me just----
Ms. Espinosa. Sure.
Mr. Green. Have you shown any savings and the audits have
been useful to HRSA, additional audits?
Ms. Espinosa. The additional audits are always useful to us
because they help us understand the areas where we can be
helpful and provide additional assistance to the covered
entities to provide technical assistance on how to comply. So
they are always helpful to us in that regard as well as
identifying any potential issues that need to be corrected.
Mr. Green. Is it too early to quantify what those audits
did and the savings or reallocation of funds?
Ms. Espinosa. We have not summed the information from the
audits in that fashion.
I think, ask my colleague Commander Pedley if that is
information that we have available that we could potentially--
--
Ms. Pedley. In terms of savings, where it comes into play
is if we do find a covered entity, for example, has diversion
or duplicate discounts, they are now required to repay
manufacturers.
So there is money exchanged there. HRSA does not get
involved in the amounts of money that are involved through that
process, but we do ensure that they repay and have a corrective
action plan in place moving forward.
Mr. Green. So there is no direct savings to the Federal
Government to actually reimburse the manufacturers?
Ms. Pedley. Correct.
Mr. Green. OK. Well, my next question is, do you need
additional Federal appropriations, that is where I was looking
for, to carry forward with the remaining recommendations from
GAO and OIG?
Ms. Espinosa. We are moving forward with the IG and GAO
recommendations. As I mentioned, the pricing system will be
operational later this year with the resources that we already
have. And we are moving forward to clarify the guidance.
We have requested in the President's budget an increase to
continue to expand our oversight to get greater coverage of
both covered entities and manufacturers to ensure that they are
meeting the program requirements.
Mr. Green. OK.
Ms. Espinosa. So we have requested additional funds, but we
are moving forward on the IG and GAO recommendations with our
current budget.
Mr. Green. OK. Both today and in the past, Congress has
weighed in a lot about the program integrity and oversight of
340B.
I want to ask you directly today what were the specifics of
the court decision last year that resulted in HRSA pulling back
from the so-called mega regulations from the Office of
Management and Budget, and I would like specifically what
regulations HRSA can issue in light of the court decisions on
340B?
Ms. Espinosa. Uh-huh. So the court decision was not based
on the merits of the orphan drug regulation but rather on the
method that we--the court found that we did not have explicit
rule-making authority for orphan drugs. And so as a result, we
have, as I mentioned, pulled back the proposed regulation that
we had in process and we are developing that through guidance.
The three areas where we do have explicit rule-making
authority are civil monetary penalties for manufacturers,
dispute resolution process, and----
Ms. Pedley. And the ceiling price.
Ms. Espinosa [continuing]. The ceiling price.
Mr. Green. OK. So I guess for practical purposes under
current law, unless it is one of these three items mentioned,
HRSA is prohibited from issuing regulations on the 340B
Program?
Ms. Espinosa. Yes, sir. The court ruling was very clear
that without explicit rule-making authority, HRSA cannot issue
regulations.
Mr. Green. Mr. Chairman, I have some other questions that I
would like to submit, but I would like that last one for us to
consider. And I yield back my time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman, and now
recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome. It is good to have you. And it is always good that
we look at a program that was established a long time ago,
especially when there is some interest in rural America. When
you have small rural hospitals and federally qualified health
clinics, it has been very, very helpful.
But we also know that that is not true in every case. And
so it is important to, you know, follow the money and see the
qualifications and the payment structures.
So I want to go to Dr. Draper. On covered entities who
participate in the 340B Program through grants are required to
follow strict reporting requirements about how the funds are
used. However, DSH hospitals do not have a similar requirement.
The OIG previously found a significant difference in how
community health centers support needy patients through
contract pharmacies compared to DSH hospitals.
Have any of your research, have you been able to do work to
track revenue generated by 340B prescriptions and what 340B
entities do with those dollars?
Ms. Draper. It is really likely to vary by facility because
it is not a program requirement that facilities track how they
use the revenue generated from the 340B Program. I will say
that----
Mr. Shimkus. Let me, just to have a discussion, based upon
the intent of the original law, I mean, wasn't there basically
intent that the revenue be provided to be helpful to the low-
income population?
Ms. Draper. For our past report, the report that we issued
in 2011, we did interview entities including hospitals and
other like community health centers and other grantees. And it
was a small sample of entities, but they were all reporting
using the revenues generated consistent with their missions.
So, for example, they use the revenues to provide more
comprehensive services in terms of case management services or
patient education. Some facilities reported using the revenue
to expand services to other locations.
So they all reported using it consistent with their
missions, which is required for grantees like community health
centers and other types of grantees. It gets a little bit more
difficult to track for hospitals just because of the complex
nature of those organizational environments.
Mr. Shimkus. And that is a great statement. So there are
differences based on the type of eligible entity in the
reporting?
Ms. Draper. There are differences in just how they use the
340B Program, yes.
Mr. Shimkus. And the reporting. And so the follow-up debate
is really, should be now, I think you alluded to, the
complexity of hospitals may not be as easy to identify where
the benefit goes to, but I think part of our internal debate is
really?
Ms. Draper. Well, this might provide some help because the
majority of growth in the 340B Program has really been in
hospitals. As of January, there were just over 2,000 unique
entities, which represented about 20 percent of the total
unique entities. But if you add on their affiliated sites or
outpatient clinics, it does represent about 51 percent of the
total 340B sites.
HRSA report told us that about 78 percent of all current
340B drug purchases are made by DSH hospitals. So the majority
of the spending is through the DSH hospitals.
Mr. Shimkus. And just following up on this line of
questioning, don't you think just as we debate the program and
the benefits, information provided by all users of the program
regardless of the entity would be helpful in us making a
determination of the credibility of the program and the value
to the identified population?
Ms. Draper. I think that it is important for the program to
ensure that the program is working as intended and benefitting
the intended populations.
Mr. Shimkus. Ms. Maxwell, do you want to add anything to
that?
Ms. Maxwell. Yes. Our work points to a need for greater
transparency not exactly the way that you are talking about,
but I do believe we have concerns about program integrity that
then compromise the ability of the program to achieve its
goals. So more clarity around how the savings are used would
allow us to understand the benefits of the program.
Mr. Shimkus. And, Ms. Espinosa, any comments on this?
Ms. Espinosa. Yes. I wanted to just offer a clarification.
So the program requirements that have been discussed, for
example, on the health centers, I mean, those are in the health
center statute.
So the 340B Program overall does not impose any
requirements on recipients regarding how they use the savings.
It is in the case where they are paired together with other
grant programs and so, for example, the health centers. In that
program, there is a requirement that any savings or revenue
generated in the program benefit the grant, so----
Mr. Shimkus. Yes. My time is expired, but I guess that is
the point of a hearing to identify if you want to do a
legislative fix to make sure there is greater transparency and
give you the authority to do that.
Ms. Espinosa. Sure. I just wanted to clarify where the----
Mr. Shimkus. I know. That is what we are looking at.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman, and now
recognize the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Pallone, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My questions are for Ms. Espinosa. Congressional history
states that the 340B Drug Pricing Program was created to help
designated healthcare providers stretch scarce resources to
provide more comprehensive care to more patients. So, in other
words, the program was established to support these designated
providers.
You stated in your testimony that this is still the intent
of the program. But for the record, can you provide a practical
example of how the structure of the 340B Program has helped
providers to get patients more comprehensive services?
Ms. Espinosa. Sure. The way the program works is that we
could use a health center example, you know, a patient that is
insured may get a prescription at a health center. That
prescription is purchased by the health center at a 340B price,
which has a discount.
And then the health center is able to charge that patient's
insurer, a third-party insurer for the full price. So that
margin, which, as has been discussed, is about 25 to 50 percent
of the drug cost, that helps to support the cost of the health
center running the pharmacy, even just having a pharmacy.
And in the cases with the health centers where there are
additional savings beyond just operating their pharmacy, many
have reported that they use them to enhance services. One
example was on patient education--so educating patients on drug
interactions, something that is very important for people who
have multiple chronic conditions--and expanding hours of
pharmacies. Those are the types of services that we hear the
health centers and many of the other grantees report that they
use the funding for.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Thanks a lot.
It is my understanding that HRSA intends to issue a mega
guidance which deals with many of the outstanding program
integrity issues that are being raised today. And you touched
on this somewhat in your testimony.
However, I wanted to ask you, can you describe in more
detail the items that HRSA will tackle in the forthcoming
guidance and how those items relate to the GAO and OIG
recommendations that we have heard today?
Ms. Espinosa. Sure. As I mentioned, the patient definition
will be addressed in the proposed omnibus guidance. That
relates both directly to the GAO recommendation and also to
some of the IG's findings as far as being able to track
prescriptions.
There is also language on hospital eligibility that we
would like to include in proposed guidance. And just to mention
that these will all be put out for public comment because we do
value the input from stakeholders and others.
A third area is contract pharmacies, guidelines on contract
pharmacies. I think those are kind of the big key areas and
then there are other aspects of policy that we would use the
opportunity to clarify where we can.
Mr. Pallone. Is the guidance on these outlier issues that
GAO and OIG identified an adequate, long-term solution in your
opinion?
Ms. Espinosa. Well, sir, we will continue to oversee this
program using all the tools that we have available to us.
Certainly we see the guidance as bolstering our efforts. I
think that we will need to see, you know, if additional tools
were available, we would certainly use those as well.
Mr. Pallone. And then what about the difficulties, other
difficulties with enforcing guidance in the absence of rule-
making authority?
Ms. Espinosa. Generally rule making allows an agency to be
more specific about its requirements and that is clearly
something that has been identified by both the GAO and IG. So
greater specificity, clarity on the requirements. It also has a
stronger enforcement ability than guidance. So, yes, overall,
rule making is a stronger enforcement tool than guidance.
Mr. Pallone. Let me just get 1 more question. Well, the
auditing practices HRSA has undertaken over the past couple of
years have gone a long way towards improving program integrity.
And I understand that audits are risk based and targeted.
But could you describe in a little detail how HRSA's risk-
based methodology helps to best target which of those entities
to audit?
Ms. Espinosa. So we have been in--the risk-based criteria
take into account the level of complexity of the program. So
understanding that covered entities that have more sites
dispensing prescriptions are going to be more complex and will
require greater oversight.
So our risk-based criteria take into account the number of
sites that a covered entity has as well as the number of
contract pharmacies. So those are two examples of things that
might trigger us to select a covered entity for an audit.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman, and now
recognize the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Griffith, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Do appreciate this hearing. I am learning a lot and that is
why I like coming to these hearings. But let me ask some
questions on some of the answers that have come up.
Ms. Espinosa, you indicated that you only had rule-making
authority on civil penalties, dispute resolution, and ceiling
price. Does that mean you don't have rule-making authority on
what constitutes a 340B patient?
Ms. Espinosa. That is right. We do not have explicit rule-
making authority on that.
Mr. Griffith. And when did the court case that defined this
come down?
Ms. Espinosa. It was over the summer.
Mr. Griffith. So summer of 2014?
Ms. Espinosa. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. All right. And you pulled back your omnibus
guidance that you were working on at the time?
Ms. Espinosa. At the time, we were working on a regulation.
Mr. Griffith. OK. All right. But how much difference is
there particularly--and I am looking at defining the patient
under 340B--how much difference would there be between your
regulation and your guidance? It seems to me you just change a
few words and you are ready to go on that portion of it.
Wouldn't that be true?
Ms. Espinosa. Well, not according to our attorneys. But I
think essentially it keys into the fact that there is different
enforcement authority associated with each one. And because of
that, we cannot be as perhaps clear or definitive in the
requirements----
Mr. Griffith. Well, I understand the court case----
Ms. Espinosa [continuing]. Depending on what the rule----
Mr. Griffith [continuing]. Got in the way, but it still
bothers me, and this is a criticism of the Federal Government
as a whole, that the recommendations came out in 2011 and even
with the guidance, if you hadn't had the court case or the
rules, you probably were looking at late 2014 or early 2015. A
student could get an undergraduate degree in that period of
time and we are having a hard time defining what a patient is
in that same period of time.
And I love lawyers. I am one. But sometimes you have just
got to move forward with common sense and you might be held
back by that. Also, sometimes you don't need to have an
omnibus.
The definition of a patient seems to be a problem GAO
pointed out. Why not get that one moved along and let some of
the more complicated things stay behind for the harder work,
get the simple things done quickly?
I do want to congratulate you, Dr. Draper, on a small point
that is 1 of my pet peeves. Thank you for listing the Medical
College of Virginia in your bio because so many people think
that it is all VCU. And, of course, they are united, but there
wouldn't be a U in VCU if it hadn't been for the Medical
College of Virginia being added to the Richmond facility. So
thank you for listing that and appreciate your hard work on
this.
Ms. Draper. Thank you.
Mr. Griffith. Are there other suggestions you think that
would be simple things that they could work on and get them out
more quickly that Ms. Espinosa ought to be focused on in the
short run as opposed to some of the more difficult things?
Ms. Draper. Well, one of the things I mentioned in my
testimony was that this is a very complex program. You have a
lot of different types of entities and no one entity looks like
another type of entity. So it is a very complex program. And
the growth in the program in recent years has been really
significant.
So I think those factors really make it clear that the
program rules and regulations really need to be very clear and
explicitly laid out either in guidance or in regulation. But on
top of that, I can't stress enough the importance of continuing
oversight and enhancing the oversight to ensure that program
participants are using the program as intended.
Mr. Griffith. And let me say this to Ms. Espinosa: Thank
you so much for your comments, but we are here for a reason.
And if the court said you didn't have authority, I would think
that we would be willing to give you--now, we have the same
problem. Everybody wants an omnibus bill. But I would think
that we would give you authority to define what a 340B patient
is if you all wanted to ask for it.
Ms. Maxwell, let's go to you. We have got the national
trends in healthcare provider consolidations where a hospital
goes out and buys up an outpatient clinic and then takes a
clinic perhaps that is break even but once they qualify that
clinic as a part of their hospital, they can get 340B money.
Can you tell me what problems you see with that because a
Berkeley research group said that that led to about $200
million in additional costs for the Federal Government? Your
comments?
Ms. Maxwell. That is an area that we have not looked at yet
in the Office of Inspector General, so I don't really have a
lot of data at my disposal to comment on that topic.
Mr. Griffith. All right. Well, I appreciate it.
My time is just about up. Thank you all for being here and
thank you so much for an interesting hearing.
I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman, and now
recognize the gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Castor, 5 minutes
for her questions.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for calling this
hearing.
I want to start by saying that 340B is a lifesaver for so
many hard-working Americans. Whenever I visit children's
hospitals or community health centers or safety-net hospitals
back home in Florida, they emphasize to me how important 340B
is to meeting their mission of taking care of families and to
ensuring that the cost of pharmaceuticals doesn't put care out
of reach for so many.
So I really appreciate the work that all of you are doing
to ensure that 340B is functioning as intended, that the
program has integrity, that money is being spent appropriately.
So thank you, HRSA, for following up on the important
recommendations of GAO and the Office of Inspector General and
because in 2011, GAO made recommendations. They said the
discounts offered in the 340B Program provide substantial
benefits, but HRSA has got to improve its oversight.
So in 2012, HRSA began doing both risk-based and targeted
audits. Is it true, Ms. Espinosa, you did 51 audits in 2012?
Ms. Espinosa. Yes.
Ms. Castor. That is correct?
And then to my colleagues, thank you for working on a
bipartisan basis to give HRSA the funds last year, an
additional $6 million to support program integrity efforts.
I understand that now in 2015, the agency is on track to do
200 audits; is that correct?
Ms. Espinosa. Two hundred and ninety-five.
Ms. Castor. Two hundred and ninety-five.
And, Dr. Draper, can you confirm that they have started
doing the audits and they have been able to ratchet up year
over year?
Ms. Draper. Yes. In 2012, they did 51. They went to 94 the
next year and 99. And then they told us that it is actually
200, so 200 audits----
Ms. Espinosa. Yes. I am sorry. I misspoke.
Ms. Draper [continuing]. This fiscal year. So we are happy
to see that. Prior to our work, no audit had been done of any
participating entities, so we see that they are working to
implement that recommendation.
Ms. Castor. Good.
Ms. Espinosa, when Congress created the 340B initiative in
1992, it intended that eligible providers use the 340B drugs
for any patient of the entity regardless of insurance status.
For the program to have any meaningful value to providers
and the patients they serve, 340B providers must be able to
generate savings by using 340B drugs for all eligible patients
including those with insurance.
So as noted in the GAO report, these savings are then used
to cover the cost of providing comprehensive healthcare
services to more vulnerable patients or those who would
struggle to afford high-priced pharmaceuticals.
My understanding is that the law does not nor was it ever
intended to require that discounted drugs only be provided to
uninsured patients or that program savings only be used to
lower the cost of drugs or health services for uninsured
patients.
Do you agree with that?
Ms. Espinosa. Yes, that is correct. The law does not
specify how the savings are to be used, and it also does not
specify the status of any of the patients that could
potentially benefit from the program.
Ms. Castor. And that goes back to what I hear and I know
other Members hear from all of the children's hospitals,
safety-net hospitals, health centers, Ryan White Centers that
the reason why 340B is so important to their overall mission.
I also wanted to ask a different question. Ms. Maxwell, we
talk a great deal about compliance on the part of covered
entities and HRSA's work to ensure proper program integrity.
However, I am curious about how we actually know that
manufacturers are offering the 340B price for drugs fairly to
all entities because there have been press reports in the past
that manufacturers are overcharging for 340B drugs.
In OIG's review of these issues, have you found evidence of
manufacturers overcharging for 340B products?
Ms. Maxwell. Yes. Our work looking at the oversight of 340B
spans back about a decade. In our early work in 2005, we did,
in fact, find instances of manufacturers overcharging. At that
time, it was 13 percent of interactions we found actually had
been overcharged resulting in $13.9 million for the month that
we looked at which is why our recommendations continue to be to
allow for greater transparency, to share those prices with the
providers so they know they are not being overcharged.
We also have an outstanding recommendation to improve
HRSA's oversight of how manufacturers calculate the 340B
ceiling price as well as doing spot checks of transactions so
they know that the correctly calculated prices are what, in
fact, are being charged.
Ms. Castor. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady, and now
recognize the gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Long, 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you all for being here today.
Ms. Espinosa, let me start with you. There are 435 Members
of Congress, and approximately half of the Members of Congress
were not here 5 years ago.
HRSA has yet to share 340B ceiling prices with covered
entities since it was provided that authority to do so 5 years
ago when half the Members of Congress weren't here, were not in
Congress.
Why has it taken so long for HRSA to do this and when does
HRSA plan to begin sharing this information with these covered
entities?
Ms. Espinosa. I think, as I mentioned, we are working on
the pricing system which will be operational later this year.
The issue of the gap in time between the authority and
implementing it relates to funding. It was the funding that the
Congress provided in 2014 that allowed us to move forward on
this particular system.
The 340B Program historically, you know, originally did not
receive an appropriation. Then it received an appropriation and
HRSA provided additional funds through some of its program
funding. But until the Congress provided that increase, we did
not have the resources to implement.
Mr. Long. OK. Does HRSA believe it would be useful to have
similar authority to share 340B ceiling prices with State
Medicaid agencies and if such authority is provided, how long
would it take HRSA to begin sharing that information with the
States?
Ms. Espinosa. That would require a legislative change. So
we currently do not have authority to share that information.
Mr. Long. OK. Sticking with you, Ms. Espinosa, with respect
to the comprehensive guidance which is expected later this
year, how does HRSA intend to ensure adoption of the policies
by the covered entity?
Ms. Espinosa. We would continue to implement our current
practices, which have multiple aspects to them. First, entities
have to register before they can participate, so this guidance
would provide more specificity as far as those requirements.
And then there is annual recertification, and that is kind
of a regular process, regular time that we have to ensure
compliance. Entities at that time also attest they are
complying. And then finally, we have the audit process that we
use to go in, as has been discussed, for the targeted and the
risk-based audits.
Mr. Long. What can we as Members of Congress do to help
HRSA promote the integrity of the 340B Program?
Ms. Espinosa. I think Congress has already been quite
supportive of HRSA's activities. As I mentioned, the additional
resources that we got beginning in 2014 were a real boost to
our program integrity efforts.
The President's budget for fiscal year 2016 also requests
additional funding for 340B to continue to modernize our
oversight practices as well as to enhance and expand them.
Mr. Long. OK. Thank you.
And, Ms. Draper, somewhat recently a study published in
Health Affairs suggests that generic dispensing rates are lower
for 340B prescriptions than for all prescriptions overall,
possibly leading to greater spending under Medicare Part D and
Medicaid.
Is that an issue that GAO has looked into in any detail?
Ms. Draper. We have not looked at that, but I am aware of
that study that was published in 2012. And there were a couple
factors that the authors described as potentially leading to
the lower dispensing rates for generics. One was related to not
having generic equivalents for HIV/AIDS and antiviral, which is
a population that is served by the 340B Program.
Another factor that they talked about was that the
underlying comorbidities and complexities of the 340B patients
may not compare to the patients at large, so they may require
more--so generic drugs may not be appropriate. So those were
the two factors that the authors discussed in that study.
Mr. Long. OK. OK. I think everyone realizes how important
this is to a lot of entities in our congressional districts.
And this is a very important hearing. I thank you all for being
here today and for your testimony.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman, and now
recognize the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Butterfield, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Butterfield. Let me thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
holding this important hearing on the 340B Program.
And I thank the witnesses for your testimony today.
As my colleague, Ms. Castor, said a few moments ago and Mr.
Long from Missouri just reiterated it a moment ago, this is a
big deal back at home. 340B is critical to the communities that
I represent in eastern North Carolina and it its importance
cannot be overstated.
North Carolina's first district has one of the highest
poverty rates in the country and prior to the Affordable Care
Act, many of my constituents were uninsured or under-insured.
Even now many remain uninsured because the Governor and the
General Assembly have been unwilling to expand the Medicaid
Program.
For many North Carolinians, the only way to access the care
they need is through 340B. This bipartisan program helps bring
providers together with pharma to ensure our most vulnerable
populations do not go without necessary medicine.
The integrity of the program is very important. To that
end, I ask that we proceed with caution to avoid disruption to
the patient populations that heavily depend on hospitals for
their healthcare needs.
I, too, would like to go to you, Ms. Espinosa. I would like
to discuss the purpose of the 340B Program to highlight how
important it is to communities like the one that I represent.
Can you describe the type of populations who benefit most,
the very most, from the 340B Program?
Ms. Espinosa. Yes, sir. As has been discussed, many of the
340B entities are the ones that are essential to providing the
safety net for individuals who have limited access to
healthcare or are low income or have other chronic conditions
that may limit their access to healthcare.
So as we have discussed, the Health Center Program is one
example that serves anybody who walks through their doors,
basically, regardless of insurance status or income. And so for
those programs, the 340B savings allow them to continue
operations and to continue to serve those individuals.
Mr. Butterfield. Well, it is obvious to me that the amount
of covered entities participating in the 340B Program has
actually exploded. It has grown exponentially.
What do you attribute that growth to?
Ms. Espinosa. Well, there are a couple of factors. One is,
just in general, there has been kind of a decentralization of
health care with care being provided in more sites. And then
there is also that we, in the 340B Program, have beginning in
2012 changed the way that we were accounting for eligible
entities. And so we started counting not only the organization
but also all of its sites, and that was done to also bolster
our oversight effort so that we knew all the sites that were
using 340B.
So that is somewhat of a technical aspect, but it does make
the numbers go up. But I should note since there have been
several comments about the growth in 340B that over the last
several years, the 340B sales have remained at about 2 percent
of overall pharmaceutical sales. So while the number of
entities has increased, the sales, the 340B as a proportion of
the pharmaceutical sales has stayed about 2 percent.
Mr. Butterfield. OK. Your testimony indicates that the $6
million in additional funding for HRSA has helped implement
additional program oversight. Specifically, the additional
funding helped increase HRSA's ability to improve compliance by
hiring additional investigators and increasing your
administration's capability to review participants.
Can you explain the relationship between the additional
money and HRSA's ability to provide greater oversight?
Ms. Espinosa. Sure. I think I am going to ask Commander
Pedley, who is accompanying me, just to describe some of the
specific things that we have done with that additional funding.
Mr. Butterfield. Yes.
Ms. Pedley. Sure. There are a few aspects that we have been
able to utilize with the additional funding. One is around IT
systems, specifically the pricing system that we have been
talking about. We are now able to operationalize that system to
make ceiling prices available to the covered entities the end
of this year.
We are also able to implement a system that we are able to
internally track compliance across the board. Right now there
are a lot of different manual systems that we can now combine
and use the system as early warning signs to help trigger any
issues that may be occurring.
And another major area again is around issuing the proposed
guidance and the regulations that we spoke to in addition to
being able to really double the number of audits in this fiscal
year to 200 as we were able to hire more auditors in the field
to conduct these audits to really pay more attention to the
compliance efforts.
Mr. Butterfield. All right. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman, and now
recognizes the gentlelady from North Carolina, Mrs. Ellmers, 5
minutes for questions.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, again, thank you to the panel for being here today.
Ms. Espinosa, I am going to start with you on HRSA. Some
private nonprofit hospitals enter the program through their DSH
percentage, yet provide very modest amounts of charity care. In
fact, 1 recent report found that the level of charity care
provided by DSH hospitals enrolled in the 340B Program is lower
than the national average of all hospitals.
Does HRSA collect the information from hospitals about how
they use the program's dollars and how they support the poor
and indigent patients in a manner that reconciles the 340B
Program's intent to serve this as a safety-net program?
Ms. Espinosa. The statute for the 340B Program does not
impose any requirements on how savings are used by covered
entities and as such, HRSA has not systematically collected
that information since it doesn't tie to a statute.
Mrs. Ellmers. Would HRSA support requirements for
additional transparency for those DSH hospitals with the use of
the 340B?
Ms. Espinosa. I think we would need to see those
requirements. And I can't speak hypothetically, but certainly
we would support greater clarity to hospital eligibility. And
that is one of the items that we are including in our omnibus
guidance that we will release later this year.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you.
Ms. Draper, your 2011 report had a section that focused on
covered entities reporting that they use the program and the
revenue generated to support or expand access to services.
However, some reports suggest that for two-thirds of the 340B
hospitals, charity care as a percentage of patient cost is less
than the national hospital average of 3.3 percent.
Other than self-reporting data, is there objective data on
how hospitals are using the 340B Program or savings in the
program, I guess I should say?
Ms. Draper. Yes. There is no program requirement for
hospitals to report how they are using the savings. For some of
the grantees, the community health centers, they have to use it
in accordance with their grant program.
In our report in 2011, we did interview entities about how
they were using savings and entities that we talked to were
using it consistent with their particular missions, so----
Mrs. Ellmers. With their particular mission statement?
Ms. Draper. Right. And they were using it for things like
to add additional sites, provide patient education, help pay
for patient's co-pays or help them get the drugs that they
needed, so things like that.
Mrs. Ellmers. Uh-huh. OK. I am just keeping an eye on time.
Ms. Maxwell, the agency has certified the results of 178
audits since fiscal year 2012. Out of the total of 295 audits
conducted with more than 11,000 entities participating in the
program, do you think that the current level of audits are
appropriate or given the vulnerabilities that have been
identified, should the agency be more for leaning in its audit
work?
Ms. Maxwell. I think the fact that HRSA now conducts audits
of covered entities is a significant strengthening of their
oversight. I am encouraged to see HRSA take that step and to
hear they are going to be auditing manufacturers as well.
As to the correct number of audits, without more
information about how HRSA actually targets those audits, I
couldn't really say how many audits would be sufficient to
provide coverage.
I would say 1 area in which our work speaks to that would
be helpful for their audit program and could really strengthen
their audit program is that they strengthen the clarity of the
guidance.
Mrs. Ellmers. The clarity of the guidance?
Ms. Maxwell. What we found with respect to the contract
pharmacy setting is the guidance was not clear enough to make
determinations about whether or not entities were, in fact, in
compliance or out of compliance.
Mrs. Ellmers. Ms. Espinosa, I have one more question for
you. There again, getting back to the issue of transparency and
how the savings are used, isn't it true that under current
guidelines some insured patients may receive lower cost drugs
from a covered entity participating in the program while other
uninsured patients may not receive that same discount from
other covered entities in the program?
So I guess my question is, there just seems to be too
much--it is too muddy as to how an uninsured patient might end
up being charged the full cost of a drug. Can you just give us
a little bit of information on that? There again, I get back to
the fact that, for the DSH hospitals or the 340B hospitals that
are getting a 20 to 50 percent discount for the commercial
price, how can an uninsured patient be charged that full price
being part of that program?
Ms. Espinosa. Because the statute does not include any
requirements for how savings are used, we have not imposed any
requirements or stipulated for covered entities. We don't have
the statutory authority to do that. What they do now is based
on their own business decisions and their own needs.
Mrs. Ellmers. Uh-huh. Which, there again, in my 9 seconds,
I will just say that--or, I am sorry. I take it back. I have
gone over time. And, there again, if this is going to be a
safety net for those who are the most vulnerable, we have got
to ensure transparency on this issue.
Thank you again to the panel.
Mr. Pitts. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentlemen from Indiana, Dr.
Bucshon, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This is to Ms. Draper and this has kind of partially been
answered, but currently about one-third of all hospitals
qualify for 340B. GAO's 2011 report noted that HRSA did not
have specific eligibility criteria for nonpublic DSH hospitals.
Instead noting that hospitals with contracts provide a small
amount of care to low-income individuals not eligible for
Medicaid or Medicare could claim 340B discounts which may not
be what the agency intended.
After the report was issued, HRSA did release some
eligibility criteria for nonpublic hospitals. However, these
criteria potentially allow hospitals with very limited
contracts for specific populations to qualify hospitals for
340B for all of their patients.
Do you think HRSA's guidance addresses your concerns?
Ms. Draper. First of all, it is now up to 40 percent of DSH
hospitals that are eligible for 340B.
Mr. Bucshon. There you go.
Ms. Draper. That is the most recent data. Basically the
guidance that was issued was a restatement of what already
existed, so there was really nothing new related to when we had
done our 2011 work.
Mr. Bucshon. OK. So you can still----
Ms. Draper. It was 2013 they issued a policy that restated
what their existing policy was from our read of that issuance.
Mr. Bucshon. OK. So I am assuming you think additional
steps are needed for the program's eligibility criteria for
hospitals to be consistent with the program's mission to
support entities that care for uninsured and vulnerable
patients?
Ms. Draper. Yes. We believe the guidance needs to be clear
as to who participates.
Mr. Bucshon. OK. Ms. Espinosa, I understand that when 340B
hospitals acquire physician practices, the drugs dispensed to
those practices' patients often are converted to 340B.
When this happens, do the acquired practices take on any
new statutory or regulatory obligations to provide access to
their practices for indigent patients?
Ms. Espinosa. Our policy is that when an outpatient
facility is reported as part of the cost report, then it is
part of the same entity and can use 340B, as far as the first
part of your question.
On the second, because there is no statutory requirement
for how savings are used, there is no requirement that the
savings be used for any particular types of patients.
Mr. Bucshon. OK. And do you think hospitals should make a
profit off the program? What I mean is, do you think that we
should have a prescriptive way that people that participate
need to show us with oversight how they are using the savings
versus just including it as part of their larger budget for
their entire facility? Does that make sense?
Ms. Espinosa. Well, sir, since we implement the statute and
the specificity that is in the statute, right now the statute
does not have those requirements. And so it is challenging for
us to go beyond that. Our guidances can interpret statute, but
to go and provide greater specificity is challenging without--
--
Mr. Bucshon. Because my understanding is hearing through
kind of the grapevine, so to speak, is that there are some
facilities out there who are budgeting for profit from the 340B
Program into their regular budget.
And so I think we have all pointed out that we probably
need to address that because that is not the intent of the
program. The intent of the program would be to use savings to
help further the education or healthcare of the serviced
population of people, not have it a line item in a budget as
here is our profit from 340B next year and going into the
general budget. Whether that is true or not, I don't know, but
that is what I have heard.
So I just want to at the end with my remaining time state
this is a critical program for many institutions in my district
as well as across the country to serve the individuals that it
serves. But clearly if we want to maintain a program that seems
to be exploding in size and make sure that these patients
continue to have access to this type of program, more
aggressive oversight and probably congressional action may very
well be needed to maintain that long-term program integrity.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman, and now
recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr. Collins, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
A lot of the questions I was going to ask have been asked.
That is the problem of being last. But I think there is a lot
of misunderstanding here when it comes to 340B, so maybe just
as I am going last some clarification.
Who sets, and this would be for Ms. Espinosa, who sets the
ceiling price? Is that a fixed price for a particular drug? Who
sets that price?
Ms. Espinosa. I am going to ask Commander Pedley to
describe the ceiling price.
Ms. Pedley. Sure. It is defined in the law for how it
works. It is based on components that manufacturers report to
CMS, average manufacturer price and unit rebate amount. They
are subtracted from each other to get the ceiling price. So it
is actually defined in the law.
Mr. Collins. So once a manufacturer has a ceiling price, is
that price then the 1 price charged throughout the entire
United States to every covered entity?
Ms. Pedley. Not necessarily. They can then go below that
price to certain types of entities, but stay at the ceiling
price for other entities. They just can't charge anyone above,
but they don't need to charge everyone the same exact price.
Mr. Collins. What would be a reason why they would give
someone a discount and someone else not below the ceiling
price?
Ms. Pedley. It could depend on market, the type of entity
that they serve, the volume of drugs that they purchase, for
example.
Mr. Collins. That is interesting. So when we talk about
transparency and the need to publish the ceiling price, have we
found cases where they would charge more than the ceiling
price?
Ms. Pedley. On occasion, we do get reports from covered
entities that they believe they may have been overcharged. We
investigate that and research it with the manufacturer. Those
are often resolved between the manufacturer and the entity,
usually an error in some type of pricing calculation, but we do
follow-up and ensure that they do not overcharge. And if they
do, they are required to refund the covered entity.
Mr. Collins. If they have a ceiling price, how often can
they modify that, monthly, quarterly, yearly?
Ms. Pedley. It is changed quarterly.
Mr. Collins. It is? OK.
Ms. Pedley. Based on the pricing submitted to CMS.
Mr. Collins. And that is where transparency would at least
be helpful, I think, to everyone. I think this is 1 of the
common-sense things we could do.
Now, we have talked about clarifying a patient definition.
So another point which I don't think is fully understood by a
lot of our Members, myself included. If an entity, a DSH
hospital is a covered entity and they are allowed to get 340B
pricing, does it also link to a particular patient that meets
the definition or is it for every patient in the hospital every
time they use that particular drug, they get 340B pricing?
Ms. Espinosa. The 340B pricing would only be available to
those patients that meet the criteria of our patient
definition. So that would be outpatient services and other
aspects of the definition that we currently have.
Mr. Collins. Which is what I thought, but I think through
some of the questions today, on occasion, it sounded like every
patient in the hospital got the discount pricing.
Ms. Espinosa. No.
Mr. Collins. And that is why it is important to define who
is a covered patient.
Now, the ceiling price versus a Medicaid price for a
particular drug, are they different? Are they the same? Is one
higher? Is one lower?
Ms. Pedley. We have some information that usually the 340B
price is slightly lower than the Medicaid price, but it depends
on the type of drug it is. For example, if it is brand or
generic, it can vary.
Mr. Collins. So tell me how does a 340B drug end up with a
negative price because I have heard there are occasions it is a
negative number and then they have the penny pricing that said,
all right, we are not going to make the manufacturer give you
the drug and give you cash on top of that. They should at least
get a penny for that. So in the common-sense world, I guess
could you help me understand?
Ms. Espinosa. Go ahead.
Ms. Pedley. So in the calculation, as I mentioned, the
average manufacturer price minus the unit rebate amount, that
can calculate out to a zero. Obviously we do not expect
manufacturers to charge a zero ceiling price, so we have a
policy in place that they charge a penny per unit when that is
the case.
Mr. Collins. I am sure they appreciate the penny, but it
was actually a negative number.
Ms. Pedley. It can actually, I believe. Since the
Affordable Care Act has passed, because of how the calculation
works, it can no longer be negative. It can just be a zero.
Mr. Collins. OK. So now, when does a drug become eligible
for 340B pricing and in particular, I have only got 38 seconds,
but the new Hep C drug that we have all talked about that is a
cure for Hep C, it is extraordinarily expensive, but a single
treatment regime cures that disease? Is that one on the 340B
Program now?
Ms. Pedley. So the drugs that are covered, the manufacturer
that participates in Medicaid signs an agreement with HRSA,
then all of their covered outpatient drugs have to be priced at
the 340B ceiling price.
And then on the entity level, as long as the drug is used
on an outpatient basis and that patient meets the patient
definition, the drug can be covered. So in this instance, if
the drug is specifically used on an outpatient basis, the
manufacturer has an agreement with HRSA, it would be 340B
eligible.
Mr. Collins. All right. Well, thank you for that. It was
very educational.
Mr. Chairman, thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman, and now
recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Bilirakis, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you. I appreciate it, Mr. Chairman.
Administrator Espinosa, I appreciate the steps HRSA has
taken to step up its compliance efforts for manufacturers and
covered entities.
In the interest of having a level playing field and
increasing accountability, do you think it would be prudent to
subject manufacturers to similar compliance and auditing
standards as covered entities have? Now, if they are covered
and they are subjected to this compliance, that is fine, but I
am asking that question. Do you feel that it should be a level
playing field?
Ms. Espinosa. We have efforts in place for manufacturer
compliance as well. For manufacturers, though, their
requirements under the law are much narrower. Their
requirements are just that they offer the ceiling price.
So the establishment of the pricing database will help to
ensure that that is happening to a greater extent than our
ability to ensure today. And then also we have authority to
audit manufacturers and we are developing protocols to audit
manufacturers as well.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK. Thank you.
Administrator Espinosa, one thing many of us like about the
340B Program is that it doesn't cost taxpayers dollars. Of
course, we love the program because it helps out our
constituents. So I am hopeful you can shed some light on the
financial impact of the 340B Program.
In GAO's testimony, it was noted that according to the most
recent estimate available from HRSA, covered entity spending on
340B drug purchases was estimated to be approximately $7.5
billion in 2013, yet HRSA's fiscal year 2015 budget
justification estimated that the annual savings attributable to
the program in 2013 was $3.8 billion.
If I am reading that right, it would be significant amount
of savings, roughly 50 percent of the total covered entities'
drug expenditure in the year.
Can you explain how HRSA calculated the savings
attributable to the program?
Ms. Espinosa. I am going to defer to Commander Pedley to
answer that question.
Ms. Pedley. So how we do that calculation is, on average,
the 340B pricing is about 25 to 50 percent lower than what they
would have otherwise paid. So we do base that number and their
savings on the highest, which would be $3.8 billion in savings.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK. Thank you.
Again for Administrator Espinosa, I understand that HRSA
received about $6 million in the Consolidated Appropriations
Act of the fiscal year 2014 and you are using those funds for
IT systems, new auditors, and staff.
Can you walk us through when you think the capacity
developed with those funds will be fully operational and
deployed?
Ms. Espinosa. We have various systems that we are rolling
out. We have mentioned the system that we use, the 340B system
that we use for compliance monitoring. Aspects of that system
will be operational this year, but we are continuing to enhance
its functionality.
We find that the system is also helpful in reducing the
burden of reporting for covered entities and manufacturers. So
it is something that helps us kind of tie together our
oversight activities but also be more efficient in the way that
they provide information to us.
We also, with those funds, are establishing the protocols
for the manufacturer audits which we will begin this year and
that will continue. And then we have the pricing system which
will be operational this year with expanded functionality into
next year.
So that investment has laid the groundwork for many aspects
of our oversight activities, but we are going to continue to
improve and enhance them as we implement them and identify
other opportunities for increased oversight.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK. Thank you.
This is for the panel. I walked in a little late because I
had another event that I had to go to, but name some of the
entities that are eligible for the 340B Program. I heard the
federally qualified community health centers, the DSH
hospitals, what have you. Can you name some other nonprofit
clinics, for example?
Ms. Pedley. So there is about 22 different types of
entities, as you mentioned, federally qualified health centers,
hemophilia treatment centers, federally qualified health
centers, as I mentioned, HIV/AIDS clinics, Indian Health
Service clinics, disproportionate share hospitals, critical
access hospitals, rural referral centers, a lot of the rural
hospitals.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK. Thank you very much.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
That concludes the questions of the Members present. We
will have follow-up questions that we will provide to you in
writing. We ask that you please respond promptly.
I have a UC request from the ranking member.
Mr. Green. Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to place
in the record a letter of support that Congresswoman Capps has
from the National Association of Community Health Centers in
support of the program and also from Congressman Matsui from
the Ryan White Clinics for 340B access. And I ask unanimous
consent to place it in the record.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Pitts. I remind Members they have 10 business days to
submit questions for the record. That means Members should
submit their questions by the close of business on Tuesday,
April 7th.
Very interesting, informative hearing. It looks like
Congress has some follow-up responsibilities. Thank you very
much for your attendance today.
And without objection, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:37 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
