- H.R. 4775, OZONE STANDARDS IMPLEMENTATION ACT OF 2016

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. 4775, OZONE STANDARDS IMPLEMENTATION ACT OF 2016

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

APRIL 14, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-134

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
20-589 PDF                   WASHINGTON : 2016
__________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California7
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               JERRY McNERNEY, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        PAUL TONKO, New York
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            GENE GREEN, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     LOIS CAPPS, California
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             KATHY CASTOR, Florida
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   PETER WELCH, Vermont
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILL FLORES, Texas                   FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma               officio)
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     4
Hon. Pete Olson, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     5
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................    91
Hon. Steve Scalise, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Louisiana, prepared statement...............................    92

Witnesses

Bryan W. Shaw, Chairman, Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality........................................................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Answers to submitted questions...............................   137
Seyed Sadredin, Executive Director/Air Pollution Control Officer,
San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District..............    17
Prepared statement...........................................    19
Ali Mirzakhalili, Director, Division of Air Quality, Delaware
Department of Natural Resources & Environmental Control........    33
Prepared statement...........................................    35
Answers to submitted questions...............................   145
Misael Cabrera, Director, Arizona Department of Environmental
Quality........................................................    40
Prepared statement...........................................    42
Alan Matheson, Executive Director, Utah Department of
Environmental Quality..........................................    45
Prepared statement...........................................    47

Submitted Material

H.R. 4775, the Ozone Standards Implementation Act of 2016,
submitted by Mr. Whitfield.....................................    94
Statement of Janet McCabe, Acting Assistant Administrator, Office
of Air and Radiation, Environmental Protection Agency, April
14, 2016, submitted by Mr. Whitfield...........................   106
Three letters of April 8, 2016, from San Joaquin Valley Air
Pollution Control District members to Hon. Kevin McCarthy,
submitted by Mr. Whitfield.....................................   110
Letter of March 22, 2016, from Paul N. Cicio, President,
Industrial Energy Consumers of America, to Mr. Olson, submitted
by Mr. Whitfield...............................................   113
Letter of April 13, 2016, from Cal Dooley, President and CEO,
American Chemistry Council, to Mr. Flores, et al., submitted by
Mr. Whitfield..................................................   114
Report, ``2015 Ozone Standard Exceedances in National Parks,''
submitted by Mr. Whitfield.....................................   115
Resolution 07-8, Environmental Council of the States, September
17, 2013, submitted by Mr. Whitfield...........................   117
Report of June 2015, ``State Environmental Agency Perspectives on
Background Ozone & Regulatory Relief,'' Association of Air
Pollution Control Agencies, submitted by Mr. Whitfield.........   119
Letter of April 13, 2016, from the Allergy & Asthma Network, et
al., to Representatives in Congress, submitted by Mr. Rush.....   131
Letter of April 14, 2016, from the Center for Biological
Diversity, et al., to Representatives in Congress, submitted by
Mr. Rush.......................................................   133

H.R. 4775, OZONE STANDARDS IMPLEMENTATION ACT OF 2016

----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 14, 2016

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:18 a.m., in
room 2322 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed Whitfield
(chairman of the subcommittee), presiding.
Members present: Representatives Whitfield, Olson, Barton,
Shimkus, Latta, Harper, McKinley, Kinzinger, Griffith, Johnson,
Long, Ellmers, Flores, Mullin, Rush, McNerney, Tonko, Green,
Capps, Doyle, Castor, Sarbanes, Welch, Loebsack, and Pallone
(ex officio).
Staff present: Will Batson, Legislative Clerk; Allison
Busbee, Policy Coordinator, Energy and Power; Rebecca Card,
Assistant Press Secretary; Tom Hassenboehler, Chief Counsel,
Energy and Power; A.T. Johnston, Senior Policy Advisor; Mary
Neumayr, Senior Energy Counsel; Annelise Rickert, Legislative
Associate; Dan Schneider, Press Secretary; Peter Spencer,
Professional Staff Member, Oversight; Jeff Carroll, Democratic
Staff Director; Jean Fruci, Democratic Energy and Environment
Policy Advisor; Caitlin Haberman, Democratic Professional Staff
Member; Rick Kessler, Democratic Senior Advisor and Staff
Director, Energy and Environment; Dan Miller, Democratic Staff
Assistant; Alexander Ratner, Democratic Policy Analyst; Andrew
Souvall, Democratic Director of Communications, Outreach and
Member Services; and Tuley Wright, Democratic Energy and
Environment Policy Advisor.
Mr. Whitfield. I'd like to call this hearing to order this
morning and, of course, today we're going to be considering
H.R. 4775, the Ozone Standards Implementation Act of 2016,
sponsored by Vice Chairman Olson and others.
[H.R. 4775 appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
And at this point I'd like to recognize myself for 5
minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

About 3 years ago, we had a series of forums on the Clean
Air Act, and at those forums we had regulators from various
States that came in and testified.
And the gist of the testimony was that the Clean Air Act
needed to be revisited. Everyone recognizes that it has been a
successful piece of legislation.
But we also know that every State is affected differently
by the regulations coming out of EPA and certainly that is true
on the proposed national ambient air quality standard that is
being reviewed at this time.
And as I said, most of the testimony indicated that there
are some areas of the Clean Air Act, because of ambiguities and
deadlines set, that needed to be revisited by the--by the
Congress.
Now, we find ourselves in a predicament though where the
Clean Air Act is one of those polarizing pieces of legislation
that has done a lot of good, and it is polarizing primarily
because of the Clean Power Plan, in my humble opinion.
As you know, Congress refused to adopt legislation to help
the president in his negotiations in Copenhagen or Paris
because the majority in Congress simply disagreed with what was
being done in that area.
On the other hand, the proponents of the Paris agreement
and the Clean Power Plan feel very strongly that the president
needed to proceed in that way.
And so, as I said, Congress didn't act. It was adopted by
regulation and what has happened is that it has become a
polarizing piece of regulation because 27 States have filed
lawsuits and we see more and more lawsuits being filed on these
regulations coming out of EPA.
So on the Republican side, you know, we sort of drew a line
in the sand. Democrats drew a line in the sand. But on national
ambient air quality standards, I think many States, whether
they be perceived as Republican States or Democratic States,
agree that there needs to be some adjustments here, and I
believe that is what H.R. 4775 attempts to do.
Now, I am going to just read a couple of comments from our
commissioner from Texas and then those on the Democratic side
will say well, that's from Texas. But then I am going to read a
couple of comments from the commissioner from California.
Mr. Shaw, in his testimony, says that Texas detailed our
disagreements with the EPA's conclusions and formal comments
during the rule making process. We also traveled to Washington
to meet personally with Administrator McCarthy to make her
aware of significant flaws in the studies EPA relied on in
coming up with this new standard.
The EPA nonetheless lowered the standard and now my agency
is challenging the validity of this standard in court, and I
won't go into the details of it.
Now, in California, I want to just read an excerpt from a
statement there. I don't think anyone views California as a red
State, or a Republican State, but this is what the commissioner
says.
The new ozone and PM 2.5 standards established by EPA
approached the background pollution concentrations in many
regions throughout the Nation including the San Joaquin Valley,
and we know that Los Angeles can't meet their existing
standard, much less this new standard.
Now, I want to just go on and point out that he goes on to
say the reality that we face today sets up regions such as the
San Joaquin Valley for failure, leading to costly sanctions and
severe economic hardships.
We face these consequences despite having the toughest air
regulations on stationary sources, the toughest air regulations
on farms and dairies, tough air regulations on what residents
can do within the confines of their own home, $40 billion spent
by businesses on clean air, over $1 billion of public/private
investment, toughest regulations on cars and trucks, toughest
regulations on consumer products, reduced emissions by 80
percent and still we can't meet the standards.
So I look forward to our discussion today with our
distinguished panelists, some from States that are not having a
problem, others from States that are, and that's the reality of
where we are today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Ed Whitfield

This morning we will review the challenges States face in
implementing the EPA's recently finalized ozone standards, as
well as other challenges with the National Ambient Air Quality
Standards program. The recent ozone standards will impose
substantial compliance burdens on State and local governments
while also jeopardizing economic growth and jobs.
We will also discuss a bipartisan solution, H.R. 4775, the
``Ozone Standards Implementation Act of 2016,'' which would
create a more reasonable and streamlined approach to
implementing current ozone standards. I want to thank Reps.
Olson, Flores, Latta, Cuellar, Leader McCarthy, and Whip
Scalise for their great work on this legislation and I welcome
our witnesses who represent a number of State and local
environmental agencies that are on the front lines of
implementing these EPA rules.
EPA's recently finalized National Ambient Air Quality
Standards for ozone would impose an additional layer of
regulation on States that are currently in the process of
implementing stringent ozone standards set by the agency in
2008. Those standards revised the previous standards set in
1997 and established a level of 75 parts per billion. However,
the EPA did not finalize the necessary implementing regulations
for these 2008 standards until March of 2015, and States are
only starting to comply with them.
Nonetheless, the agency decided to create an additional
ozone standard, this one at 70 parts per billion. And because
the standards from 2008 have not been revoked, States face the
prospect of implementing two ozone standards at the same time.
Under the new standards, States would be required to begin
later this year a complex regulatory process involving
designations, State implementation plans, and new permitting
programs, long before the 2008 standards have been fully
implemented.
As a practical matter, the new ozone standards present
implementation challenges because for certain parts of the
country they are close to background levels. EPA projects
annualized costs of $2 billion in 2025, including $1.4 billion
for areas outside California and $800 million for California.
Yet these annual costs will almost certainly be much higher
since EPA acknowledges that ``unidentified controls'' will need
to be discovered to meet the new standards in some of these
areas--in other words, the agency does not really know how
States can comply, so it is unclear what the ultimate price tag
will be.
This new burden arrives at a time when State and local
governments face other expensive EPA mandates. It represents
another headwind for job creators, since new permitting
requirements have already begun to be implemented. Further,
potentially hundreds of counties will be designated as being in
``nonattainment'' as early as next year.
A ``nonattainment'' designation places limits on new
construction, expansions and transportation projects, triggers
a suite of new planning requirements, and subjects areas to
potential penalties. Because of the designation, these counties
will remain subject to continuing EPA requirements for decades,
even after air monitoring shows the counties have attained the
standards.
H.R. 4775 offers a commonsense path forward, by allowing
the 2008 ozone rule to continue being implemented, and for the
2015 standards to be phased in on a more reasonable timeframe.
EPA itself projects the vast majority of areas in the country
would meet the new 70 parts per billion standard by 2025 under
existing Federal rules and programs.
Instead of forcing hundreds of counties to be needlessly
categorized as ``nonattainment,'' this legislation builds on
EPA's own projection that all but 14 counties would reach
attainment by 2025 based on existing Federal measures. HR 4775
would ensure these areas do not become subject to a suite of
new paperwork and requirements that will divert limited State
resources but will not contribute to improvements in air
quality.
There is no benefit to stacking a new rule on top of an
unfinished earlier one. The bill makes practical changes to
modify the current requirement that standards for ozone and
other pollutants be reviewed every 5 years, and places the new
deadline at no more than 10 years subject to the discretion of
the administrator.
EPA's own actions show that 5 years is not enough time and
that this arbitrary deadline needs to be revised.
The bill also imposes the commonsense requirement that EPA
release implementing regulations and guidance at the same time
it releases new standards, something that EPA should have been
doing all along.
Overall, the news on ozone is positive and we have seen a
30 percent drop in ozone levels since 1980. EPA itself concedes
ozone levels are declining and will continue to fall even in
the absence of the new standards. This practical bill simply
ensures that air quality continues to improve while avoiding
unnecessary harm to State and local governments and to job-
creating businesses. Thank you.

Mr. Whitfield. At this point, I would like to recognize the
distinguished gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Rush, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding
today's legislative hearing on the Ozone Standards
Implementation Act of 2016.
It is unfortunate, Mr. Chairman, but I have some grave
concerns with this bill. This bill will roll back important
provisions of the Clean Air Act and hurt our Nation's efforts
to protect air quality.
For starters, H.R. 4775 would unacceptably delay
implementation of the EPA's 2015 ozone standards for another 8
years, even though these standards have not been updated since
the Bush administration last did it in 2008.
Additionally, Mr. Chairman, the bill would also mandate
that EPA wait a decade before considering any new evidence
regarding the health implementations from ozone and other
harmful pollutants despite what the science may say.
Mr. Chairman, for those of us who believe that science
should inform policy making in regards to public health
decisions, prohibiting EPA from revisiting the scientific
evidence for at least a decade is an unacceptable risk that
could result in potentially disastrous health impacts for the
American people.
Mr. Chairman, we know that breathing dirty pollutants such
as ozone, carbon monoxide, lead, nitrogen, sulfur dioxide and
many other dirty pollutants can lead to a host of health
problems including asthma, inflammation of the lungs,
respiratory disease and even premature death.
Current research even suggests, Mr. Chairman, that ozone
may also occur--may also cause damage to the central nervous
system and may harm developing fetuses.
Yet, Mr. Chairman, despite all the scientific research,
this bill would stall the new ozone standards, permanently
weaken the Clean Air Act and hamstring the EPA's ability to
regulate these harmful contaminants both now and in the future.
And think, Mr. Chairman--under this bill not only would
States not have to comply with the 2015 standards until 2026,
but parents were not even being born if their communities were
in violation of clean air standards until the year 2025.
Mr. Chairman, I can think of no greater benefit to the
public interest denying--than denying citizens information
directly tied to their health and their well-being. There is no
benefit to the public interest.
Mr. Chairman, instead of trying to stall the 2015 ozone
standards and prohibit the EPA from updating the national
ambient air quality standards regularly as H.R. 4775 would do,
we should be heeding the warnings of doctors and scientists of
not acting quickly enough to protect the public health.
For these reasons among many others, I cannot support this
bill, and I urge my colleagues to support it--to oppose it,
rather, and I yield the rest of my time to Mr. McNerney from
California.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I thank the gentleman.
I just want to thank Seyed Sadredin from San Joaquin Valley
for appearing in front of the committee today. You're from the
San Joaquin Air Valley Pollution Control District, which has
one of the biggest challenges in the country. I look forward to
your testimony and thank you again for showing up. With that, I
yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. Mr. McNerney told me you were
going to yield in 2 minutes, Mr. Rush, but, at this time, I
recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Olson, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PETE OLSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Olson. I thank my friend from Kentucky.
The Clean Air Act is about cooperation. It is a balance
between States and the Federal Government. I believe why we are
here today is that we are not in any balance right now.
I would ask all my colleagues to listen carefully to what
these State officials will say this morning. They want clean
air and will work aggressively to achieve it.
We all want clean air within these communities, our
families, our kids, and that is why the Clean Air Act is hugely
important, but it is not perfect.
Working together, we can improve it. We've picked out the
low-hanging fruit to improve air quality. As we push more
improvements, we must go after smaller sources. This provides
economic pain at the local level and hides imperfections in the
Clean Air Act.
We can provide needed balance to this process. H.R. 4775
does just that. Now, I would like to welcome one Texan with the
cowboy hat on the panel, Dr. Bryan Shaw.
He has been on the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality for almost a decade, has been the chairman since 2009.
When he does manage to escape Austin, Texas, home of the
University of Texas, Dr. Shaw returned to his own alma mater,
Texas A&M University, where he is an associate professor. He
spends much time of his research--he spends much of his time
researching air pollution. He also finds time to drop by the
Dixie Chicken for a nice Texas meal.
Dr. Shaw has also worked here in DC. He is acting lead
scientist for air quality at the Department of Agriculture and
served as a member of EPA's science advisory board. He brings
an incredible amount of depth of knowledge to this hearing. I
want to welcome him with a proud small Aggie woo.
I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Would the gentleman yield to the gentleman
from Texas?
Mr. Olson. Yes, sir.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Barton.
Mr. Barton. That's whoop. I am an Aggie.
I just want to welcome Dr. Shaw. Sorry I missed the earlier
meeting but you've testified here before and we look forward to
hearing what you have to say and, of course, all the other
witnesses, and thank the chairman and ranking member for the
hearing.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, the Chair recognizes the
gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The legislation that is the subject of today's hearing, the
deceptively named Ozone Standards Implementation Act, has very
little to do with implementing EPA's ozone standards and
instead is focused on undermining the Clean Air Act.
Make no mistake, H.R. 4775 is a broad attack on some of the
most important and successful tenets of the Clean Air Act
including health-based standards and protections for all
criteria of pollutants.
Since 1970, the foundation of the Clean Air Act has been a
set of health-based air quality standards that EPA must set
based solely on the latest science and medical evidence.
Essentially, the standard sets the level of pollution that
is safe to breathe. With these health-based standards as the
goalpost, States then develop plans to control pollution and
meet those goals.
Costs and technological feasibility are front and center in
this planning and States can identify which pollution control
measures are best suited to meeting the standard in the most
cost-effective way.
This structure has been extraordinarily effective for 46
years in cleaning the air and protecting public health
including the health of sensitive groups like children and the
elderly.
H.R. 4775 would alter this proven approach. It would
elevate cost considerations in the standard-setting process not
just for ozone but also for carbon monoxide, sulfur oxides,
nitrogen oxides, particle pollution and even lead.
This would allow polluters to override scientists, leading
to air quality standards based on profits rather than health
and reversing decades of progress in cleaning our air.
But H.R. 4775 goes even further, delaying development and
implementation of national ambient air quality standards, or
NAAQS, for all six criteria pollutants.
The bill doubles the review period for all NAAQS, meaning
any new evidence or science would only be considered every 10
years. That's a dramatic move in the wrong direction on
science-based decisionmaking.
The legislation also includes a provision to alter the way
that air quality monitoring data is interpreted, discounting
air quality measurements taken during normal weather and
climate cycles like heat waves and droughts.
It's an environmental ``don't ask don't tell'' designed to
make it appear that air quality is improving when it's not. We
should eliminate pollution, not the record of its occurrence.
The bill actually does manage to address implementation of
the new ozone standards directly by delaying implementation by
up to 8 years. When you combine this mandated delay with other
features of this legislation we virtually guarantee that people
living in areas with poor air quality will continue to be
exposed to air pollution indefinitely.
In fact, a number of the provisions in this bill impact the
areas that have the most persistent problems with air
pollution. We have some of those areas represented on the panel
today.
There are three fundamental things that we all need every
day--food, water and air. When we enacted the Clean Air Act, we
made a commitment to the public to make the air safe and
healthy to breathe.
H.R. 4775 breaks that commitment. It's simply a bad bill.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The legislation that is the
subject of today's hearing--the deceptively named ``Ozone
Standards Implementation Act''--has very little to do with
implementing EPA's ozone standards and instead is focused on
undermining the Clean Air Act. Make no mistake: H.R. 4775 is a
broad attack on some of the most important and successful
tenets of the Clean Air Act, including health-based standards
and protections for all criteria pollutants.
Since 1970, the foundation of the Clean Air Act has been a
set of health based air quality standards that EPA must set
based solely on the latest science and medical evidence.
Essentially, the standard sets the level of pollution that is
``safe'' to breathe. With these health-based standards as the
goal posts, States then develop plans to control pollution and
meet these goals. Cost and technological feasibility are front
and center in this planning and States can identify which
pollution control measures are best suited to meeting the
standard in the most cost-effective way.
This structure has been extraordinarily effective for 46
years in cleaning the air and protecting public health,
including the health of sensitive groups like children and the
elderly.
H.R. 4775 would alter this proven approach. It would
elevate cost considerations in the standard-setting process,
not just for ozone, but also for carbon monoxide, sulfur
oxides, nitrogen oxides, particle pollution and even lead. This
would allow polluters to override scientists, leading to air
quality standards based on profits rather than health, and
reversing decades of progress in cleaning our air.
But H.R. 4775 goes even farther, delaying development and
implementation of National Ambient Air Quality Standards--or
NAAQS for all six criteria pollutants. The bill doubles the
review period for all NAAQS, meaning any new evidence or
science would only be considered every 10 years. That's a
dramatic move in the wrong direction on science-based
decisionmaking.
This legislation also includes a provision to alter the way
that air quality monitoring data is interpreted, discounting
air quality measurements taken during normal weather and
climate cycles--like heat waves and droughts. It's an
environmental ``don't ask, don't tell'' designed to make it
appear that air quality is improving when it is not. We should
eliminate pollution, not the record of its occurrence.
The bill actually does manage to address implementation of
the new ozone standard directly by delaying implementation by
up to 8 years. When you combine this mandated delay with other
features of this legislation, we virtually guarantee that
people living in areas with poor air quality will continue to
be exposed to air pollution indefinitely.
In fact, a number of the provisions in this bill impact the
areas that have had the most persistent problems with air
pollution. We have some of those areas represented on the panel
today.
There are three fundamental things that we all need every
day--food, water and air. When we enacted the Clean Air Act, we
made a commitment to the public to make the air safe and
healthy to breathe. H.R. 4775 breaks that commitment. It is
simply a bad bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

Mr. Pallone. I wanted to--I have about 2 minutes. Did you
want to make your statement? I will yield to Mr. McNerney.
Mr. McNerney. No, I didn't do my duty and then yell out for
the Warriors for winning 74 games this season. So, yay,
Warriors.
Mr. Olson. Seventy-three games.
Mr. McNerney. My concern here----
Mr. Olson. Seventy-three. They won 73.
Mr. McNerney. Seventy-three. Well, I can give them an extra
one.
So anyway, I mean, my concern here is the issue with the
Clean Air Act is it provides incentives for using new
technology and many of the emission reductions are achieved
through instead of funds to use new technology that both reduce
emissions and reduce costs and that is possible through
innovation.
So we don't want to see the new law tear down that
provision at all. But California is the home to two regions
struggling with the worst air quality in the Nation.
As I mentioned, the San Joaquin Valley has really
struggles. Our pollution control district has done tremendous
work. They continue to do tremendous work and they have a lot
of challenges ahead of them, and I just want to see that this
law actually helps our communities fight pollution rather than
puts them in a straightjacket.
So that is really what I was going to try and say with my
earlier 2 minutes. So and with that, I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back. and that
concludes the opening statements. So at this point, I would
like to introduce our witnesses for the day.
First of all, we have Dr. Bryan Shaw, who is Chairman of
the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. In fact, what I
am going to do, I am just going to introduce you and let you
give your opening statement. Then I will introduce each one of
you when we call on you.
So, Mr. Shaw, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF BRYAN W. SHAW, CHAIRMAN, TEXAS COMMISSION ON
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY; SEYED SADREDIN, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR/AIR
POLLUTION CONTROL OFFICER, SAN JOAQUIN VALLEY AIR POLLUTION
CONTROL DISTRICT; ALI MIRZAKHALILI, DIRECTOR, DIVISION OF AIR
QUALITY, DELAWARE DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES &
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL; MISAEL CABRERA, DIRECTOR, ARIZONA
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY; AND ALAN MATHESON,
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, UTAH DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY

STATEMENT OF BRYAN W. SHAW

Mr.  Shaw. Thank you.
Good morning. Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member Rush,
members of the committee, thank you very much. A special thank
you to Congressman Olson and Congressman Barton. I certainly
have enjoyed the opportunity to work with you over the years.
Good morning, and again, I am thankful for the opportunity
to talk about an important issue this morning, specifically
H.R. 4775, the Ozone Standards Implementation Act of 2016
sponsored by Vice Chair Olson.
My name is Dr. Bryan Shaw and I am the chairman of the
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. My agency's mission
is to protect Texas public health and the environment in a way
that's consistent with sustainable economic development.
In carrying out that mission, we seek to bring together
common sense, sound science and the law to ensure that
environmental regulations are safe, fair and predictable.
I am here today because the Environmental Protection
Agency's recent action lowering the national ambient air
quality standard for ground-level ozone is not consistent with
those principles.
As you all know, the EPA finalized their proposal to lower
the standard from 75 to 70 parts per billion on October 26th of
2015.
The State's initial designation recommendations are due on
October 1st of this year. The TCEQ detailed our disagreements
with the EPA's conclusion and formal comments during the rule
making process.
We even traveled to Washington to meet personally with
Administrator McCarthy to make her aware of the significant
flaws in the studies EPA relied on in promulgating the new
standard.
The EPA nonetheless lowered the standard and now my agency
is challenging the validity of that standard in court. While
our voluminous comments and legal filings elaborating great
detail on the myriad scientific and legal vulnerabilities with
the new standard, I would like to briefly raise a few of the
most troubling issues.
First, the EPA claims that the new standard will provide
annual health benefits between $2.9 billion and $5.9 billion,
with a cost of only $1.4 billion. My agency's analysis suggests
these figures are dramatically incorrect.
For example, the EPA only includes industry costs in their
analysis, not the States' or taxpayer costs, nor do they look
at economic impacts like increased electricity costs.
Another major flaw in the EPA's analysis is their
quantification of the benefits that would flow from this new
standard. The EPA's own analysis shows that lowering the
standard even to the 65 ppb level will not significantly reduce
asthma attacks.
In addition, approximately two-thirds of the benefits the
EPA claims would result from the new standard are not based on
ozone reductions at all. In fact, they are based on reductions
of an entirely different pollutant that is not the subject of
this rule.
Specifically, the EPA reasons that in taking the actions
necessitated by this standard, States will also lower levels of
fine particulate matter, or PM 2.5.
The flaw in that reasoning is that, at least in Texas'
case, levels of PM 2.5 are already below the standard set by
EPA. Chief Justice Roberts recently questioned this practice
when the EPA's Mercury and Air Toxics Standard was reviewed and
rejected by the Supreme Court.
While the court ultimately rejected the rule on other
grounds, the Chief Justice suggested that EPA's co-benefits
analysis might be an illegitimate way of muddling the differing
regulatory schemes for each pollutant under the Clean Air Act.
H.R. 4775 is a welcome step in the right direction. It
seeks to defer the implementation of the new standard until
2024, and it requires the EPA to spend more time studying and
reviewing scientific literature and other factors before
implementing new standards.
By suspending the applicability of the new standard, this
legislation will allow States to focus their limited resources
on fully implementing the 2008 standard as well as a cascade of
other new and expensive regulations coming out of EPA.
Especially considering the cost of the negligible health
and environmental benefits embodied by the new standard, a
delay in implementing this standard is helpful indeed.
More broadly, H.R. 4775 also seeks to make the NAAQS--the
National Ambient Air Quality Standards--program applicable to
all six criteria pollutants more efficient and effective.
By lengthening the required review period from 5 to 10
years, it will ensure the EPA does not rush to lower given
standards only to comply with a statutory deadline.
Furthermore, it will give States more time to comply with
previous standards before getting saddled with more stringent
standards and facing economic and developmental sanctions for
nonattainment.
I also support this legislation's addition of technological
feasibility and possible adverse welfare, social, and economic
effects to the list of factors the EPA can consider in revising
a standard.
As the Act is currently written and interpreted by the
Supreme Court, the EPA is prohibited from considering whether
or not the state of our technological capabilities would even
make getting the required reductions possible.
Put simply, the EPA could require States to make reductions
that are literally impossible to achieve. The act's requirement
that the EPA ignore technological and economic considerations
might have made sense 40 years ago when it was initially
passed.
However, pollution levels have been lowered to such a
degree that the law of diminishing returns has made it more and
more difficult to continue to reduce pollutant levels at all,
much less in a way that is not burdensome economically.
Finally, H.R. 4775's directive to the EPA to begin timely
issuance of implementing regulations and guidance solves a
major issue that often confronts States like Texas.
Without this protection, the EPA can and does require
States to develop and propose new standards before the EPA
itself has given States specific guidance for the standard. And
so I understand how charged this issue can be but I appreciate
Vice Chair Olson's efforts to streamline this process.
And thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shaw follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Dr. Shaw.
And now our next witness is Seyed--Mr. Seyed Sadredin, who
is the Executive Director of Air Pollution Control for San
Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SEYED SADREDIN

Mr.  Sadredin. Thank you, Chairman Whitfield, Ranking
Member Rush and members of the committee. It is an honor to be
here before you today.
My name is Seyed Sadredin and I am the executive director
and air pollution control officer for the San Joaquin Valley
Air Pollution Control District.
With me today I have a number of local elected officials
that serve on the governing board of the air district--Council
Member Baines from the city of Fresno, Chairman of the Board
Supervisor Worthley from Tulare County, and Supervisor Elliott
from San Joaquin County.
They serve on the District Governing Board and deal with a
lot of the issues that we are about to talk about today.
The area of our jurisdiction covers a 25,000 square mile
region in the Central California, the beautiful area that is a
big source of food throughout the Nation and throughout the
world.
We are the largest air district in the State of California,
and today I am here as a public health official as a
representative of an agency that is charged with protecting
public health to urge a strong bipartisan support for H.R.
4775. I think it is good for air quality, and it also
streamlines the act.
H.R. 4775, in my opinion, provides for much needed
streamlining of the implementation of the Clean Air Act. It
does not roll back anything that is already in the Clean Air
Act in the form of protections for public health, safeguarding
public health and it does nothing to roll back any of the
progress that has been made and it will not impede or slow down
our progress as we move forward to reduce air pollution and
improve public health.
I want to congratulate you and express my gratitude to you,
to your committee, to the sponsors of the bill for taking
reasonable action to provide much-needed and long overdue
congressional guidance with respect to the implementation phase
of the Clean Air Act.
As you know, it has been more than 25 years since the act
was last amended by the Congress. To date, as many have said,
the act has served us well and we have made significant
progress in reducing air pollution and improving quality of
life all across the Nation.
We have reached a point, however, in my opinion and many
others in our region that have had decades of experience
implementing the act, that we are reaching a point of
diminishing return and many of the well-intentioned provisions
in the act are leading to unintended consequences that are
costly.
In many cases, they are actually adverse to public health.
I don't think anyone here believes that Congress meant to put
something in the act that actually is detrimental to public
health, and there are a number of provisions in the act now
that if you fully implement them the way the courts have read
them, the way EPA sees them, they are actually detrimental to
public health and finally, consequences that set regions like
ours up for failure with potentially devastating economic
sanctions.
And these consequences are going to be mostly felt in many
of our environmental justice communities with a great deal of
poverty and a lot of other disadvantages that they face
already.
I believe good governance and common sense dictates that
after 25 years we reexamine our policies, and I am hoping that
our decades of experience in our region can be helpful as your
committee, as the Congress moves forward to chart the course
for our future.
In our region, we have imposed the toughest air regulations
on all businesses and all agricultural activities.
We have imposed the toughest regulations on cars, trucks,
consumer products. We have imposed even tough regulations on
what people can do inside their homes, as you mentioned, Mr.
Chairman.
We have left no stone unturned in reducing emissions from
all sectors of our economy and from every source of air
pollution in our region.
We have reduced air pollution by over 80 percent. We have
reduced population exposure to ozone by over 90 percent.
Unfortunately, at this point, despite all that progress we are
nowhere near meeting the latest standards.
If you could just take a quick look at Figure 2 that I
provided in my written testimony it basically breaks down the
sources of air pollution from various sectors.
Today, if we eliminate all businesses in San Joaquin
Valley, small and large, we will not come anywhere near meeting
the standard. If we eliminate all agriculture--and I have to
tell you, seven of the top ag producing counties in the Nation
are in our region--if we eliminated all agriculture in San
Joaquin Valley we will not come close to meeting the standards.
If we removed all passenger vehicles in our area--2.7
vehicles--if we removed all of them we will not meet the
standard. If we removed all the trucks that travel up and down
the valley we will not come anywhere near meeting the standard.
I don't think this is what the Congress envisioned when
they passed the act when it was last amended and I will take a
few more seconds, Mr. Chairman, if I could, to finish.
I don't think the Congress envisioned a scenario like this
where you reduce air pollution by 80 percent and you were at a
point that you are not anywhere near meeting the standard.
I believe, as I have detailed in our written testimony,
H.R. 4775 puts in place a number of streamlining measures
without rolling back any of the existing provisions and without
impeding our progress and it will go a long way and finally
bring in some order into the implementation phase of the Clean
Air Act.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sadredin follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much.
And our next witness is Mr. Ali Mirzakhalili, who is
Director of the Division of Air Quality for the Delaware
Department of Natural Resources & Environmental Control.
Thank you very much for being with us and you're recognized
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ALI MIRZAKHALILI

Mr. Mirzakhalili. Thank you very much. Chairman Whitfield,
Ranking Member Rush, and members of the subcommittee, my name
is Ali Mirzakhalili and I serve as Delaware's Director of Air
Quality. Thank you for the opportunity to testify on H.R. 4775,
the Ozone Standards Implementation Act of 2016.
Since the Clean Air Act was last amended over 25 years ago,
it has prevented literally hundreds of thousands of premature
deaths as well as averted millions of incidents of morbidity
including, for example, heart disease, chronic bronchitis and
asthma.
The health benefits associated with this landmark
legislation have far outweighed the costs of reducing pollution
by more than 30 to 1.
Moreover, we have acquired these health benefits over the
same period as our Nation's gross domestic product has grown.
It is fair to say that the Clean Air Act has not only been one
of our Nation's most effective environmental statute, it will
likely go down in history as one of the most effective domestic
laws ever passed.
Accordingly, it is imperative that consideration of any
significant amendment to the act be deliberate and thoughtful
and ensure that fundamental tenets of the legislation, which is
protection of public health and welfare, remain intact.
Unfortunately, after reviewing H.R. 4775, Delaware has
concluded that it cannot support this bill. I believe the bill
substantially weakens the existing Clean Air Act by delaying
important deadlines and considerably altering the process of
setting health-based national ambient air quality standards.
One of my primary concerns with H.R. 4775 is Section 3(b),
which would revise the criteria in the act for establishing
health-based NAAQS by allowing the consideration of
technological feasibility in determining the level of the
standard.
I believe this provision could unravel the entire framework
of the Clean Air Act. Congress and the courts, including the
United States Supreme Court, have been very clear over the past
several decades on the issue of setting the NAAQS, requiring
the EPA to set these standards solely on the basis of health so
that communities will know whether or not the air they are
breathing is safe.
Costs and other factors such as technological feasibility
have never been allowed to be considered in these critically
important decisions. Once the health-based standards are set,
the act appropriately allows cost and other factors including
technological feasibilities to be considered as States develop
implementation strategies to meet the standard.
By removing this important firewall, separating the setting
of the standards from their implementation, the public will
never know what level of air quality is truly safe.
Imagine an oncologist discovering through the best medical
tests that her patient has cancer, but because the treatment is
not feasible she tells the patient he simply has a bad case of
flu.
The diagnosis is not dependent on the feasibility of the
treatment. I am also very troubled by Section 2 of the bill,
which would delay deadlines for implementation of 2015 ozone
standard by up to 8 years.
Arbitrarily extending the compliance deadlines would leave
the old, outdated and unprotective standard in effect,
resulting each year in hundreds of premature deaths on top of
many thousands of morbidity and related impacts.
To make matters worse, Section 3(a) would permanently
lengthen the NAAQS review cycle from 5 to 10 years, bar EPA
from completing any review of those standards before October 26
of 2025.
I am concerned with Section 3(d) of H.R. 4775, which
appears to reward the regulative community with no
consideration of health of our citizens for EPA delays in
publishing important guidelines.
The bill would allow industries to meet preconstruction
permit requirements based upon an outdated standard if EPA were
unable or unwilling publish its rules and guidance at the
time--at the same time it promulgates its health-based
standard.
One way for Congress to overcome these delays is to ensure
that EPA has sufficient resources to do its job. The provisions
of Section 3(f) and (g) of the bill are also troubling because
they would weaken the progress requirement of the Clean Air Act
by allowing States under the guise of economic feasibility and
technological achievability to circumvent these important
requirements.
It will seriously interfere with Delaware's and other
downwind States' ability to provide our citizens with clean
air.
In Delaware, we are meeting all of our deadlines and taking
our responsibilities seriously. We fully expect the same from
others.
In conclusion, the proposed legislation would undercut
requirements of the Clean Air Act that are crucial to obtaining
healthy air quality as expeditiously as practicable.
Further, the proposed amendments would wholly change the
thrust of the Clean Air Act from expeditious protection of
public health to one of delay.
Delaware supports efficient and expeditious implementation
of NAAQS. H.R. 4775 bill, however, would weaken and delay
public health protection. My State, therefore, must oppose this
bill.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify and I am happy to
answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mirzakhalili follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much.
And our next witness is Mr. Misael Cabrera, who is the
Director of the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality,
and you're recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MISAEL CABRERA

Mr.  Cabrera. Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member Rush and
members of the committee, my name is Misael Cabrera and I am
the director of the Arizona Department of the Environmental
Quality.
I greatly appreciate the opportunity to share testimony
today. As the lead State challenging the 2015 ozone standard in
the court, Arizona does not support 70 parts per billion as the
appropriate ozone standard.
We believe that the new standard is simply not achievable
in many areas of our State. Although the Clean Air Act has five
mechanisms to bring nonattainment areas into compliance or
provide relief, these mechanisms are inadequate for Arizona and
likely other Western States.
These mechanisms include improving air quality through
State regulation, designating rural transport areas,
designating interstate or international transport areas and
demonstrating exceptional events.
I will discuss each mechanisms and its shortcomings in the
context of a rural county in Arizona. Yuma County is located in
the southwest corner of Arizona bordered by both California and
Mexico.
The county contains a few small towns and the city of Yuma,
which has an estimated population of about 100,000 and an
unemployment rate of about 20 percent.
Yuma is predominantly an agricultural community and despite
its lack of urbanization or industrialization, Yuma County will
be designated as nonattainment under the new ozone standard.
As you may know, precursors for ozone include volatile
organic compounds and oxides of nitrogen. According to EPA's
2011 National Emissions Inventory, industrial sources account
for only 0.2 percent of the total VOC emissions and 5.3 percent
of NOx emissions within the county. All other sources are
either naturally occurring or not regulated by the State.
No matter how many local emissions controls are placed on
Yuma County businesses, Yuma County will not achieve compliance
under the new standard.
In addition, Yuma County would not qualify for the rural
transport mechanism because the Clean Air Act states that a
rural area seeking relief cannot be adjacent to or include any
part of a metropolitan statistical area, defined by the U.S.
Census as an entire county comprising 50,000 people or more.
The Cross-State Air Pollution Rule often mentioned as a
relief mechanism is yet another option that does not apply to
Yuma County. Although 20 percent of ozone concentrations in
Yuma County emanate from California manmade sources, the rule
only helps downwind nonattainment areas receive emissions
reductions from upwind attainment areas.
This approach will not work for Yuma County because
California has already implemented the most stringent controls
in the country, is still unable to achieve compliance with the
standard and has no emissions reductions to contribute
downwind.
Further, the exceptional events rule is of dubious value to
Yuma County, if not the whole country. Although Arizona has
been a national leader in the development of exceptional event
documentation or dust events, the process for documenting and
receiving EPA approval of ozone-exceptional events has not been
well explained, will almost certainly be resource intensive and
is difficult to predict.
The best case scenario for Yuma is that our agency can make
an international transport demonstration, given that EPA's own
modeling shows that international sources are responsible for
68 percent of ozone emissions affecting Yuma on modeled
exceedance days.
Unfortunately, that demonstration is only valid after the
area has been designated as nonattainment and has exceeded the
3-year deadline.
This means Yuma would still have to comply with higher
nonattainment classification requirements--requirements that
would limit economic growth in a high unemployment area in
perpetuity as a consequence of emission sources that originate
primarily outside of Arizona and/or outside of Arizona's
jurisdiction and control.
Yuma County is but one of many such counties in Arizona and
the West. For all these reasons, Arizona is challenging the new
ozone standard in court.
We also request that consideration be given to interstate
and international transport demonstrations before areas are
classified as nonattainment.
Thank you, and I am happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cabrera follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you very much.
And our last witness today is Mr. Alan Matheson, who is the
executive director for the Utah Department of Environmental
Quality.
Thanks for being with us and you're recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF ALAN MATHESON

Mr.  Matheson. Thanks, and I'll, Mr. Chairman, just note
initially that Mr. Cabrera is credible, despite the fact that
he has far too much hair for this panel.
Mr. Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member Rush, members of the
committee, I am Alan Matheson, the executive director of the
Utah Department of Environmental Quality.
Improved air quality is a high priority for Utah. Under the
direction of Governor Gary Herbert, we have taken aggressive
action to clean our air--imposing stringent new control
requirements, expanding public transportation, implementing
travel-reduction strategies and a public education campaign and
conducting research to understand Utah's unique atmospheric
chemistry. The results have been meaningful.
In the appropriate pursuit of cleaner air, we need to
ensure that our regulatory system is rationally aligned with
that goal. Today, I share Utah's concerns with the periodic
review cycle of the National Ambient Air Quality Standards--or
NAAQS--the implementation schedule for the ozone standard, and
the challenges our State has in meeting the new 70 parts per
billion threshold.
In general, extending the 5-year NAAQS review cycle so that
it better aligns with the prescribed NAAQS implementation time
lines is appropriate. An area designated as moderate
nonattainment for ozone has 8 years from the date the NAAQS is
set to achieve attainment.
At the very least, there should be 8 years between NAAQS
reviews to accommodate this compliance schedule. Extending the
review cycle to 10 years would more closely align it with the
prescribed planning period of an area designated as serious
nonattainment for ozone.
Further, EPA has been unable to provide States with timely
and necessary implementation guidance under the current 5-year
NAAQS review cycle. The implementation rule for the 2008 ozone
NAAQS was published in March 2015, only seven months before the
ozone standard was lowered to 70 parts per billion in October.
As another example, new PM 2.5 nonattainment areas were
designated in 2009. State implementation plans for those areas
were due to EPA December 2014, but EPA has yet to promulgate
the guidance establishing what is required in those plans.
EPA cannot even review for completeness the plans that they
have received. Extending the time line for implementing the
2015 ozone NAAQS will allow better coordination among States,
tribes, and the Federal Government.
One of the areas in Utah experiencing difficult challenges
with ozone and expected to be classified as nonattainment is
the energy-rich Uinta Basin. The unique chemistry underlying
winter ozone formation differs from the typical summer urban
chemistry anticipated by the Clean Air Act of 1990.
In addition, this region has a complex mix of State,
tribal, and EPA air jurisdictions. Utah has coordinated a
significant multi-agency study into the causes of winter ozone
and is working with EPA and the Ute Tribe in developing State,
tribal, and Federal implementation plans for the area.
These efforts take an extraordinary amount of time and an
extension of the implementation period is needed. Under the
Clean Air Act, another review of the ozone NAAQs will occur in
2020. If EPA sets a new standard then, it will hamper the
coordination efforts that are already underway.
Background ozone levels present an additional challenge in
meeting the new 70 part per billion standard. International
transport can, at times, account for up to 85 percent of the 8-
hour ambient ozone concentration in some Western States. Many
areas in the West have little chance of identifying sufficient
controls to achieve attainment, leading to severe consequences.
Utah recommends that EPA work with States to determine what
portion of ozone pollution and its chemical precursors is
coming from background ozone and to clarify how exceptional
events and international transport will affect attainment
designations and compliance.
Making the right choices to improve air quality in ozone
nonattainment areas will depend on how well we understand the
science, and our understanding of science needs to improve. The
tools available to States to account for nonanthropogenic ozone
are administratively burdensome and subject to second guessing,
often due to a lack of reliable supporting data.
Effort spent analyzing uncontrollable pollution to satisfy
EPA's administrative requirements is simply administrative
overhead that does nothing to improve air quality or people's
health.
The Department of Environmental Quality's mission is to
safeguard public health and the environment and our quality of
life by protecting and enhancing the environment, and it is a
mission that we take seriously.
We must address the public health impacts of ozone with
reasoned approaches. As we move forward with this more
stringent ozone standard, EPA needs to have in place the
necessary tools to allow States to succeed.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Matheson follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Matheson, and we appreciate
the statements from all of you, and at this time I would like
to recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Olson, for 5 minutes
of questions.
Mr. Olson. I thank the Chair.
My first questions are for Dr. Shaw. As you know, this
bipartisan bill got Mr. Costa from California to sign up on it
yesterday. It would require the EPA to review air quality
standards every 10 years instead of every 5.
It would also make sure that EPA actually puts out timely
guidance on how to implement the rule when they do make a
change. It ensures we avoid the mess of the last decade.
Lower standards in 2008--rules to make those happen 2015.
Seven months later new standards. That should never ever happen
again.
Do you think that these changes in this bill will help
States clean up the air in a more straightforward way and more
health benefits with this law--this new bill?
Mr. Shaw. Thank you, Congressman.
Yes, the reason that I am encouraged by the effort that is
underway here is because I sincerely believe that it will
enhance our ability to have more meaningful environmental
regulations that do indeed help to protect the health of those
individuals that we are sworn to help to protect.
I believe that this planning time frame will help us to
analyze and do the heavy lifting to understand better what is
causing the respiratory health issues, to be able to develop
plans to make sure those are being addressed and those
regulations will indeed have a reasonable likelihood of
yielding those environmental and health benefits.
So I think that providing that time frame and requiring a
more detailed analysis of the standard before it is lowered
will be very helpful.
Otherwise, we tend to have--find ourselves in a cycle where
we lower the standard trying to achieve the health benefits
that we failed to the last time we lowered the standard and I
think there's some science that needs to be done to answer
that.
Mr. Olson. Is it true too that ozone concentrations are
lower when--as medical reactions are higher in Texas so there's
no coordination between more ozone and health, correct?
Mr. Shaw. That's correct. In the State of Texas we have a
higher asthma hospitalizations in the winter time during our
low ozone concentrations and nationally as well we have seen
significant reductions in ozone concentrations and yet the
level of asthma continues to increase.
Mr. Olson. Sounds like need more studies.
As you know, last year EPA decided to pick a new standard
of--well, they had a goal between 70 and 60 parts per billion.
They chose 70. Their advisor said that rule net range would
keep people healthy.
Under our bipartisan bill, we call on EPA to give secondary
consideration to whether a standard is achievable. It doesn't
tell them to set an unhealthy standard but it keeps them
available--it keeps that technology available, that edge, so
they know they're protecting our air.
Do you think this bill is a reasonable approach?
Mr. Shaw. I do. I think that, you know, one of the other
things that EPA has talked about is that even in absence of
this standard being lowered that I believe that you talked
about 85 percent of counties would achieve the standard by
doing nothing.
I think that there is an opportunity for us to provide
reason to this and let the market and let some of these
innovations take place and I think that this bill helps to
ensure that we are investing our environmental efforts from the
State from dollars and from what we are asking our regulated
community to invest to actually lead those health benefits that
we look at--that we are looking for.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. And now Mr. Sadredin. Wow. Seventy
parts per billion really hurts the San Joaquin Valley, huh?
As was mentioned, one section of this bill deals with
what's called exceptional events. That part of the law is
designed to make sure that our communities aren't punished for
pollution they can't control such as droughts or fires.
But, as you know, EPA does not provide relief relating to
certain events beyond an area's control. My question is, Can
you explain why this exception is so important to this change
for your county?
Mr. Sadredin. Thank you, Congressman Olson.
In 2012, San Joaquin Valley was on the verge of meeting the
65 microgram per cubic meter standard for PM and then we had
the drought that I am sure you heard about, have experienced it
in other regions, where we had concentrations never seen before
in terms of the magnitude of PM concentrations that we were
monitoring throughout the valley.
Unfortunately, the Clean Air Act as it is written right
now, it says you cannot take into account a stagnation or
precipitation.
Now, this is another one of those well-intentioned
provisions that is leading to unintended consequences. I think
the Congress, when they put that in there, they meant, you
know, you cannot come on a daily basis.
Well, say, today is hot, today is stagnation. So this is an
exceptional event on a daily basis. But when you have a
situation like we experienced in San Joaquin Valley where we
had a 100-year drought, conditions that had not been seen
before for 100 years, and they have already gone away this year
thanks to El Nino and almost a normal weather condition, the
language in H.R. 4775 simply says that when you have
extraordinary circumstances such as what we experienced in
California you should not be held responsible, have the valley
businesses, residences be penalized for something that we have
zero control over.
Mr. Olson. And so you're saying 100-year drought is
exceptional. Is that right?
Mr. Sadredin. That is all we are asking, yes.
Mr. Olson. Wow. I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back. At this time, I
will recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Rush, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Rush. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mirzakhalili, as I referred to in my opening statement,
the ozone standards have not been updated since 2008. H.R. 4775
would further delay any new standards from being implemented
for up to another 8 years.
Are there any health implications that would be impacted if
this bill were to become law and we waited for a period of
almost 16 years before updating these standards?
Mr. Mirzakhalili. Thank you, Mr. Rush. Obviously, the
sequence of events that takes place by setting the standard--
when the standard is set, the designations take place, the
States begin taking action to reduce their emissions.
We depend on our upwind State emissions reductions to help
us achieve attainment. If they are not designated, if they are
not implementing measures to reach attainment, we are not going
to--as a downwind State, we are not going to see the benefit.
Moreover, the standard--we are telling the people probably
an untruth saying that standard--they are being protected by
the ozone standards. We issue forecasts. We issue air quality
alerts.
We issue advisories based on the standard. If the standard
is not protective, the forecast obligation is not going to tell
people the whole story.
Mr. Rush. What are the implications, Mr. Mirzakhalili--what
would the implications be if we were to extend the renew period
for all air pollutant standards from every 5 years to 10 years?
For instance, there is a concern that new developments in
scientific research in regards to health impacts may occur more
frequently than every decade.
Also, just because the EPA is required to review the data
every 5 years does not mean that the agency must automatically
update the standards every 5 years.
Do you have any comments on----
Mr. Mirzakhalili. Absolutely. The 5-year review--we need to
follow science. The decision regarding the standards should be
science-driven.
As everybody here on the panel has talked about, we need
additional information. We need to do research and we need to
be informed by that--by the research.
We can't just arbitrarily prohibit and prevent EPA to
lengthen the time that they go back and revisit the standard to
some period of time because it is not convenient.
I think 5 years has been a good timer and tied with--if we
want an alignment with implementation your marginal areas have
to come in with 3 years of the standard.
So if you are going to--one could argue that there should
be a 3-year review of the standard as opposed to a 5-year. As
the new science becomes available, EPA doesn't have to, and
they have a number of occasions, not changed the standard.
They have reviewed it, said science doesn't indicate that
we need to change the standards and they have moved on. That's
the case with carbon monoxide. That is the case with the last
time there was a motion for reconsideration of the 75 standard.
We are not happy with 70 ppb. I don't think it was--you
know, I would have been happier with a lower standard. We think
that some of the science indicated that 65 would have been a
more protective standard.
However, EPA followed the science advisory committee's
recommendation and adopted that. And so we are trying to
implement that. They should not be barred from implementation.
There should not be a provision that would delay the review of
available scientific data that will come before it.
Mr. Rush. H.R. 4775 would also change the reporting
requirements for States by allowing them to claim, quote,
exceptional events, end of quote.
Can you discuss the practical implications of changing air
quality monitoring protocols in ways that could lead to under
reporting of poor air quality conditions and how this might
impact mostly health and environmental conditions for an
affected community?
Mr. Mirzakhalili. I just go back to what triggered the--
prompted the Clean Air Act and us, the Congress, acting on
adopting clean air measures. The northern Pennsylvania event
was an exceptional event. It killed people. We had a bad
inversion that caused a high air quality event and a number of
people died as a result of air pollution.
Just because meteorology is adverse it doesn't mean air
pollution doesn't occur and you should be dismissed. The
language that is being proposed here it opens the door that we
say if there is a hot day we don't--it doesn't count. An
inversion doesn't count.
So we are reduced to managing air quality on good days and
I don't think that's the way you intend us to do.
Mr. Rush. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentleman's time has expired. At this time I
will recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Barton, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am going to ask most of my questions to Chairman Shaw,
but if anybody wants to answer them, they can. I just know him
a little bit better.
What was the original ozone standard set back in 1971?
Mr. Shaw. The standard has, obviously, changed over time
and we had a 1-hour standard and the number was 120 parts per
billion, I believe, was the standard.
Mr. Barton. It was over 100.
Mr. Shaw. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Barton. But it was set in a different way on a 1-hour.
Mr. Shaw. Correct.
Mr. Barton. We've changed it to an 8-hour.
Mr. Shaw. That is correct.
Mr. Barton. And has consistently gone lower every time it's
been set. Isn't that correct?
Mr. Shaw. That's correct.
Mr. Barton. How low can it go? I mean, why not just put
into law every 5 years we are going to reduce it 5 parts per
billion and be done with all this? Because that is what
happens, basically.
Mr. Shaw. It is certainly part of where I am encouraged by
a longer time period between the review. But that is most
effective if that is a more thorough review because as I
alluded to earlier it is my perception that we are in a cycle
to where we are--the process that is being used by EPA to
determine whether to lower the standard is flawed and this is
certainly characterized and captured in our comments we
submitted.
But we are looking at epidemiological studies that show a
correlation and therefore they are assuming that there must be
a causal relationship.
And yet, in order to get clinical studies to show an impact
on the ability of people to bring air in and out of their lungs
they had to subject folks to 6--over 6 and a half hours per day
of moderate to extreme exercise while being exposed to levels
we are talking about just to get a measurable degradation in
lung function.
And by the way, those levels were reversible. Those weren't
permanent. And so in order to get any response they had to have
people exercise it in a way that--I won't speak for you but
certainly I can't do on a regular basis and it is--while we
agree that EPA used them as a surrogate for the sensitive
populations, it is unreasonable to expect people to be exposed
to that.
And the key point I am making, Congressman, is that EPA is
continuing to lower the standard but we are continuing to get
the same result. If you lower the standard over and over again
but you're not providing those health benefits then one would
question maybe we are missing something.
Mr. Barton. Well, now, the standard is parts per billion.
Isn't that right?
Mr. Shaw. That is correct.
Mr. Barton. And we are going from 75 parts per billion to
70. So we are changing it five parts per billion. Can I tell
the difference? If I breathe air right now, can I tell the
difference between 70 parts per billion and 75 parts per
billion?
Mr. Shaw. I would argue that in order for EPA to get a
measurable difference that you would have to follow that
protocol and exercise rigorously for 6 and a half hours each
day while you were being exposed to that in order to
potentially, and not all parties would show a measurement. So,
unlikely that you would experience that.
Mr. Barton. I tried to exercise for 6 and a half hours,
that would kill me. That would be a measurable impact on my
health.
Mr. Shaw. I am with you, Congressman.
Mr. Barton. What is the sensitivity of the best air quality
monitors--in other words, the variance--they measure parts per
billion plus or minus--it used to be about 10 parts per
billion, but it may be better now.
Mr. Shaw. We are better than that now, and certainly we can
measure to the parts per billion and that is getting--you know,
the science an ability to monitor is improving significantly.
Unfortunately, that doesn't necessarily--because you can
measure it to a finer detail it doesn't necessarily mean that
you're--that you are better able to understand what those
implications are.
We can measure it very accurately. But the bigger errors
aren't in the measuring the concentration at the monitor. The
bigger errors are the fact that folks that we are comparing
them to that are hospitalized and/or unfortunately, pass away
we are tying them to a monitor that they may never have been
around.
And in fact, in all likelihood someone who is in a hospital
or, unfortunately, passing away likely didn't spend their final
days exercising 6 and a half hours a day.
In fact, they probably spent most of their time indoors,
which we, as a general population, spend about 90 percent of
our time indoors where ozone levels are about 30 percent, I
believe, of ambient and we are exposed to much other pollutants
in the indoor environment than we see in the ambient
environment.
And so in all likelihood, any environmental input into that
person's hospitalization and mortality were effectively
something besides ozone and I think that is where we need EPA
to assess and help us to come up with ----
Mr. Barton. Let me ask Mr. Cabrera a question.
What do you do in these rural counties like you mentioned
where the natural occurring ozone is probably higher than the
standard? You just--there is nothing you can do. What--I mean--
--
Mr. Cabrera. Congressman Barton, that is exactly why we are
challenging the standard in court.
There are many areas that would be forced to put
requirements on industry for air pollution that they did not
create and that the State cannot regulate, and that puts rural
counties in a very odd position.
We have looked at this very, very hard. Our stance as an
agency is typically to cooperate with EPA whenever we can and
on this particular issue we have looked at all of the
mechanisms for relief that EPA provides and none of them work
well for Arizona.
And so rather than holding counties accountable for air
pollution that they did not create, we decided to challenge the
standard in court.
Mr. Barton. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time has expired.
At this time, I will recognize the gentleman from New
Jersey, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to ask my questions of Mr.--is it pronounced
Mirzakhalili? OK.
I see you share many of my concerns about this bill. In my
opinion, H.R. 4775 is a major rollback of valuable Clean Air
Act protections and will give any area that has air quality
problems numerous new avenues to avoid cleaning up the air.
So, first, I would like to ask some questions about the air
quality monitoring provision. Exceptional events--large
wildfires, for example--are accounted for now in air
monitoring. I mean, that is true. Do you want to just briefly
explain that?
Mr. Mirzakhalili. Certainly. Thank you, Congressman.
Right now, the policy--as exceptional events come into play
when we look at the air quality and see what--whether or not
the violator attained the standard or met the standard and that
is the communication that we make back to our community.
During certain events--you know, Canadian wildfires, for
instance, contributed--caused a problem for certain areas in
our region--we were able to go back, make the case those are
exceptional events and eliminate those--reading those air
quality data points from our overall assessment of air quality
and attainment/nonattainment.
So to go back and say well, and that is very limited--EPA
works on it. They have--they're working on the guidance. There
was just recently a meeting where they brought up and trying to
address Mr. Sadredin's and others' issues regarding, you know,
what should or should not be exceptional events.
But I think what this proposed language does, it creates a
big gaping road for inversions, fires, having hot days and
those are not supposed to be considered exceptional events. We
are supposed to protect the public from----
Mr. Pallone. So then if now you expand this definition, you
know, this--these exemptions, what are some of the real world
implications for such a policy change?
Mr. Mirzakhalili. Well, ozone is formed during the hot days
and require hot days to create ozone. It's a secondary
pollutant. You need VOC and NOx in the presence of sunlight and
hot temperatures.
So if you take out days we eliminate hot ozone days. So we
can--we can declare victory that way and before that we have
met the standard whereas we are not meeting the standard.
Mr. Pallone. So for downwind States like yours and mine
also, by the way, I am concerned that this change, you know,
makes the air quality problems from transport a lot worse.
I mean, is it possible that downwind States could receive
additional air pollution? I mean, they are likely going to
receive a lot more air pollution.
Mr. Mirzakhalili. Absolutely. Like I mentioned, if the
trigger for controls is by designation on air quality,
nonattainment areas usually have to implement more
requirements, and to the extent that they are not part of the
planning, if they manage--if the open area manages to exclude
their poor air quality that is based on exceptional events they
will not be required to implement the reduction strategies that
would then directly benefit the downwind areas such as ours and
your State, obviously.
Mr. Pallone. All right. So as I understand it, the
monitoring data is also used to report the daily air quality
index, which gives people warnings when the air pollution is at
unsafe levels.
So how would expanding what can be considered an
exceptional event impact those alerts to the public? Would it
lead to fewer warnings or would the public wonder why the
numbers of warnings of bad air quality days are increasing
while their area was declaring that they were meeting the air
quality standards? I mean----
Mr. Mirzakhalili. It certainly would create a confusion and
mixed messages to the public. You know, we provide access to
air quality data to the public.
Our monitoring stations are--you know, you can go online to
our Web site and get near real-time air quality data and they
will see it is measuring, you know, above the standard and yet
we are saying well, that this doesn't count.
Mr. Pallone. Well, is there any justification for this
change other than making bad air quality look good to avoid
controlling air pollution or what is the justification other
than that?
Mr. Mirzakhalili. That is what I get, and that is why we
are not supporting it. I believe there are instances that are
truly exceptional events that EPA already considers.
But to open it up to the extent that is being proposed is
not warranted.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Well, I just--I want to thank you,
because as I see it this Section 3(h) would create a loophole
that would allow localities to disregard dangerous air
pollution and, basically, the bill requires the EPA and the
States to pretend that real harmful air pollution doesn't exist
and isn't hurting our kids when in fact it may very well be.
So thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Chair recognizes the gentleman from
Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. This has been a great hearing. I am
sorry, I just had to step out.
So I want to start with Mr. Mirzakhalili. I am sorry if I
butcher it. I am Shimkus. I get it butchered all the time, too.
The--you don't question anybody on the panel with you and
their concern about air quality, do you? I mean, all your
colleagues there, in essence, you don't--you don't question
that they are doing their best for the air quality of the areas
that they represent?
Mr. Mirzakhalili. Absolutely not. I copy their programs
quite often. I go through----
Mr. Shimkus. Let me go on because--yes, I mean, this is
great testimony that we have heard from some of your
colleagues, and Mr. Sadredin, I think we would pull up--I would
encourage people to look at his testimony and look at the two
charts he refers to in his testimony.
I don't know if you can pull it up. We are having trouble,
and so that is why I was bouncing back and forth.
The reality is in San Joaquin Valley the success of what
you have been doing is undeniable, and you are coming before
us.
Then you go to chart two, then you are coming to us and it
says, ``Even if I stop all this activity, I can't meet it.'' Is
that how I observe your opening statement and your testimony?
Mr. Sadredin. Yes. Thank you, Congressman.
As we speak today, the San Joaquin Valley is on the verge
of having 10 active State implementation plans for 10 different
standards for ozone and particulate matter.
There is nothing in this bill that would take this
impossible mandate that is before us as we speak that by next
August our region is required to put a new State implementation
plan together to reduce emissions down to zero from all these
sources, very near zero, and even then it is questionable
whether we meet the standard because the background
concentration that we have.
So when people talk about this bill rolling back or holding
back requirements, there is nothing like that. Just meeting the
current standards we have to go to the Nth degree of throwing
more than the kitchen sink because we've already thrown that
in.
Mr. Shimkus. And let me go to Mr. Cabrera because I saw you
shaking your head when the ranking member was talking.
I mean, you are in the same position, in essence. So what
do you do?
Mr. Cabrera. There is very little that we can do. And so to
answer the question about the exceptional events, the Clean Air
Act and the rule will regulate an area that exceeds the
standard on four days only the same as an area that exceeds the
standard every day.
So an area that exceeds the standards on four days of the
year versus an area that exceeds that standard every single day
of the year get treated the same and that is the reason why you
need exceptional events.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, and Congressman Olson showed me a picture
of an exceptional event in Texas and actually told me that
there were 10 exceptional events that he could speak to.
How many of those got kind of a waiver or whatever the EPA
does to say OK, we will take that into consideration, Dr. Shaw?
Mr. Shaw. I don't have that number but I will speak to it
general and it is challenging and it is uncertain whether
you're going to have success.
It takes an awful lot of personnel input to get there and
oftentimes before you get there the damage is done from that.
And so I can't speak, unfortunately, to the number of those
that were successful. But in general those are some of the
challenges with those exceptional events.
Mr. Shimkus. So Mr. Mirzakhalili, part of the--why I
focused on you at first because in your opening statement you
made a comment--this is why we find this debate troubling--that
even though there is not technologically a feasible way to get
to a level, you are testifying that we should meet it anyway.
Mr. Mirzakhalili. What I said was----
Mr. Shimkus. That is what you said in your opening
statement.
Mr. Mirzakhalili. I said that in setting the health--air
quality standard should be independent of technological
feasibility because so the science indicates----
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, so even though there is not technology to
get there, they need to have that as a standard. That is why we
have--let me go real quick. I am almost done with--I only have
30 seconds, and I apologize.
So the other issue that I have dealt with numerous times is
the public domain doesn't understand the multiple different
environmental rules and regs that are--that are imposed upon
air quality folks in this country.
So here we are talking about ozone, PM. So the public out
there, the C-SPAN viewers are saying, ``What's the deal? It's
one air provision.''
Well, we know it's not, right? You guys deal with it, and I
always bring it up and I am going to do it again. You are
dealing with MACT. It was mentioned in some opening. We got
mercury air toxics.
We have got air quality standards for particulate matter.
We have got cooling water intake rule. We have coal ash startup
shutdown malfunctions, Clean Power Plan, ozone rule.
This is just one of a multitude of a cavalcade of rules and
regulations that are imposed upon people who are trying to
protect the air quality for their citizens and they--you all
need help and you all need a delay in implementing this and
that is why this is--this is a good bill and I appreciate my
colleague for bringing it forward and I yield back my time.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, the Chair recognizes the
gentleman from California, Mr. McNerney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I thank the chair. You know, the San
Joaquin Air Pollution Control District has done an excellent
job over the years and I think should be a model for some of
the districts across the country.
For example, the last couple years have been some of the
cleanest on record. Would you discuss some of the
accomplishments of the Air District and how you have attained
those accomplishments?
Mr. Sadredin. Yes. Thank you, Congressman McNerney.
We have been doing this, as you know, for over three
decades now in San Joaquin Valley.
But, unfortunately, as we speak today, the congressman
mentioned, you know, when was the first ozone standard
published--1979, when our ozone standard--we made significant
reductions in emissions and we are just barely in the process
of meeting that standard because the way the Clean Air Act is
constructed if you have 1 hour of exceedance----
Mr. McNerney. But, I mean, that wasn't my question. How did
you meet those?
Mr. Sadredin. Well, we have imposed the toughest
regulations on valley businesses from small Ma and Pa
operations, service stations, paint shops, all the way to our
largest power plant refinery that we have.
Mr. McNerney. Have you--have you been able to use
technology--new technology? Has there been incentive for you to
use new technology that you've implemented?
Mr. Sadredin. Yes. We support regulations or mandates that
force technology. But we have to take a close look at, you
know, where we are at this juncture in our history. This is not
25 years ago when cars did not have catalytic converters and
there was a lot of low-hanging fruit.
There is nothing in this bill, in my opinion, that would
hold us back in continuing to push technology because of the
current standards. There is nothing in this bill that would
make us go back and have any of these tough regulations that we
have imposed to roll them back.
Technology has been the savior. As we have moved forward,
more technology is available. But today, unfortunately, even if
money were not object, technology does not exist today even on
the drawing board to get to some of the reductions that we
need.
And as I said, even if we eliminated everything, just say
we don't have technology, let's shut down agriculture--let us
shut down all businesses, it will be difficult to meet the
standard.
Mr. McNerney. You have mentioned that the new standards
will be detrimental to public health. Could you explain that?
Mr. Sadredin. I said that there are a number of provisions
in the Clean Air Act right now that are detrimental to public
health and a couple of them are being addressed by this bill.
The obvious one, which is a classic case of well-
intentioned provisions that has led to unintended consequences
is a requirement that extreme ozone nonattainment areas such as
ours have to have contingency measures.
Of course, contingencies make sense. Everybody said,
Whatever you do let's have a contingency measure in place. But
an extreme nonattainment area by definition is an area that has
to throw everything in the mix in their plan.
There is not an A list of measures that we say oh, let's
just do those and hold back. Some of those measures were
contingency ARB's policy and the way the rule is written will
force areas like ours to not put in place all the technology
that is available.
Hold some of it back for contingencies later. To me, that
is detrimental to public health.
The other thing that is detrimental to public health the
way the Clean Air Act is constructed right now it does not
distinguish the fact that various pollutants have different
impact on public health.
Not all PM 2.5, for instance, has the same impact. Some of
it is ammonium nitrate, which might be, you know, respiratory
irritant, whereas you have diesel carcinogens which cause
cancer, toxic.
In the Clean Air Act, it says you treat them all the same
and waste a lot of resources and efforts on reducing pollutants
that have much less benefit to public health versus what we
could do with others.
And then, finally, the whole bureaucracy of having 10
plans--it takes a lot of resources that are diverted from being
able to do things to actually reduce air quality and improve
public health. To me, those provisions are detrimental to
public health.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. Mr. Mirzakhalili, does Delaware
have any regions that are having difficulty meeting standards
because of noncontrollable sources?
Mr. Mirzakhalili. Certainly. Our struggle with ozone are--
is mainly I attribute to emissions that are outside of our
jurisdiction and are transport related.
Mr. McNerney. So have you been able to work with the EPA to
develop the flexibility you need to deal with that?
Mr. Mirzakhalili. What we have--we have been struggling
with EPA trying to get them to actually expand in nonattainment
areas. That was a case that we delegated with EPA, saying that
more areas outside of Delaware should be designated because
they contribute to our nonattainment.
As nonattainment be subject to the requirements of--that we
are subject to to get--put the emissions reductions in place in
order for us to attain.
We are not successful in that effort but by delaying the
standards, by not implementing the reductions Mr. Sadredin's
problems aren't going to go away and if the emissions
reductions don't take place in upwind areas our problems aren't
going to go away. In order to solve air pollution we need to
reduce air pollution.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. The Chair will recognize the gentleman from
Ohio, Mr. Latta, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and very good hearing
today and thanks to our panelists for being here today.
If I could start, Mr. Sadredin, if you would like to
respond if you can remember exactly what Mr. Mirzakhalili
comments on--exceptional events. Could you comment maybe on
what he had commented on?
Mr. Sadredin. Yes. There are a couple of areas that I don't
agree with, let's say.
First, Congress, even 25, 40 years ago when the act was
passed recognized the fact that exceptional event provisions
make sense because there are times when everything is
overwhelmed by things you have no control over and regions
should not be penalized.
The misunderstanding that I see in some of the discussions
there is that somehow what is in this bill or allowing a more
reasonable approach to an exceptional event is being
characterized as misleading the public or not letting the
public know what's going on.
There is nothing with exceptional events that says you do
not measure air quality and do not report to the public what
the air quality actually is, and if you have programs like we
do, working with the school districts on bad air quality--to
stay indoor--whether that air quality is bad because of an
exceptional event or a source of air pollution, those things
will stay in effect and the public is fully aware of those.
The only thing that an exceptional event provision that
says it will keep the area being penalized from having had this
violation that they have no control over--and, as you know,
there a number of penalties, sanctions in the Clean Air Act
when you don't meet the standards--as was mentioned, if you
have one day of exceedance in the region you still have all the
requirements applying to you.
It is just when you have an exceptional event we say don't
hold that against us for the sanctions and other obligations
that come into play.
There is nothing in this bill that would take that away in
terms of communicating to the public what true air quality is
and all the protections that you need to put in place with
respect to that.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much.
If I could turn to Mr. Matheson, and this has come up
before. But when you see that the National Park Service
released data that at many national parks--this is the Joshua
Tree National Park, Sequoia, Kings Canyon National Parks, even
Yosemite--had ozone exceedances in 2015 you note in your
written testimony that many rural Western national parks, the
canyon lands in Utah are located far from any emission sources
yet routinely are above the new ozone standard levels of 70
parts per billion.
And so I guess my question is are you concerned that from
many parts of the western United States there may be few if any
options I know we just heard a little bit about, but what
options are there then to complying with this--these
regulations? How do you do it?
Mr. Matheson. It is a significant challenge, and I know the
Western States Air Resources Council, which is the 15 States in
the West and their air directors, have been looking at this
issue and they found that there has been some recent research
suggesting that there are 12 counties in six States in the
inter-mountain West where the design values exceed the 70 parts
per billion but the human in-State contribution to that
pollution is 10 percent or less.
Mr. Latta. Let me interrupt for one second because, again,
I am from Ohio. We have 88 counties. My home county is one of
the top 10 counties in size. It's 619 square miles.
I noticed Yuma County--I did a quick check--is 5,519 square
miles. You know, we are looking at size differences and you are
lumping everybody together as a county. How do you adjust for
that and how do you account for it? How are you going----
Mr. Matheson. And I will give you another example in Utah.
San Juan County, where Canyonland National Park is far away
from any urban areas, it's about the size of New Jersey, has a
population under 16,000. The industrial emissions for NOx are
400 tons a year total. For VOC it is 100 tons a year total.
So if you look at the standards that are applied based on
ozone formation typically in the East and in urban areas, the
requirements are looking at fuel reformulation, looking at
emission testing for cars, control requirements on business,
traffic controls, et cetera. Those provisions don't apply and
don't work in a county like San Joaquin County that does at
times exceed the 70 parts per billion.
Now, we are committed to clean air and we are looking at
every option available. But at times those options just aren't
available. We have seen many situations in the southwestern
part of the State where we measure the air mass coming into the
State, and it is above the standard.
It goes through the metropolitan area of St. George and
measured on the other side. The ozone is just the same. And in
fact, if you measure at night, ozone goes down because of NOx
scavenging.
It's a--you have a chemical reaction that takes some of the
ozone out of the air. So, again, we are finding it hard to
justify how in the East you reduce NOx and VOCs and ozone has
gone down. In many parts of the West, we have dramatically
reduced NOx and VOCs and over the last 20 years ozone has
stayed relatively constant.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much. My time has expired.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, the Chair recognizes the
gentleman from New York, Mr. Tonko, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and certainly having
worked, before entering Congress, on a number of environmental
and energy concepts, it is nice to know that we can protect the
environment and public health and grow the economy and that
they are not mutually exclusive.
In fact, they do indeed support each other, and I know that
Representative Rush had quizzed some of you about the 5-year
review cycle, the rationale there, and citing some of the
experiences.
I would like to dig a little deeper into that and, if I
could, as you, Mr. Mirzakhalili, the--about some of the 5-year
cycle.
Were there significant amounts of new research and
scientific knowledge that informed the recent revision to this
standard?
Mr. Mirzakhalili. I am sorry. Could you repeat that?
Mr. Tonko. Yes. Are there significant amounts of new
research and scientific knowledge that informed the recent
revision to this standard?
Mr. Mirzakhalili. Absolutely. There was a wealth of
additional studies. I don't recall the exact number of
additional studies that were a part of the record of the
decision.
But CASAC considered all of those and there are--we are
getting at additional studies coming out every day. Right now,
a new study that came out tying air pollution to preterm, for
instance.
It is--need to be considered. They need to be in front of
the scientific community and inform EPA of our policy
decisions.
Mr. Tonko. So if we create this construct of a 5-year
window or have, new and significant research can become
available. Is it fair to say that delay of this proposal--of
the proposed--of this proposed legislation would hinder the
agency's ability to ensure the latest science being
incorporated into EPA's decisionmaking?
Mr. Mirzakhalili. It would certainly bar them from using it
and will not--as is the agency is--can review it in a timely
manner and make revisions as necessary. What lengthening the
cycle would do is just set it aside until the time comes up.
Mr. Tonko. And under the current law, if EPA finds that a
change is not warranted in that 5-year cycle does it have to
revise the standard?
Mr. Mirzakhalili. No, they do not.
Mr. Tonko. Is it correct that the recently revised standard
is consistent with the recommendations of the Clean Air
Scientific Advisory Committee and the latest science?
Mr. Mirzakhalili. It is.
Mr. Tonko. In fact, that committee, I concluded, I believe,
that the latest science supports a standard within a range of
70 parts per billion down to 60 parts per billion. So EPA's
standard is on the high end of that range.
The purpose of these standards is to establish a level of
air quality that adequately protects public health based on the
latest scientific knowledge.
The increase to a 10-year review cycle would undermine that
effort. The current 5-year cycle provides a reasonable amount
of time for the development of new research.
So the intent of this bill, I believe, is to obstruct EPA
from performing its duty to promote public health by increasing
the length of its review cycles. But I see the possibility for
that to backfire.
Apparently, EPA has discretion to not change standards and
in its last revision it decided on the high end of the range
suggested by the independent Clean Air Scientific Advisory
Committee.
And after a 10-year span existing standards will no longer
be based on the latest scientific evidence and proposed
regulations may have to be even more ambitious to meet future
long-term public health needs.
Now, you may be changing the standard less often but the
changes may have to be much more drastic. So do you think that
may be a possibility, what I just said?
Mr. Mirzakhalili. I completely agree with your assessment.
Mr. Tonko. I think that, you know, what we have here is an
opportunity for us to move forward with science and technology
to assist us in strengthening the outcomes and would strongly
encourage the community to--your given technical community to
encourage us to do the most effective outcome here.
Mr. Mirzakhalili. I completely agree. I think it is--the
large number of health care community out there that also
agrees with you.
Mr. Tonko. And erring with that great growing sentiment I
think is the way that will allow us to achieve the best
results. So with that, Mr. Chair, I yield back and thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentleman yields back. At this time, the
Chair recognizes the gentleman from West Virginia, Mr.
McKinley, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me try to understand. I want to cut to the chase a
little bit on this. I think the whole rationale for lowering
from 75 to 70, as I recall, with McCarthy and others who have
come in and testified, was it was to improve our health,
particularly address asthma.
Is that a fair statement, that that is generally why they
lowered it from 75 to 70? I am hearing that from testimony.
But yet, we have--time and time again others have come in
here and said there is not relationship between ozone and
asthma.
We have--Utah State came out with a report on that. A Los
Angeles study came out in 2011 on it. Johns Hopkins just came
out a couple years ago, said there was no connection. So I am
troubled with the rationale of lowering it from 75 to 70 when
there is no connection, especially when we hit rural areas or
States with nonattainment zones and the impact of it.
I don't think--and I refer to a lot of Mildred Schmidt--I
don't think the lady on the street understands what has just
happened when we've lowered this.
So for Mildred Schmidt--in West Virginia I have got the
most--these are the absolute latest, just printed today, that
our capital this year hit 72. Another city was 74. My city was
72. Another community was 77.
Morgantown, home of the Mountaineers, 74. I am just
troubled with where we are going with this. I guess it is
fundamentally goes to that--just because Government can change
or modify a regulation doesn't mean that it should. It has the
power to do that but why are we doing this.
So let me ask the question. If you are in a nonattainment
county, what are you supposed to do? It is my understanding we
can't get air permits--or excuse me, you won't be able to get a
construction permit.
In West Virginia, in these towns I just referred we are the
51st unemployment rate in the Nation. We are the eighth most
impacted by regulations in the country and yet we are just now
going to put another layer on it that I am not sure is going to
improve public health.
Mr. Sadredin. I believe you bring an important issue to the
light here that is really at the heart of this legislation that
is before you which really gets to the implementation phase of
the Clean Air Act.
People could argue where the standards should be set or
where it shouldn't be. There could be--there are various
opinions on that. But there is a misnomer out there that people
equate cleanup in the air and improved public health by just
setting a new standard.
But the realities that we face today after 25 years, after
40 years is that we are--the best way you can describe it--the
process that we face right now when standards change it's the
chaos that leads to a lot of litigation, a lot of delay and no
cleanup in the air.
And then they, I think, the more--what this bill
essentially does it doesn't say ultimately the 70, if that's
the best standard, will not take effect. It just says let's
bring some order to the process.
We have, in our case, 10 other State implementation plans
already for the existing plans that we have to deal with. Let's
deal with those and then in 8 years there's no rollback, no
change in the progress that we have made. Let's bring some
order into the implementation phase of it.
Mr. McKinley. But, Dr. Shaw, if I could--you touched on
something that has been dear to my heart because I think many
people--I was a professional engineer before I came here, one
of just two in Congress and we dealt with a lot of indoor air
quality--and so the fact that you mentioned the 90 percent I am
with you.
That is exactly what it is. We focus a lot on indoor air
quality. Are we chasing the wrong rabbit here? Should we really
be looking at indoor air quality versus the exterior?
Because if we are spending 90 percent of the time indoors,
where should we--so I would like to hear from you in the time
remaining. Which should we be addressing? Which rabbit should
we be chasing?
Mr. Shaw. Thank you, Congressman. You used one of my
favorite adages and that is that we are chasing the wrong
rabbit and that is the reason that I am so motivated and why my
staff has dedicated significant resources to trying to better
understand both the ozone standard as well as helping to try to
provide some input into a better process.
Because what we do know is, as you point out, there's
dubious connections between the respiratory health issues that
we are trying to address at this point and the ozone standard.
The justification for lowering the ozone standard to try to
improve asthma is primarily associated with epidemiological
studies, looking at the correlation between ozone and people's
hospitalization associated with that.
Those don't hold up uniformly across the country and
certainly I think we are missing the opportunity to chase the
right rabbits and we need to find out if it is indeed indoor
air quality, which I think probably plays a large part to that,
or it is ozone plus something else or it's something else in
the ambient environment. But just simply lowering the ozone
standard, I am convinced, is not going to give us the health
benefits that we seek.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you very much. I yield back my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentleman yields back. At this time, I will
recognize the gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Castor, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Castor. Good morning, everyone, and thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for calling this important hearing on the Clean Air
Act, and I hope the committee and this Congress will not weaken
the Clean Air Act or undermine the important progress America
has made in cleaning our air since the 1960s.
The Clean Air Act does require EPA every 5 years to review
the air quality standards that govern the air we breathe and
the law says make revisions as appropriate.
So last October after thousands of studies and comments and
recommendations from the Independent Clean Air Scientific
Advisory Committee, the EPA proposed lowering the air quality
standards by 7 percent, from 75 parts per billion to 70 parts
per billion.
This is an important revision and it keeps America on the
track of continuing to make progress, and if you look back
since the Clean Air Act was adopted in the 1960s and then
amended in the '70s and especially the '90s we have been able
to--we have the strongest economy in the world and we have been
able to make progress still with better air to breathe.
And this is especially important because it has such great
consequences for our families and neighbors back home. We have
been able to reduce smog across country. According to the
American Lung Association, inhaling smog pollution is like
getting a sunburn on your lungs and it often results in
immediate breathing trouble. And long-term exposures to smog
pollution is linked to chronic asthma and other respiratory and
lung diseases, reproductive and developmental harm and even
premature death.
The American Lung Association has determined that there are
currently almost 150 million Americans living in areas with
levels of smog pollution that are linked to health problems.
It is particularly harmful to children whose lungs are
still developing, particularly harmful to older adults because
of their age and all of our bodies become increasingly
susceptible to the assault from dirty air and it is
particularly harmful to our neighbors and communities of color
and in low income areas that often struggle with environmental
justice issues because they live and their children grow up
next to industrial plants and other large-scale polluters.
But you have to compliment the industrial community in
America. They have been able to make great progress, and the ag
community too.
So it's a balance, as we move forward. But I am concerned
that the bill we are considering today is really going to throw
a wrench into the progress that we are making and despite the
importance of continuing to make progress, this is not--this
rule and these new standards aren't going to happen overnight.
They say States will have between 2020 and 2037 to begin
to--or to address it and to make progress, and I know the EPA
has said, ``We are going to work with the States.''
After reviewing the bill, it is clear to me that H.R. 4775
would drastically alter the Clean Air Act to weaken air quality
protections. It would allow more pollution and threaten the
public health.
The bill also undercuts our national ambient air quality
standards process for all other pollutants. That is not
appropriate.
These proposed changes would undermine significantly the
features of the Clean Air Act that have driven important
progress in improving air quality and public health.
And I have one specific problem that I wanted to ask
Mirzakhalili about. It is the definition of exceptional events
for air pollution such as it would expand that definition to
include hot days, drought and stagnant air.
And, unfortunately, what we used to think of as
exceptionally hot days is now your typical summer day in
Florida and in other places.
So what's the practical impact of including these types of
occurrences in the definition of exceptional events?
Mr. Mirzakhalili. You are spot on, Congresswoman. It is why
declaring those conditions which are required to create
pollution as an exceptional event you are essentially barring--
defining a--you must also define clean air and not--you know,
whereas before was--there were exceptional events they were
subject to rigorous demonstration to EPA in order to exclude
them from assessing the air quality designation.
Here, we are just--it broadly opens up the definition to
exactly what you suggested, which is hot days, inversions can
be now included in a definition of an exceptional event. They
are everyday events. They are not--they can't be considered and
shouldn't be considered exceptional.
Ms. Castor. Well, I share your concern and, as climate
change continues to exacerbate droughts and heat waves, these
events are becoming even more common and I have to say this is
America, we can do this together with industry and with all of
you as technological experts in concert with the Environmental
Protection Agency and the Congress. But we shouldn't take a
step backwards and we shouldn't undermine the Clean Air Act and
not continue to move forwards.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentlelady's time has expired.
At this time, we'll recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Flores, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to talk about the impact of the conflicting
regulations that have been proposed by the EPA on State
resources. I will start with you, Mr. Sadredin.
You testified that your local air district is subject to
four standards for ozone and four standards for fine
particulate matter and that each standard, quote, requires a
separate attainment plan which leads to multiple overlapping
requirements and deadlines, unquote.
And so how does your agency harmonize all of these
overlapping requirements?
Mr. Sadredin. Unfortunately, under the current state of the
act with the current framework, we are not able to do that,
which causes a great deal of confusion for the public, for the
businesses that have to comply with these redundant requirement
with multiple deadlines and time lines that they have to comply
with.
What we hope this process would allow by giving some
additional time before the next standard kicks in that perhaps
we could make a case to EPA that if we took the most stringent
parts from all these eight standards that we are subject to,
put them in a single plan with a single set of regulations to
be able to do that.
So that is why I don't think this legislation rolls back
anything. It just gives us the time to do it right and do it in
a harmonious fashion.
Mr. Flores. So what you have to deal with now requires
significant staff and resources and you've got--so you are
spending all this time and resources on these conflicting plans
and are we getting any corresponding health benefits out of
this?
Mr. Sadredin. We are not, because as I was trying--when
Congressman McNerney asked me about your accomplishments the
reason that I mentioned the 1-hour ozone standard is that we
have been working on the existing standards, throwing in the
kitchen sink at all of them. Simply setting a new standard will
not clean the air.
We still have to get to zero emissions with the existing
standards. The new standards just make it impossible even if we
get to zero emissions meet the standards.
Mr. Flores. Right. Right. The prior questioner talked about
rolling back--that the bill rolls back several regulations.
Does it--Mr.--Dr. Shaw, does it roll back any regulations?
Mr. Shaw. No, it does not. As I understand and read the
bill, it does not roll back. It simply provides for additional
time with the implementation of the latest standard but it does
not roll back those requirements that are in place.
There is a lot of technological advancements that are--that
are in place that will continue to be in place and those areas
that can meet this standard likely will. The challenge is those
areas that are having difficulty because the technology is not
there will be additionally penalized. And so this does not slow
down the progress that we see underway to meet the current
standards.
Mr. Flores. Back to the same question that I asked Mr.
Sadredin--sorry, I am messing your name up--what is the impact
of the multiple--the conflicting standards on your resources?
Mr. Shaw. Certainly it takes a huge impact on staff
resources but also I think it's important to add to--the
comments are that it also prevents us or minimizes our ability
to work cooperatively to find those things--when we work and
engage with the regulated community to find approaches that
make sense for multiple pollutants that we are trying to
obtain.
It's often misperceived that what you do to reduce one
pollutant also reduces others. Oftentimes, that's not the case.
There's sometimes a parasitic component to that and raising one
lowers another, lowering one raises another.
Mr. Flores. Mr. Cabrera, any comments from you on the
multiple standards that exist today?
Mr. Cabrera. Well, we just want to clarify that the Clean
Air Act has an escalation so you have time lines to meet the
various standards.
You have 3 years, then 6 years, then 9 years, and there is
increasing regulation on businesses every time you don't meet
the standard. And that is why the background issue, the
international transport issue is so big because you would be
increasing standards on localities that have not caused the air
pollution in the first place.
Mr. Flores. OK. And Mr. Matheson, would you like to comment
on the conflicting standards?
Mr. Matheson. Thank you. We share some of those concerns
and I think we've been talking generally about two different
issues.
One is the standard itself and its health impacts. The
other is how you implement that, and the implementation does
have an impact on our air quality.
When we've got limited resources and are spending that time
on paper exercises rather than on working on getting the
information, the science, the data to ensure that in the unique
chemistry that we see sometimes we are actually targeting those
emissions that make the biggest difference, not just those that
are imposed on it.
Mr. Flores. OK. And there was some commentary that going to
a 5-year review period--going to a 10-year review period from a
5-year review period causes great harm.
I look at the rollout of various standards over the years.
There was 8 years between the first two--I mean, from '71 to
'79 before you changed standards.
Then there was 18 years between '79 and '97, and then there
was 9 years. So in all this time our environment situation has
gotten better.
So it doesn't sound to me like the world ended because we
weren't adhering to a 5-year standard. Do any of you all
disagree with that? OK. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentleman yields back. At this time, the
Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and the ranking member.
I thank the witnesses for being here today, specifically Bryan
Shaw, the chair of our Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality. It's always nice to have a Texan testify here.
I would also like to acknowledge Alan Matheson, cousin of
our longtime colleague from this committee, former
Representative Jim Matheson. I miss Jim because on my side of
the aisle he voted with me a number of times.
But it is not secret in Houston we have air quality
challenges. Just yesterday the EPA granted the Houston-
Galveston-Brazoria region an additional year of compliance.
The region currently sits on 80 parts per billion, which is
still above the 2008 ozone standard. So we needed more time.
That being said, we have come a long way in Houston since
the 1970s when the ozone measure was 150 parts per billion. I
think today's discussion is an invaluable exercise.
While I don't support the majority's legislation, I think
there is reasonable efforts that can be made to improve
implementation of NOx.
Chairman Shaw, in your testimony you stated the Clean Air
Act's requirement of the EPA ignore technological and economic
considerations may have made sense 40 years ago but now
pollution reduction is economically burdensome.
We've repeatedly discussed the issue of technological
feasibility and economic achievement. But the Supreme Court has
stated the most important forum for consideration of
technological and economic claims is before the State agency
where you sit.
Can you--your agency consider the cost in technology in
drafting a SIP?
Mr. Shaw. No, sir. We have to come up with a plan that
meets the standard and we have to satisfy the model. So we have
to find what approaches where we can make arguments. But we
have to develop a plan that will achieve the standard.
Mr. Green. But are you allowed to consider the cost in
technology?
Mr. Shaw. I don't believe that I have had any success or
that we were asked to be able to offer to do anything besides
meet the standard because of cost and technology. We basically
have to find a way to get there, even including very draconian
if necessary.
Mr. Green. My big concern is if we want to do what's
technologically possible and hearing the testimony from parts
of the country that just--unlike in Houston.
You know, part of our problem is that we need some better
roads instead of all the dirt that flows up and dust that flows
up into the air, particularly an industrial area like I
represent.
So there's things we can do. But if it is not
technologically possible I really do think that the State
agency, as the court said, or maybe EPA ought to consider it. I
am just glad we got another year so we can continue to work.
But I wish I could say we would pave those places in my
district in the last year. I've been working on that for a
dozen years now.
But if the State can already consider it by the court order
why is it not sufficiently flexible to meet the new
requirements?
Mr. Shaw. I think the key there is somewhat similar to the
issue here where we talk about concerns over exceptional
events. It's that we have no process where we have some
certainty and ability to actually get--to move the needle based
on those options.
We can talk about exceptional events but those are very
challenging and oftentimes the damage to the location is
already done because the jobs that you need to be able to
afford the new environmental benefits get impacted because you
basically have to go through this process and hoping that you
get some relief.
But we typically don't find that relief. And so the
implications is while there may be the potential for it, it's
long coming and often not available.
Mr. Green. What will we do in Texas for the year extension
we have? Because we still don't meet the standards that, you
know, that we were earlier.
Mr. Shaw. Right. Well, we will continue doing the things
that we are doing, which is looking for new technologies,
better ways to move forward.
We continue to try to attack 60 percent of the ozone
challenges, NOx emissions from mobile sources in this area and
so we have the innovative programs, the TERP program--Texas
Emissions Reduction Plan--where we incentivize turning over
older vehicles.
So we try to get any fruit we can, recognizing that we need
a ladder or an extension bucket to get to that fruit these
days.
Mr. Green. Well, and in my area we have industrial
facilities, refineries, chemical plants. But they're
stationary. You know what they're doing.
But our problem is we also have tremendous truck traffic
not only from those plants but also the ship channel and so the
mobile sources are an issue.
Is there a split between what the stationary sources are as
compared to the mobile sources?
Mr. Shaw. About 60 percent of our NOx emissions are from
the mobile side of that. So that's where--and the stationary
sources have been controlled to the point where there is not--
it is very difficult to find technologically and, certainly,
economically feasible but technologically even feasible
reductions.
And so our primary areas for opportunity are continued in
the mobile sources but those we are not--we are not regulating.
The Federal Government regulates those. So we can incentivize
programs to turn over trades trucks and railroad locations and
diesel engine retrofits.
Mr. Green. OK. Director Sadredin, in December '15 as part
of the 2015 ozone standard the EPA released a white paper on
background ozone, which discussed exceptional events.
The white paper requested comments from stakeholders. Last
month, EPA had a workshop to follow up on these. During the
workshop none of the participants raised the issue of drought
or stagnation. Some stakeholders are interested in development
of further guidelines and templates for exceptional events. A
few, however, were concerned, that spending limited resources
on development of exceptional events guidance.
In Texas, we know the issue of drought and in fact I am
worried we are getting back into it in some cases. Would your
control district consider additional guidance regarding
qualifying events a worthwhile use of time or recourse?
Mr. Sadredin. Thank you for the question. Unfortunately,
EPA has closed the door on considering drought and these
extraordinary conditions from being considered as exceptional
events because the Clean Air Act as written is silent on that
and EPA has interpreted that as meaning no, you cannot do that.
So with that door closed we didn't think that we could have
any productive discussions with EPA because they've already
told us no.
We just think a 100-year drought--we'll argue, well, maybe
100-year droughts that we are facing that will become ordinary
because of climate change. But we are not quite there yet even
if you accept that on the face value.
All this, though, says if you have extraordinary conditions
such as a 100-year drought under EPA's guide, EPA ultimately
will be the arbiter on that--does it qualify as an exceptional
event.
You still have to follow all the procedures and guidelines
that EPA has laid out for any exceptional event.
We are saying that should--the door should be open to have
that discussion that this was--this was extraordinary and
should qualify as an exceptional event.
Mr. Green. Thank you for you answer. Thank you for your
time. I know I've run over a lot. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, the Chair recognizes the
gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Griffith, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Sadredin, my understanding is is that even after a
nonattainment area is redesignated as being in attainment it is
still subject to EPA oversight and maintenance plans for an
additional 20 years. Can you explain if I am right on that
understanding and how that works?
Mr. Sadredin. That is correct. As I have said, you know, we
have made major progress over the years to meet the standards.
We used to be nonattainment until 2010 for PM 10 and we came
into attainment.
But what happens right after that you write a maintenance
plan, which is essentially identical to a State implementation
plan. You still have to maintain all of those regulations that
you had in place if all of a sudden you end up in, you know,
not meeting the standard or various new requirements that kick
in.
So it's a never-ending process in terms of maintaining the
control and you will never have an opportunity or a
circumstance where you can roll back any of the existing
measures that you have put in place to come into attainment.
Mr. Griffith. All right. So let me--let me see if I can
clarify and go from there, and I see some other, particularly
Dr. Shaw, nodding his head.
So you've now--you've now hit the attainment and you said
you have to put a maintenance plan in which, to me, makes some
sense. But then you said you have to keep all the controls.
Does that mean that your new--you can have a new plan that
says here's what we are going to do to maintain or do you have
to keep all the controls in place that were in place even if
there's no evidence that a particular control was relevant to
bringing you into attainment?
Mr. Sadredin. Essentially, when you put a maintenance plan
you cannot roll back any existing regulations that you had. If
there is a potential scenario like that, that would be the
case. That is exactly as you describe it.
But given that we have four--eight other plans to meet with
there is always regulations that are needed to meet those new
requirements and they can also be used to satisfy the existing
maintenance plan.
Mr. Griffith. And I just want to make sure that I am not
miscommunicating because my wife accuses me of doing that
sometimes. So as I understand it, even if there is--even if
there is evidence that one of the plans had nothing to do with
you coming in to attainment and may just be superfluous, you
still have to maintain that particular component?
Mr. Sadredin. Yes. There is a general legally accepted
provision that once a particular control measure becomes part
of a State implementation plan you can never relax that
regulation.
Mr. Griffith. OK. Yes, sir. My time is running out so if
you could be brief.
Mr. Mirzakhalili. I will be--I will be quick.
Mr. Griffith. You disagree?
Mr. Mirzakhalili. I disagree. I think, first of all, the
way EPA has addressed it, the standards of clean data
determination in a lot of areas get--be designated to attain
them without having to develop a maintenance plan.
So there isn't another way of getting to where the
requirements don't carry over. For a maintenance plan
developments if the plan is--it can, it gives you the
flexibility to show that you are achieving the reductions and
maintaining those reductions while mixing and matching.
We can do that under our attainment plan strategies. I can
take and measure out what I have to replace it with something
else that gives me that reduction so that I can--I can show
that attained.
Mr. Griffith. OK. So the distinction would be, however, if
you've got a--if you're taking something out that does nothing
but you have to put something back in, based on what I am
hearing from both of you but it's a legalese thing, I may still
have to put something back in even if I don't think it does any
good if I am taking something out that doesn't do any good
because you have to replace it with something that does the
same type of thing.
And so--and we could debate this all day, but it sounds
like to me that while there may be a slight distinction between
what the two of you are saying it is basically the same.
You still--you've still got to plan. You've got a
component. You can't just eliminate that component if it turns
out to be not accurate.
I've got to move on because I do have another question I
want to get in and I don't have much time left. Mr. Sadredin
again, when the EPA revokes a standard, do States or localities
continue to be subject to obligations under those standards?
Mr. Sadredin. I looked at Ms. McCabe's testimony and that
was cited as one the streamlining measures in the act
currently, that if you revoke a standard, say ``no harm, no
foul,'' you can move on. I have to say, first of all, before I
comment on Ms. McCabe's testimony she has always been gracious,
generous with time and creativity in helping us do everything
that we need to do and we worked well together with her and
with EPA.
And in fact, I was happy that in her testimony she did not
object to a couple of things that are in this bill that we had
advocated for the contingency measure elimination for extreme
areas and also economic feasibility with relation to RFPs.
But on that particular issue relating to revocation of the
standards, I think it's a bit misleading to say when the
standard goes away we don't have to do anything.
As I am sitting here before you, June of this year we have
to write a plan for the 2008 ozone standard, which is about to
be revoked.
We have a plan in place actively for the 1997 ozone
standard. We still have a plan in place for the 1979 ozone
standard. Everything that is in the act remains in place when
you revoke a standard.
The only thing that goes away is you can do a new
transportation budget. Otherwise, every other requirement stays
in place and to somehow say revoking the standard takes away
requirements it's absolutely incorrect.
Mr. Griffith. I appreciate it, and I yield back. That's the
end of my time. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Chair recognizes the gentlelady from
California, Mrs. Capps, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Whitfield and
Ranking Member Rush, for holding this hearing. Thank you to
each of you witnesses for your testimonies today.
You know, I am sort of like the catch-up questioner now,
and many of the things probably I will say or ask may have been
said one way or another. But I want to make sure we get some
things on the record.
Over 40 years ago, our predecessors in this place
recognized they had the power to protect the health--this is
about health--of all Americans and the environment in which we
live.
Several landmark laws were created to do just this right
about that sort of pivotal time. During the 1970s, even before
we saw the creation of the National Environmental Policy Act--
NEPA--the Clean Water Act, the Safe Drinking Water Act, the
Endangered Species Act--so many at that particular time.
In addition, Congress passed a significant overhaul of the
Clean Air Act in 1970. All of these laws have provided the
foundation for a safer, cleaner environment and have
drastically improved our public health, and it goes without
saying we are still benefitting from the creation of these
landmark laws.
However, since the enactment of the laws we have seen
countless attacks to weaken them despite the fact that we are
benefitting from them, and I think this is the nature of the
society in which we live.
Instead of prioritizing the public health and the
environmental safety issues, we have seen push after push to
marginalize these protections that are in place.
So my questions are now for you, Mr. Mirzakhalili. In your
testimony, you highlighted--I probably butchered your name--
some serious concerns with this legislation we are discussing
and I share--I will just be honest--I share many of these
concerns with you.
One of my major concerns relates to Section 3(b), which
changes the criteria for establishing an air quality standard
from one that is based solely on protecting public health--true
to confession, I am a public health nurse by background--to one
that includes the consideration of the, quote--and we have been
using this phrase a lot--``technological feasibility'' of the
standard, and my background tells tells you that I have always
appreciated that we should recognize that protecting our health
is really the number-one priority.
In fact, you stated that this provision that we are
discussing today could--I quote from your testimony--unravel
the entire framework of the Clean Air Act. Those are pretty
strong words.
My first question--do you believe that economic or
technological feasibility should be considered in the air
quality standard-setting process at all? Is there a reason that
we should stray from the precedent of only considering public
health?
Mr. Mirzakhalili. I do not.
Mrs. Capps. You probably said this, but if you'd say it
again.
Mr. Mirzakhalili. Yes. No, I say it again because I think
it's worth repeating that the economic affordability shouldn't
be something that is used to set the standard. It is the
science that should dictate what the lungs can handle, how the
body responds, and we are charged with protecting the sensitive
individuals and the population. The standards need to reflect
that.
Now, how we manage to implement that, that's where the
rubber hits the road and the economic and technological
feasibility come into play.
We should not put the target where an arrow lands. That is
just not the way we do things--not as a nation. That's not how
we've done it and that's not how we should proceed. I
understand the challenges of Mr. Sadredin's exasperation with
meeting a real stubborn problem with air quality.
I understand my colleagues to my left here about their
issues as well and, you know, the difficulties that Mr. Shaw--
that Dr. Shaw has with the science behind this. I think it's
something that's going to get litigated and debated. But that's
where it should end. Science should dictate where the standard
is.
Mrs. Capps. And you've sort of said this too even just now,
but why is it so important to separate the cost--consideration
of cost from setting the standard?
Mr. Mirzakhalili. It becomes what can we afford.
Mrs. Capps. Right.
Mr. Mirzakhalili. This is the health care that we can
afford. This is the health protection that we can afford and
let's--and where does this slippery slope end?
On the East coast we can--we like to pay more and therefore
we get better protection, better standard and some localities
get--they can't afford it so they get a higher standard.
How do we do this? This is--this just doesn't make sense.
There has to be a standard that science indicates is going to
protect the public health and that's what we should follow.
Mrs. Capps. And so, again, you touched on this but is
there--are we really clear in your mind of the charge to the
United States Congress in the--in this area and is there a more
appropriate place for the kind of consideration that is brought
up in this legislation?
Mr. Mirzakhalili. I think the consideration for--goes to
the implementation phase of it and I think it can be done
administratively through how EPA implements--it does
implementation rules and how us as professionals manage to meet
the air quality challenges that we face.
Mrs. Capps. OK.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentlelady's time has expired.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, I recognize the gentleman from
Oklahoma, Mr. Mullin, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, panel,
for being here.
I don't think it's any secret where my heart lies with the
EPA. I think they overreach every day and are putting more and
more pressure on States, on counties, manufacturers, job
creators and the whole nine yards.
And it goes into--it goes into questions what are they
thinking. Are they listening? Are they paying attention to
what's actually happening out there? I'd say no.
And Dr. Shaw, I'll start with you just simply because you
got a hat on the table and I--Lord, I appreciate seeing that.
Don't see that enough up here.
But I am kind of interested to know, you don't look like
you had to be bald. Did you just choose to do it? I mean, if I
wore a hat all the time, it would be sticking to my head if I
was----
Mr. Shaw. My wife has breast cancer, and when the chemo
took her hair I decided to lose mine in support of her.
Mr. Mullin. Well, what's her name?
Mr. Shaw. Dana.
Mr. Mullin. Dana. I will tell you right now, just because I
feel like I stuck my foot in my mouth, I will be praying for
Dana.
Mr. Shaw. Thank you. Thank you.
Mr. Mullin. And God bless you for being such a supporting
husband.
Mr. Shaw. She's got the tough role, but thank you.
Mr. Mullin. Yes, but you're there and you're going to be
walking her through the whole thing. So God bless you for that.
Switching gears just a second, you know, you're from Texas,
and, even though we beat you in football all the time, I really
do appreciate the idea that we work together and we have
similar experiences.
Explain to me a little bit about what this ozone rule is
going to do to the State and maybe even the cost that is going
to require you all to take on at a time when really the--you
know, we are an oil and gas State, too--at a time when really
we need to be looking at shoring up our State and the jobs
within it, not costing jobs by spending money where it's not
needed.
Mr. Shaw. Thank you. I'll start with saying we recognize
that we are not--as a State agency we are not choosing between
the environment and the economy.
We have to have both or we'll have neither and a big part
of what we are looking at also when we think about the public
health component of this is especially for a standard that has
very limited and questionable benefits.
We're at a point now with the great success we've had in
lowering our pollution and cleaning up our air and water across
the State and across the country is that your health impact is
likely more driven by your opportunity for economic success
than it is by the environment that you're faced, and we want to
continue to clean that environment.
But we take very seriously that some of what we can do to
help our people to have a better healthier life is to pick them
up out of poverty and make sure they have good job
opportunities.
And so when we look at this issue, one that has
questionable scientific value for moving forward and we look at
the fact that we are compounding by putting a number of
regulations on top of one another and it makes it difficult
both for the agencies to develop the rules but also for
industry to be able to be implementing those and us to work
with them, I see this as an opportunity to improve our
environmental outcome as opposed to one as might be otherwise
suspected as one that helps industry to compete.
I think it does help industry to have more reasonable time
frames. But I am convinced if we take advantage of a length and
time opportunity especially and we look at a better
scientific--more rigorous scientific evaluation we'll actually
get the better environmental health outcomes.
Mr. Mullin. Well, and by the EPA's on a mission they said
that the 2015 ozone standard will be reached by 2025 by just
implementing the 2008 rule. So it calls into question why.
Mr. Shaw. It certainly does, and that's one of the comments
I sort of alluded to earlier. Their own data suggests that most
places are going to get there without the rule so why do you
need the rule, especially if it's going to cause undue economic
impact on a number of areas that really can't afford it.
And, quite frankly, the market does a very good job of
driving innovation and we have a lot of innovation in place
that if we can allow that to move forward we could instead of
going through this process of developing complex rules to try
to meet a standard that is very close to background in many
areas--we have some areas where 65 parts per billion is an
often background--we could instead focus on what are the real
environmental and health issues that are out there that need to
be tackled next.
Mr. Mullin. And just to kind of make a point here and maybe
it's been brought up already, but even the National Park
Service is saying that the Grand Canyon and the Sequoia
National Forest where I am sure there's a tremendous amount of
industry and work going there, it is going to be out of
compliance with this.
So it does leave us all the question what is the motive.
Other than just busy work, what is the motive behind this?
And, look, I live--my kids are the fourth generation on our
farm and I want clean air and clean water, too. A creek runs in
front of our place. I used to drink out of it as a kid.
I don't think we are arguing that, and we are doing--we are
good stewards of the land behind us, but we don't need this
rule. It's undue cost and undue harm to States and
manufacturers around.
And so we'll be praying for Dana----
Mr. Shaw. Thank you.
Mr. Mullin [continuing]. Sir, and I do sincerely mean that.
God bless you for being such a supporting husband to her, and I
yield back. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Shaw. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back, and that
concludes the questions today except for me, and I've waited
patiently for quite a while now, Mr. Rush.
But I would just like to make this comment, that certainly
Congress has a lot of purposes but one purpose is to provide an
opportunity for constituents who have a problem to come and
petition the Government for some help, and that is what I view
this panel as.
I mean, some of you are having some problems in your States
of meeting a Federal requirement. I know that Mr. Mirzakhalili
has a different view on some of this than some of you, although
he has admitted, I believe, that there are some areas in
Delaware that are in nonattainment, as well, but not to the
extent that we have in the San Joaquin Valley or certainly
Arizona, parts of Utah, or even in Texas.
And one question I wanted to ask you, Mr. Sadredin: In the
past the EPA has advised our committee that, while it doesn't
consider technological and economic feasibility in setting the
standard, it does consider it when implementing it. Would you
agree with that, or has that been your experience?
Mr. Sadredin. That's definitely a bit misleading and
incomplete view of the world and the realities that we face.
There has been a number of discussions here about economic
feasibility and setting the standard.
Mr. Whitfield. Right.
Mr. Sadredin. I believe that standards should be set with
science only and I don't think this bill really goes away from
that.
What it says is that when CASAC makes a recommendation and
they give a range to the administration to consider, right now
it goes through the administration.
Depending on who's in charge they make these various
assumptions and set the standard where it needs to be and then
they come up with something. This really brings some order,
some law into how you can actually pick within that range what
is an appropriate standard.
But to your exact question, unfortunately, Supreme Court
ruled that since Congress was silent economic feasibility
cannot be considered. It wasn't that Congress intentionally----
Mr. Whitfield. Right.
Mr. Sadredin [continuing]. And specifically said do not
consider economic feasibility. But the bottom line is when the
standard is set it says you have to come into attainment by
such and such year.
You have X number of years. There is no cost effectiveness
economic feasibility you can--argument you can use to say we
are not going to meet that deadline.
Mr. Whitfield. Right. And that's how many of us feel and
the forums indicated that that when you have laws that have
been out there for a while even the Clean Air Act, relating to
EPA, Congress should be able to respond to address some of
these problems that are there.
Now, you know just from the questions today there are a lot
of members of Congress who say because it's EPA nothing should
be changed because health is the most important issue.
And yet, we do understand that poverty does have a direct
impact on health. Clean air is not the only thing. And so the
thing that struck me today is listening to the four of you. I
mean, you all touched on it a little bit more than our
gentleman friend from Delaware.
But you can't meet the standards in many areas. It cannot
be done, and so what is the impact of that? What does that mean
for the people in your area when you cannot meet the standard?
Mr. Cabrera.
Mr. Cabrera. What it means is those requirements on
business that keep business from opening up. What it means is
that there's requirements on agriculture that keeps agriculture
less efficient and what it means is that we are imposing
restrictions on American business for pollution that's coming
from international sources.
Mr. Whitfield. Correct. Correct.
Do you want to make a comment, Mr. Sadredin?
Mr. Sadredin. In San Joaquin Valley, unfortunately we have
a lot of communities of color with great deal of poverty, where
economic well-being is the key factor in quality of life.
If we are not able to meet these standards, draconian
sanctions will kick in. No new businesses can locate in the
area without significant costs. We will lose highway funding,
Federal takeover and then nonattainment penalties to the tune
of about $40 million a year. Right now we are paying for the
1979 1-hour rules on standards.
Mr. Whitfield. And Mr. Matheson, I know up in Utah, I mean,
even things going on in Asia has an impact on you, right?
Mr. Matheson. It does, and we've been able to measure that
and see that in several counties we've seen pollution come in
that's very close to the standard or above.
Mr. Whitfield. Right. We know the International Monetary
Fund is having their meeting in Washington right now and
they're talking about world stagnation.
They're talking about excessive regulations, and so
Congress does have a responsibility when you have a predicament
where a Federal standard cannot be met.
Now, this is the standard for the country but yet under the
clean energy plan, which was stayed by the Supreme Court, EPA
went to individual States and set different standards in the
States for the States. Yet, this is the standard that applies
and even when EPA looks at cost they automatically exclude any
costs relating to California because California is not going to
be able to meet the standard.
And so we have a real problem and one comment I would make
about Mr. Olson's legislation is some have suggested that we
are mandating that only--it be reviewed every 10 years.
That is not the case. 4775 does not bar EPA from setting a
new national ambient air quality standard whenever they want to
but they're not required to review it for at least 10 years.
Every 10 years they've got to be required instead of five.
So that information is misleading.
And so I want to thank all of you for being here today. We
appreciate your time and we look forward to continuing our
efforts to try to pass this legislation.
I have some documents here I want to introduce into the
record. Have you all seen it? You all seen that one?
So without objection, we'll enter those into the record,
and did you----
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Rush. I have two letters, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to
enter.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Without objection, we'll enter those two
letters into the record, as well, and we'll keep the record
open for 10 days.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Rush. All right.
Mr. Whitfield. And yes, well, unanimous consent for any
member who wants to enter a statement in the record, we'll do
that as well.
I think all of them are here, though, aren't they? Oh, I
felt like all of them were here. But it's an important issue.
So that will conclude today's hearing. Thank you all once
again for joining us and for your invaluable input.
Hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:38 p.m., the hearing was concluded.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

This committee takes seriously its oversight
responsibilities under the 1970 Clean Air Act. It is important
for us to look back and acknowledge what this law has
accomplished--a 30 percent reduction in ozone levels since
1980. But it is equally important to recognize what is no
longer working and needs to be fixed for the 21st century, and
the agency's current ozone program with its two overlapping
regulations is a prime example. Fortunately, there is a
bipartisan solution that works to simultaneously protect jobs,
economic growth, and public health--H.R. 4775, the ``Ozone
Standards Implementation Act of 2016.'' The legislation cuts
red tape and puts EPA's ozone program back on track towards
achieving cost effective reductions for ground-level ozone.
EPA itself delayed the implementation of its 2008 ozone
standard and last year the agency finally provided States with
necessary implementing regulations. But instead of focusing on
working with States to achieve the 2008 standard, the agency
went ahead and finalized a new standard and is now requiring
States to simultaneously comply with both.
Even EPA admits that the second rule would not
significantly contribute to ozone reductions that are already
occurring under existing regulations, but the rule instead
would increase permitting and other compliance costs, as well
as present administrative challenges for States and local
communities. Make no mistake, counties designated as in
nonattainment with EPA's ozone standard face serious limits on
new economic activity. It's essentially a kiss of death for
economic growth for communities in Michigan and every State.
Factory expansions to new construction may have to be placed on
hold until the necessary pre-construction permits are obtained.
Backyard barbeques could even be limited.
And even after compliance is achieved, EPA would still
impose constraints-all for reductions that EPA claims will
largely occur regardless of new compliance regimes. Regulations
that are unnecessarily costly and restrictive, and that result
in overlapping requirements and deadlines, are the last thing
job-creators in Michigan and across the country need.
Businesses will go out of their way to avoid setting up shop in
any area that's close to being in noncompliance.
H.R. 4775 introduces a dose of needed commonsense to EPA's
ozone program. It extends the implementation schedule for the
new ozone standard to allow the 2008 standard to be implemented
first. It would also harmonize the new ozone standard with
other existing regulations that EPA projects will reduce ozone
levels across the Nation. Most importantly, the bill provides
States with a reasonable path forward for implementing new
ozone standards while also updating the Clean Air Act to make
this law workable for States and communities in the years
ahead.
A Clean Air Act that continues to drive down pollution
without causing undue damage to jobs and the economy is an
environmental legacy we should be striving for and one that the
bipartisan Ozone Standards Implementation Act will help
achieve.

Prepared statement of Hon. Steve Scalise

Here in the United States, we have achieved something
extraordinary: economic growth and expansion have not led to
dirtier air. Quite the opposite, we have seen background levels
of pollution steadily decline in recent years, and the quality
of the air we breathe continues to improve. However, looking at
the onerous regulations coming out of the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA), you might believe that no gains have
been achieved. You see, EPA--through its periodic review and
implementation of National Ambient Air Quality Standards
(NAAQS)--seems to think that even background levels of certain
pollutants must be eliminated. Which begs the question: how
will this be accomplished? The short answer is: EPA has no
idea.
The Ozone Standards Implementation Act of 2016 goes a long
way toward bringing some clarity and sanity to the EPA
rulemaking process related to ambient air quality standards. To
that end, the bill requires that the new standard for ground-
level ozone not be implemented until 2025--which makes sense,
since EPA does not estimate that any of the benefits will be
realized until that time. Further, the bill changes the review
period for criteria pollutants under the Clean Air Act from 5
years to 10. This is a practical change that will give
stakeholders more certainty. Instead of reviewing the criteria
pollutants every 5 years, the EPA has chosen to change the
standards for those pollutants every 5 years. This has resulted
in a kind of intra-agency competition of which set of
bureaucrats can promulgate the most stringent air quality
regulations without regard for cost or economic impact. A 10-
year window in which to review criteria pollutants is simply
better than 5.
When it comes to transparency, I am glad that language from
my Promoting New Manufacturing Act has been included in the
Ozone Standards Implementation Act of 2016. As it stated last
Congress, the language requires EPA to put out guidance on how
to comply with the new standard at the same time the rule is
published. If EPA does not do this, the standard does not take
effect until the agency gives guidance. This is critically
important for manufacturing investment--particularly in the
petrochemical sector, in which investment decisions are made 3,
5, or even 10 years in advance--as companies need to know what
the rules will look like in the years ahead. In addition, it
took EPA 7 years to put forth guidance on the ozone standard
that was issued in 2008. This is unacceptable.
These much-needed changes will bring our clean air laws
into the 21st Century and will send the necessary signal to the
investment community that the United States is still open for
business. No longer will nameless, faceless Washington
bureaucrats be able to stifle American innovation. Therefore, I
am proud to give my strong support to the Ozone Standards
Implementation Act of 2016 and look forward to its favorable
consideration by this committee and the full House of
Representatives.

[GRAPHICS AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
