- FEDERAL POWER ACT: HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVES

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FEDERAL POWER ACT: HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 7, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-164

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

22-407 PDF              WASHINGTON : 2016
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ANNA G. ESHOO, California
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             GENE GREEN, Texas
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          LOIS CAPPS, California
Vice Chairman                      MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JERRY McNERNEY, California
PETE OLSON, Texas                    PETER WELCH, Vermont
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  PAUL TONKO, New York
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     Massachusetts
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TONY CARDENAS, California
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

______

Subcommittee on Energy and Power

VACANCY
Chairman
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               JERRY McNERNEY, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        PAUL TONKO, New York
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            GENE GREEN, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     LOIS CAPPS, California
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             KATHY CASTOR, Florida
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   PETER WELCH, Vermont
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILL FLORES, Texas                   FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma               officio)
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Pete Olson, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Jerry McNerney, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     3
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................   103

Witnesses

Douglas W. Smith, Partner, Van Ness Feldman, LLP, and Former
General Counsel, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission..........     7
Prepared statement...........................................    10
Answers to submitted questions...............................   109
Clifford M. (Mike) Naeve, Partner, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher
& Flow, LLP, and Former Commissioner, Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission.....................................................    28
Prepared statement...........................................    31
Answers to submitted questions...............................   114
Susan Tomasky, Former General Counsel, Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission, and Former President, AEP Transmission of American
Electric Power Corporation.....................................    39
Prepared statement...........................................    41
Answers to submitted questions...............................   117
Linda G. Stuntz, Partner, Stuntz, Davis & Staffier, P.C., and
Former Deputy Secretary, Department of Energy..................    59
Prepared statement...........................................    61
Answers to submitted questions...............................   123

Submitted Material

Letter of August 30, 2016, from Norman C. Bay, Chairman, Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission, to Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr.
Olson..........................................................   104

FEDERAL POWER ACT: HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVES

----------

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 7, 2016

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., in
Room 2322, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Pete Olson (vice
chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Olson, Barton, Shimkus,
Latta, Harper, Pompeo, Kinzinger, Griffith, Johnson, Ellmers,
Flores, Mullin, Hudson, McNerney, Tonko, Engel, Green, Welch,
Loebsack, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Will Batson, Legislative Clerk, Energy and
Power; Tom Hassenboehler, Chief Counsel, Energy and Power; A.T.
Johnson, Senior Policy Advisor; Ben Lieberman, Counsel, Energy
and Power; David McCarthy, Chief Counsel, Environment and the
Economy; Brandon Mooney, Professional Staff Member, Energy and
Power; Annelise Rickert, Legislative Associate; Chris Sarley,
Policy Coordinator, Environment and the Economy; Dan Schneider,
Press Secretary; Andy Zach, Counsel, Environment and the
Economy; Robert Ivanauskas, Detailee, Energy and Power; Jeff
Carroll, Democratic Staff Director; Rick Kessler, Democratic
Senior Advisor and Staff Director, Energy and Environment; John
Marshall, Democratic Policy Coordinator; Alexander Ratner,
Democratic Policy Analyst; Timothy Robinson, Democratic Chief
Counsel; Tuley Wright, Democratic Energy and Environment Policy
Advisor; and C.J. Young, Democratic Press Secretary.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PETE OLSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Olson. The hearing will come to order. This hearing is
called Historical Perspectives on the Federal Power Act. And
that is just what it is: historical perspectives, so we can
learn more going forward.
It is a little awkward day for me. I am not used to being
in this seat. But I will do my best. As per normal, I will have
an opening statement, Mr. McNerney will, Mr. Upton will, and
Mr. Pallone will, if they come. And then 5-minute statements
from the witnesses and questions from the Members.
OK. First, I want to say a word or two about our good
friend Ed Whitfield. Ed knows these issues. He knows about the
policy. And above all, he wants the best for his home State of
Kentucky.
Chairman Whitfield was a great steward for this committee.
He was a mentor, a teacher, and he will be missed around here.
And of course he helped get this ball rolling on this new
series of hearings on the Federal Power Act. This should be a
great opportunity for this committee. We can bring a new and
much-needed focus to today's power markets. We can see what
works, what doesn't work, and find long-term solutions.
But before we take any next step, we need to know how these
markets developed. Back in 1996, FERC issued Order 888. In
general, that required open access for transmission lines of
our Nation's utilities. And since that time, consumers of
electricity have gained more competitive options beyond their
local utility.
Today, at least for the wholesale markets, a large
purchaser of electricity can not only purchase from the local
utility, but that consumer can purchase power at wholesale from
a neighboring utility or an independent power producer or any
number of competitive suppliers. Texans, and those at half
other States, can even pick their retail electric electricity
provider. All these options to choose an electric supplier were
designed to keep costs down for consumers everywhere by
checking the prices charged by utilities.
Yet the markets by no means are perfect. Some people still
object to subsidies and tax breaks granted to a few types of
power sellers. Others complain that certain power plants
generate too much pollution, even if their power helps pay
lower bills for their users. The owners of power plants object
that the markets don't always establish the right prices. They
say prices can be artificially low at times of high demand. Not
because prices should be low during high demand but because the
organizations running the markets are too sensitive to
political pressures.
We won't solve the serious problems facing our market this
morning. We won't sort out the difference between the real
properties and the empty allegations today either. Rather, this
hearing will set the stage for our work on all of these topics
in the future. To set this stage, we have gathered four
witnesses today who have deep experience in the development of
the markets. They were in the markets in senior policymaking
positions when the key decisions were made on how these markets
would roll out. Two were former counsel generals at FERC. One
was a FERC commissioner. And one was a senior official with the
Department of Energy. They have a valuable perspective to offer
this committee. I look forward to today's hearing.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Olson follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Pete Olson

First, I want to say a word or two about my good friend Ed
Whitfield. Ed knows these issues, he cares about the policy.
Above all, he wants what is best for the people of Kentucky.
Chairman Whitfield was a great steward for this committee, and
he will be missed around here. And of course, he helped get the
ball rolling on a new series of hearings on the Federal Power
Act.
This could be a great opportunity for this committee. We
can bring a new-and much- neededfocus to today's power markets.
We can see what works, what doesn't, and find long-term
solutions. But before we take any next step, we need to look at
how these markets developed.
Back in 1996, FERC issued Order No. 888. In general, that
order required open access over the transmission lines of our
Nation's utilities (except in Texas, where we'd rather cut our
interstate power lines than let FERC tell us what to do.).
Since that time, consumers of electricity have gained more
competitive options beyond the local utility.
Today, at least for the wholesale markets, a large
purchaser of electricity can not only purchase from the local
utility, but that customer can purchase power at wholesale from
a neighboring utility, or an independent power producer, or any
number of competitive suppliers.. Texans and those in a handful
of other States can even pick their retail electricity
provider. All these options to choose an electric supplier were
designed to keep costs down for consumers everywhere by
checking the prices charged by utilities.
Yet the markets are by no means perfect. Some people object
to subsidies and tax breaks granted to a few favored types of
power sellers. Others complain that certain power plants
generate too much pollution, even if their power helps people
pay lower electric bills.
The owners of power plants object that the markets don't
always establish the right prices. They say that prices can be
artificially low at times of high demand --- not because prices
should be low during high demand but because the organizations
running the markets are too sensitive to political pressure.
We won't solve the serious problems facing the markets
overnight. We won't sort out the difference between the real
problems and the empty allegations today either. Rather, this
hearing will set the stage for our work on all of these topics.
To set the stage, we've gathered four witnesses today who have
deep experience in the development of the markets. They were in
the markets, in senior policymaking positions, when the key
decisions were made on how these markets would roll out. Two
were former general counsels at FERC. One was a FERC
Commissioner. And one was a senior official with the Department
of Energy.
They have a valuable perspective to offer this committee. I
look forward to today's hearing.

Mr. Olson. And with that I yield to my friend from
California, Mr. McNerney, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JERRY MCNERNEY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. McNerney. Well, I thank the chairman for holding this
important hearing on the Historical Perspective of the Federal
Power Act.
Mr. Chairman, it is clearly important to give Members the
opportunity to review some of the thinking and reasoning that
went into the laws that we do have today. Considering all the
latest and ongoing developments that the grid now faces, it is
worthwhile to hear from prominent stakeholders who can provide
historical and current analysis from legislative,
administrative, and judicial perspectives.
The Federal Power Commission, and later the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission, played a significant role in providing
the regulatory structure that provided a balance between
competition and public interest to help make the United States
a leader in the generation of distributed public and affordable
energy. This subcommittee played a significant role in enacting
the policies that led to those agencies and to how the current
grid is structured.
It is time to consider what changes, if any, are needed to
meet the challenges of today. Mr. Chairman, new technology is
bringing about fundamental changes in how and where we produce
and deliver electricity to consumers. This provides
policymakers with both challenges and opportunities for
establishing a modernized electric grid. Exciting developments
such as the emergence of renewables and cheap natural gas,
distributed power system, demand-side management, improved
energy storage, local and regional micro grids, electric
vehicles, rooftop solar, and high speed switching technology
must now be incorporated into a modern, efficient, and reliable
grid.
Today's hearing will provide additional insight into what
this modern grid should look like, how it should be regulated,
and what entities should have what authorities. The fact of the
matter is that with the current regulatory framework
established back in 1935 with the Federal Power Act may no
longer be suitable as the bright line distinguishing Federal
and State regulations of the electric power grid.
The dividing line giving Federal regulators exclusive
authority over the wholesale electric sales and interstate
commerce and relegating retail sales to State regulators may in
fact need to be updated to account for the current realities of
today's grid operations. Just as the grid has changed,
policymakers may need to consider a new regulatory structure
that takes into account State-by-State decisionmaking processes
for issues such as permit siting, demand response, blended fuel
sources, and net metering policies.
Mr. Chairman, I believe today's hearing is a great first
step into examining these issues and in gaining valuable
insight into how we got here in the first place. I hope today's
bipartisan hearing, one of the first of its kind, can be a
model for future legislative hearings that may ultimately lead
to a consensus approach to addressing essential challenges that
the Congress must additionally address: What should a 21st
century grid look like. Once against, Mr. Chairman, thank you
for holding this timely hearing. And I yield the balance of my
time.
Mr. Olson. The gentlemen yields back. I have heard Chairman
Upton will not be here on our side. Anybody want to take some
time? His time? Going, going, gone.
We recognize the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Pallone from New Jersey, for 5 minutes, opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. We are going to have an auction on the other
side for the time.
I want to thank Mr. Olson as the chair of the committee
now, and also thank Mr. Whitfield for his service to the
subcommittee. Thank you for holding this important hearing to
provide us with a historical perspective on how our system of
electricity regulation has evolved over the past three decades.
The Energy and Power Subcommittee was the first
subcommittee where I had the privilege to serve as ranking
member opposite the late Chairman Dan Schaefer of Colorado. And
I mention this today because today's hearing is about
historical perspectives on the Federal Power Act and because
there was a time, beginning with Chairman Phil Sharp, when this
subcommittee focused an enormous amount of its time on electric
utility restructuring.
In my 2 years as subcommittee ranking member, Chairman
Schaefer held what seemed to be almost weekly hearings on
electricity. And these hearings focused on the vision of a
national mandate for retail competition as well as overseeing
the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission or FERC's development
of wholesale electric competition. And Chairman Barton then
continued the subcommittee's focus on the electric utility
sector and the development of regional wholesale markets that
led to the Energy Policy Act of 2005. And that law included
critical structural and regulatory changes that modernized and
solidified the regional system that we have today.
Since that time, the subcommittee has turned its attention
to other issues. However, new developments in the electricity
sector and the regional markets, both promising and concerning,
require us to return again to a serious assessment of the state
of the electric sector and how it is regulated. For one thing,
technology has dramatically transformed the possibilities for
cost effective generating and efficiently delivering electric
energy to homes, businesses, and manufacturing facilities.
Today this can all be done from a variety of sources. For
example, distributed generation, both fossil and renewable
based, along with improving storage options, smart meters,
micro grids, and other technologies, have altered the
possibilities for effectively and economically ensuring
reliability. And this has called into question even the most
basic tenets of rate making.
At the same time, these technological and market changes
have challenged the longstanding and financial models for
utilities, and the economic viability of many large nuclear and
coal-fired facilities. Beyond technological transformation,
recent decisions by the Supreme Court have also called into
question many of our past assumptions about electric sector
regulation. One example of that is the court's decision earlier
this yearly in the FERC versus Electric Power Supply
Association case. This decision provided for markets where
conservation and efficiency could be sold at wholesale
alongside electric power. It has also upended traditional views
of what constitutes sales of wholesale or retail and what is
within the purview of the Federal Government and FERC as
opposed to State governments and their public utility
commissions. And these are enormous and complex matters that
are important and should be examined by Congress and
specifically this committee.
We need to begin exploring what types of changes if any
need to be made to the Federal Power Act or whether some of the
technological and legal developments I have discussed have made
the act itself obsolete. And these are legitimate questions
that we should be exploring. And while we represent different
parties and philosophies as well as different States and
regions, it is critical that our committee spend significant
time examining these matters so that we arrive at decisions
that are informed by fact.
Again I will say, Mr. Chairman, it is an important hearing
because we have worked in a bipartisan fashion to bring
together some of the best minds and public servants in the area
of electricity. These are not just academic experts. They are
people who played significant roles at key moments in the
development of our modern electric regulatory regime. And again
I want to commend Chairman Upton, you, Mr. Chairman Olson, and
of course our Ranking Member Rush for not only holding this
hearing but doing so in a thoughtful, collaborative, and
serious manner that this subject deserves.
And I am grateful to our witnesses who include a former
FERC Commissioner, former general counsels, and the former
deputy Energy secretary, all of whom continue to be well-
respected experts in this field, for helping begin this effort
to understand and assess the evolution of the electric sector.
I yield back unless somebody wants my time on our side. I
don't think so. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Thank you for holding this important hearing to provide us
with a historical perspective on how our system of electricity
regulation has evolved over the past three decades. I also want
to welcome Mr. Olson as the chair and thank Mr. Whitfield for
his service to the subcommittee.
The Energy and Power Subcommittee was the first
subcommittee where I had the privilege to serve as ranking
member, opposite the late chairman, Dan Schaefer of Colorado.
I mention this because today's hearing is about historical
perspectives on the Federal Power Act, and because there was a
time -beginning with Chairman Phil Sharp--when this
subcommittee focused an enormous amount of its time on electric
utility restructuring. In my 2 years as subcommittee ranking
member, Chairman Schaefer held what seemed to be almost weekly
hearings on electricity. These hearings focused on the vision
of a national mandate for retail competition, as well as
overseeing the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission's (FERC's)
development of wholesale electric competition. Chairman Barton
then continued the subcommittee's focus on the electric utility
sector and the development of regional wholesale markets that
led to the Energy Policy Act of 2005. That law included
critical structural and regulatory changes that modernized and
solidified the regional system we have today.
Since that time, the subcommittee has turned its attention
to other issues. However, new developments in the electricity
sector and the regional markets, both promising and concerning,
require us to return again to a serious assessment of the state
of the electric sector and how it is regulated.
For one thing, technology has dramatically transformed the
possibilities for cost-effectively generating and efficiently
delivering electric energy to homes, businesses and
manufacturing facilities. Today this can all be done from a
variety of sources. For example, distributed generation, both
fossil- and renewable-based, along with improving storage
options--smart meters, microgrids and other technologies--have
altered the possibilities for effectively and economically
ensuring reliability. This has called into question even the
most basic tenets of ratemaking.
At the same time, these technology and market changes have
challenged the long-standing financial model for utilities, and
the economic viability of many large nuclear and coal-fired
facilities.
Beyond technological transformation, recent decisions by
the Supreme Court have also called into question many of our
past assumptions about electric sector regulation. One example
of that is the Court's decision earlier this year in the FERC
v. Electric Power Supply Association (EPSA) case. This decision
provided for markets where conservation and efficiency could be
sold at wholesale alongside electric power. It also upended
traditional views of what constitutes sales at wholesale or
retail, and what is within the purview of the Federal
Government and FERC, as opposed to State governments and their
public utility commissions.
These are enormous and complex matters that are important
and should be examined by Congress and, specifically, this
committee. We need to begin exploring what types of changes, if
any, need to be made to the Federal Power Act, or whether some
of the technological and legal developments I've discussed have
made the Act itself obsolete. These are legitimate questions
that we should be exploring. And while we represent different
parties and philosophies, as well as different States and
regions, it is critical that our committee spend significant
time examining these matters so that we arrive at decisions
that are informed by fact.
This is an important hearing. We have worked in a
bipartisan fashion to bring together some of the best minds and
public servants in the area of electricity. These are not just
academic experts: they are people who played significant roles
at key moments in the development of our modern electric
regulatory regime.
I commend Chairman Upton, Chairman Olson, and Ranking
Member Rush for not only holding this hearing, but doing so in
such a thoughtful, collaborative and serious manner that this
subject deserves. And, I am grateful to our witnesses, who
include a former FERC Commissioner, former general counsels and
a former Deputy Energy Secretary--all of whom continue to be
well-respected experts in this field--for helping begin this
effort to understand and assess the evolution of the electric
sector.

Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back. And now it is the fun
time.
Our four witnesses will speak for 5-minute testimony. We
are starting from my left to my right. No politics involved.
That is just how we do that. Our first witness will be Mr. Doug
Smith. Doug was a former general counsel at FERC from 1997 to
2001, and now is a partner at Van Ness and Feldman LLP. Mr.
Smith.

STATEMENTS OF DOUGLAS W. SMITH, PARTNER, VAN NESS FELDMAN, LLP,
AND FORMER GENERAL COUNSEL, FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY
COMMISSION; CLIFFORD M. (MIKE) NAEVE, PARTNER, SKADDEN, ARPS,
SLATE, MEAGHER & FLOM, LLP, AND FORMER COMMISSIONER, FEDERAL
ENERGY REGULATORY COMMISSION; SUSAN TOMASKY, FORMER GENERAL
COUNSEL, FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY COMMISSION, AND FORMER
PRESIDENT, AEP TRANSMISSION OF AMERICAN ELECTRIC POWER
CORPORATION; AND LINDA G. STUNTZ, PARTNER, STUNTZ, DAVIS &
STAFFIER, P.C., AND FORMER DEPUTY SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF
ENERGY

STATEMENT OF DOUGLAS W. SMITH

Mr. Smith. Good morning. My name is Doug Smith. I am a
partner at Van Ness Feldman. I did serve at both FERC and the
Department of Energy before I was at Van Ness. But the views I
am going to express today are my own, not those of my
employers, past employers, clients, colleagues, or anybody
else.
I have been asked today to provide a brief review of the
legal history of the Federal Power Act, and to address
particularly the relationship between Federal and State
regulatory responsibilities as shaped by that act. When utility
regulation got started in the early 1900s, it was States that
comprehensively regulated electric utilities. There wasn't a
Federal role. But in 1927 there was a Supreme Court decision
called Attleboro in which the Supreme Court found that the U.S.
Constitution put some utility activities beyond the reach of
State regulation.
In particular, the court held that the dormant commerce
clause prevented Rhode Island from regulating the rates charged
by a Rhode Island utility to a utility in neighboring
Massachusetts. This constitutional limitation was referred to
as the Attleboro gap. In 1935 Congress moved to fill that gap
by enacting what is now part two of the Federal Power Act.
Part two authorized the Federal Power Commission, the
predecessor of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, to
regulate two categories of transactions; wholesale sales of
electricity in interstate commerce, and transmission of
electricity in interstate commerce. And sections 205 and 206 of
the Federal Power Act require that the rates, terms, and
conditions for such wholesale sales and transmission must be
just and reasonable, and must not be unduly discriminatory or
preferential. And those standards enacted in 1935 remain in
place today and are the foundation for much of what FERC has
done in the intervening years.
Importantly, the Federal Power Act expressly provides that
the Commission does not have jurisdiction over retail sales,
generation, and local distribution, reserving those areas of
activity to State regulation. In 1964, the Supreme Court, in a
case called Colton, described this division of labor in the
Federal Power Act as a bright line easily ascertained. As we
might see from today's discussion, it may not be quite so
bright or easily ascertained anymore.
In 1935, and for several decades thereafter, the electric
utility business model was a vertically integrated utility
principally focused on serving their own retail customers, not
wholesale sales, not transmission for third parties. But that
industry structure and the related regulatory structure started
to change in the late 1970s, moving towards increased
competition in generation.
In 1978, Congress enacted the Public Utility Regulatory
Policies Act, a provision of which section 210 enabled non-
utilities to own and operate certain cogeneration and renewable
generation facilities, really providing a first step into
competitive generation.
In the Energy Policy Act of 1992, Congress further opened
the door to independent power production by authorizing FERC to
require transmission owning utilities to provide wheeling
service on case-by-case basis. And by reforming PUHCA, the
Public Utility Holding Company Act, to provide for exempt
wholesale generators, which allowed IPPs to avoid the most
significant regulatory obstacles created by PUHCA.
And on that basis, the next steps were really taken by FERC
as an administrative agency. Under sections 205 and 206 it
authorized sellers to make wholesale sales at market-based
rates if the seller could show that it did not have market
power. It issued its landmark ruling on transmission open
access, Order No. 888, and it moved further to promote
formation of regional transmission organizations.
In the Energy Policy Act of 2005, Congress again amended
the Federal Power Act, responding in part to perceived
regulatory problems that were highlighted by the California
electricity crisis by, for instance, imposing a statutory ban
on market manipulation, raising the civil penalties under the
act to $1 million per day, providing for mandatory reliability
standards for the first time, and adopting policies that were
intended to support transmission investment, some of which were
successful and some less so.
But all these changes from PURPA on, that I have listed,
were intended to promote competitive wholesale markets. The
questions about the boundary between Federal and State
regulatory jurisdiction continue to arise. Just this year the
Supreme Court was presented with two such questions. In a case
called FERC v. EPSA, the court held that regulation of the
price that demand response receives in an organized wholesale
energy market is a proper subject for FERC regulation, and was
not an impermissible intrusion on State authority to regulate
retail sales.
And in a case called Hughes, the court held that a Maryland
State program to support development of in-State generation
that was directly linked to FERC-regulated wholesale capacity
markets was preempted. Further, technology and market changes
such as expanded use of distributed generation, micro grids,
energy storage, and plug in electric vehicles will continue to
present questions about the proper roles for Federal and State
regulatory authority.
I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smith follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Olson. Thank you. I recognize now Mr. Naeve.
Mr. Naeve was a former Commissioner of the FERC. He is
currently a partner at Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom,
LLP. And he wants to be called Mike. So, Mike, you have 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF CLIFFORD M. (MIKE) NAEVE

Mr. Naeve. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, members of
the committee. We are focusing today on the evolution of
electric power markets. When I was on the Commission, in
effect, those markets did not exist. So I would like to
describe how they came into being. And you really can't discuss
the evolution of electric power markets until you first discuss
the evolution of natural gas markets. Because FERC cut its
teeth bringing competition to the natural gas industry, and
then later applied those lessons to the power industry.
In the mid-1980s when I served on the Commission, we had a
strange phenomenon. We had gas surpluses and rising prices.
Now, how does that happen with a surplus and rising prices? You
have to go back actually to the mid 1970s. In the mid 1970s the
Nation was confronted with severe natural gas shortages, at
least in the interstate markets. In the unregulated intrastate
markets, which constituted about 40 percent of the gas sales,
supplies were plentiful. Prices were a little bit higher but
supplies were plentiful. But in the interstate markets, which
were regulated at the time by the Federal Power Commission,
which was the predecessor to FERC, prices were set much lower
and they weren't sufficiently high to attract new supply. So we
had shortages.
So in response to that, Congress passed the Natural Gas
Policy Act. And what Congress did in the Natural Gas Policy
Act, is it basically substituted itself for the Federal Power
Commission, and the later FERC, in establishing prices. And
where the Federal Power Commission had set prices too low,
Congress in effect set prices too high. It specifically
dictated prices. They were inflation adjusted prices. And in
response to those prices, those higher prices, gas producers
began to drill again and sell into the interstate market. And
we created a surplus. But even though we had a surplus, we had
rising prices. And the reason for the rising prices was because
we had rigid market structure. We had very long-term contracts.
We had obligations to purchase that had all been entered into
at a time when there was pervasive regulation. And that rigid
structure of those rigid contracts caused prices to increase,
notwithstanding the surplus supplies.
So when I joined the Commission, we were faced with a
dilemma. How do we address this perplexing problem. We began to
ask ourselves, Why are we even regulating gas production? We
regulate natural monopolies. But there is nothing about gas
production that appeared to look like a natural monopoly. There
were 12,000, at the time, 12,000 natural gas production
companies. That looked like plenty of companies to produce
robust competition. So we concluded that to get the right
prices so that prices would rise when there was a shortage,
prices would fall when there is a surplus, the normal workings
of the market, we needed to introduce competition into the
marketplace.
So that was a decision made by FERC that they were going to
attempt to do that. It wasn't so easy, though, as to just
simply pull back from the market. The market itself was
structured, as I previously mentioned, in a response to
pervasive historic regulation. So the Commission actually had
to begin to restructure the market so that competition could
take root. So among the other things that I had to do, first
they had to make sure that suppliers could reach their
customers. And in those days, pipelines only carried the gas
that they themselves owned. They wouldn't carry gas for
competitors. So we had to require pipelines to carry their
competitors' gas, open access on the pipeline system. That was
the first step. We had to free gas supplies from pervasive
regulation.
The FPC had set prices, the Natural Gas Policy Act had set
prices. We had to find a way to allow prices to float up and
down with the market. And we worked on that and then later the
Wellhead Deregulation Act helped us further on that. But we had
to let prices float. We had to make sure that pipelines
couldn't compete against--excuse me--couldn't favor their own
supplies when they transported gas over supplies from their
competitors. So we had to develop a series of rules to prevent
favoritism.
And then finally we had to free up the supply. Because as
strange as it may sound, back in 1983, 1984, 1985, if a
producer made a sale to an interstate pipeline under a 5-year
contract or a 10-year contract, and if that contract expired,
the Commission nonetheless required that producer to continue
to sell in perpetuity to that same pipeline for the same price.
So we had gas supplies--gas contracts that had been entered
into in 1950s for 16 cents and 17 cents. And they were being
told that even though those contracts had expired 20 years
earlier, they had to continue to deliver supplies to the
interstate market at those prices.
So we had to find a way to allow those prices to be--those
supplies to be freed up and so they could go to the parts of
the country where the supply was needed the most at a market
price. So those were changes that had to be made in the
structure of the industry before competition could even be made
to work.
It is amazing that FERC was able to kind of take all of
those steps under the Natural Gas Act. The Natural Gas Act was
passed in 1938, just 3 years after the Federal Power Act. It
was largely structured after the Federal Power Act. Very, very
similar. FERC was to set just and reasonable rates. Well, FERC
used that power to set just and reasonable rates to require or
permit market-based rates. So they concluded that if we can
show there is enough competition, then market competition can
set just and reasonable rates. And the courts agreed with that
determination. FERC used the power in that statute that said
you have to prevent undue discrimination. They used that power
to order open access transportation.
So it was a broadly written statute written in very broad
strokes that gave FERC the ability to fill in between the lines
as the market changed, as conditions changed. And it turned out
to be a very powerful and lasting statute. We will get to this
in a second. But the Federal Power Act is very similar to that.
It gives FERC very broad powers. And it has lasted, you know,
more than 85 years.
So after FERC had great success in deregulating the Natural
Gas Act, and today we have a very thriving industry, it is
largely because of the work that FERC did, they turned their
attention to the Federal Power Act and to the power industry.
And they concluded maybe we should be doing the same thing here
as we had accomplished in the gas industry. After all,
generation doesn't look, again, like a natural monopoly
business. Why not permit competition for generation like we
permitted competition for gas production. By that time, PURPA
had been passed. We had an independent power industry. There
wasn't much competition. The PURPA generators signed up under
long-term contracts and their supplies were locked in. So there
wasn't a tremendous amount of competition. And their prices
were set by regulators, not by the market. But nonetheless, we
did know that an independent power industry could stand alone
on its own. So the Commission then set about trying to
deregulate the power industry.
Initially they tried to apply the same model that they had
applied to the natural gas industry. Let's require open access
transportation. If we can show adequate competitions, let's let
the market set the price, not set the price ourselves through
cost of service type regulation. Let's prevent favoritism in
transmission service by transmission owners and so forth.
So that was the initial approach. And that approach was a
very good start. But there were major differences between the
power industry and the gas industry which frankly made it much
more difficult to implement competition in the power industry.
So let's talk about some of those major differences. The first
is the statutory framework.
I am sorry?
Mr. Olson. I am sorry, sir, I know it didn't occur to you
about the microphones, but you are about 4 minutes over. So
wrap up quickly.
Mr. Naeve. Oh, OK. All right. Well, let me just say there
are very, very significant differences between the two
industries that make competition and the implementation of
competition more difficult. Power doesn't flow in a straight
line like gas through a pipeline. That makes it harder.
Reliability is much more difficult to impose in the power
industry because supply and demand have to be a perfect balance
minute to minute. There are structural differences in the
industry and shared jurisdiction and so forth. And I will be
happy to respond in the Q and A session to some of those
issues.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Naeve follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Olson. Thank you, sir.
Our next witness will be Mrs. Susan Tomasky. Susan was a
former counsel general at FERC. After that she was the
president of the Transmission of American Electric Power
Corporation. And she will talk about Order No. 888. Five
minutes, Ms. Tomasky, please.

STATEMENT OF SUSAN TOMASKY

Ms. Tomasky. Yes, sir. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Pallone, and members of the committee. Thank you so much for
the opportunity to actually come back before this committee
after many years to talk about the history of electric supply
competition in the United States.
I would like to start by first explaining that, from my
perspective anyway, Order 888 was very much the product of
changing market conditions that FERC observed at the time, as
well as the regulatory model that it had previously seen with
respect to natural gas. Really, for most of the 20th century,
from a customer perspective, electric service wasn't very
complicated. People paid a bill. That bill was, for the most
part, regulated by State commissions, and they paid a single
bundled rate. And behind all that was a complicated set of
assets; transmission, distribution, generation. That was all
priced on a cost-of-service basis. The State figured out the
bill, the utility charged it, and the customer turned the
lights off and we hope, in the utility industry, in most
instances paid for the bill. However, in the 1990s we saw an
extraordinary escalation of the price of electricity in many
parts of the country. And that was due largely to the decision
of utilities that really had a lot to do with securing power
supply to build large nuclear generation facilities. There was
significant cost escalation associated with that. And as a
result, customers resisted that. They resisted it in State
regulatory proceedings, but they also resisted it by trying to
escape from the regulatory regimes that were in place in that
time and find alternative suppliers.
In the early days, the alternative supply market was pretty
thin. But as it became pretty clear that the opportunity was
available, technology improved, capital was available, but
customers were still bound to their utilities under existing
regulatory rules. And even if they could escape those, they
didn't have the ability to get power from the independent
generator to the transmission because they didn't have access
across the utilities monopoly transmission system.
At that point FERC began to face a number of case-by-case
requests to address this for individual customers, to make
market-based rates available, and the Commission did begin to
respond to that. But ultimately came to the conclusion that not
only was it a slow process, but it created uncertainty and
risks for both the utility industry and all parties, and in the
end only benefitted a handful of customers. And, really, it was
to address these issues more broadly and systematically that
the Commission undertook the rulemakings in Order 888.
At the heart of the Commission's action was the conviction
that electricity customers would benefit from power prices if
they were determined on the basis of efficient competitive
marketplace rather than through a utility-driven process that
was overseen by regulators and paid for by States on the basis
of the utility's cost. To accomplish this, as Mr. Naeve said,
they did turn to the model of the natural gas industry. They
ordered the separation of wholesale sales from transmission
service. And that helped to create a distinct transparent power
supply market. They also provided a relatively simple path for
market-based rates for both utility and non-utility sellers.
And then they continued to regulate the transmission business
as a monopoly business but under a new set of standards that
required terms for the utilities to provide open access service
to both non-utility service users and to themselves on
essentially the same terms.
So the question is how are things working. And in my view,
we have had some very painful learning lessons along the way.
But the competitive markets that do exist are working fairly
effectively. We have a large number of suppliers. And capitalis
generally available to support new investment when it's
justified. And I think equally important, when markets are
permitted to work, capital doesn't flow to projects that aren't
justified. That is the market discipline, and it directly
benefits customers. In recent years we have seen price declines
that pass through to customers. And we also have seen price
increases that pass through to customers.
I am sorry. Is there something wrong? No. OK.
These are good things. These are price signals that go to
the marketplace. They prompt generation and in transmission
development. And those are the operation of a properly
functioning market. There are winners and losers. Some
generators are not effective competitors. Others are. And of
course there are external factors that affect this. But
generally I would have to say that the outcome is that the
customer isn't at risk when these risks are assumed by the
generators. And that is pretty much the vision that the
Commission had of the competitive marketplace.
This committee, I know, is going to be looking at
significant challenges. I would be happy to discuss any of
those in my comments if you like, but that concludes my
testimony. Thank you.
[The statement of Ms. Tomasky follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Olson. Thank you very much. Our final witness is Ms.
Linda Stuntz. And Ms. Linda Stuntz was the former Deputy
Secretary of Energy from 1992 to 1993. And she is currently a
named partner at Stuntz, Davis and Staffier, P.C.
Five minutes, please, ma'am.
Mr. Barton. And a former staffer of this committee.
Mr. Olson. I apologize.

STATEMENT OF LINDA G. STUNTZ

Ms. Stuntz. Thank you, Mr. Barton and Mr. Chairman. It is
an honor to be before you today, to be back. As you have heard,
part two of the Federal Power Act was enacted in 1935 to fill a
regulatory gap. It provides the Federal Power Commission, now
FERC, with the ability to regulate what the States could not.
The States retained authority over generation, intrastate
transmission, local distribution, and retail sales of
electricity. Interestingly, it is a challenge. None of those
things is self-defining, of course. And a lot of what we at
this table have done over many, many years is try and flesh out
what those terms mean.
As the economy has grown, and not to repeat what some of my
colleagues have said before, and as electricity markets and
industry structure have evolved, Federal jurisdiction under the
Federal Power Act has expanded. The gap-filling function has
how become much more a blanket. Wholesale markets for
electricity administered by RTOs and ISOs now provide power
across much but not all, and that is an important--not all of
the country. I included in my testimony a chart, I think on
page 5, that reveals that. It is about two-thirds of all
customers. The restructuring of the electric industry was
driven by multiple factors. And as Mr. Pallone mentioned, I
think sat through a lot of those hearings, you have heard some
of these, but let me just tick them off.
Clearly PURPA sort of established the principle that
generation could be competitive. It didn't need to be provided
by utility suppliers under cost of service regulation. And yes
there were rate shocks in some parts of the country. In part
because of over-budget nuclear plants, in part because of
general inflation and the price of oil and so forth where oil
was used in the Northeast. But there was also, I think, a
favorable experience with oil and natural gas deregulation, as
you have heard from Mr. Naeve, which drove a desire to rely
more on market forces and markets rather than cost of service
utility regulation, to better protect consumers and to
encourage innovation.
Finally, even back then there was technology development.
And I think this is often overlooked. But the simple adaptation
of the aero derivatives, sort of jet engine, to be able to be
used to supply electricity from natural gas-fired turbines was
huge. Because this was a lower capital cost. It could be built
more quickly. It could be almost modular. And in the 1990s this
became a source of tension. And there may be important lessons
there as you look at technology developments today.
Electric restructuring has taken many different forms
across the country, as many of you know based on your own
experiences with the States. But as Mr. Smith observed, the
Supreme Court decisions earlier this year confirmed that FERC
jurisdiction under the FPA now extends to the purchase of
demand management resources, energy efficiency, if you will, by
RTOs and ISOs, and that States may not act in a way that a just
and interstate wholesale rate, even if the State is acting in a
way that it believes is necessary to secure supply generation
adequacy.
Other pending State initiatives known well to many of you,
ranging from support for nuclear power to perhaps coal plants
in Ohio, are likely to raise similar questions in the future
and likely to be equally difficult. One thing that has not
changed, and here is where the lawyer is going to play engineer
if you will forgive me for just a minute, one thing that has
not changed since passage of the FPA is that electricity cannot
be stored in meaningful amounts, despite very considerable
current efforts to change that. This simple fact has very large
consequences because demand for electricity varies greatly over
the course of a day and over the course of the year.
What this means is that--and yet at the same time supply
and demand have to be balanced perfectly in order to preserve
reliability in real time. Doing this is becoming more
challenging as intermittent resources such as wind and solar
play bigger roles. Reserve margins are no longer sufficient to
ensure reliability. We need new planning paradigms. And again,
I put a chart in my testimony, the famous duck curve, on page
12, which shows a sort of extreme version of this. But those of
you from Texas are already seeing this. In other places,
Colorado, where there have been significant penetration of
renewable resources.
And finally with great respect to Mr. Pallone, there is no
such thing as the grid. North America is actually made up of
four separate networks, if you will. The western
interconnection, the eastern interconnection, ERCOT, most of
Texas, and Quebec. There are only weak direct current ties
between these two. We can talk more about why that exists and
whether it is a good idea. Certainly there is a lot of history
there. But again, that has meaning because it affects the
jurisdictional status of the folks in Texas.
And in addition, there are some 500, more or less, it
changes almost every day, transmission owners in the U.S.,
ranging from TVA, the PMAs, to co-ops to large industrial and
utilities. Each of these is regulated differently, each with
greater or less FERC involvement. In all cases that I know of,
States do the siting. So you have to--it is unlike natural gas
which has Federal eminent domain, you don't have that to site
electric transmission. This complexity creates major challenges
for initiatives to change the way that the grid in this country
is upgraded, operated, paid for, and constructed.
With that, let me conclude my oral statement. And I welcome
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Stuntz follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Olson. Thank you, Mrs. Stuntz. And I will yield myself
5 minutes for a round of questions.
This hearing is called, again, the title was, the ``Federal
Power Act: Historical Perspectives.'' The subtitle, I think,
could be, ``Those who forget the lessons of history are doomed
to repeat them.''
I would like to start with you, Mrs. Stuntz, and open this
to the panel.
Mike is on my right? Curveball from up on stage here.
Early in the course of the electrical restructuring efforts
at FERC, Congress and this committee were fairly active on the
topic. We kept our oversight and passed significant
legislation. Overall, Mrs. Stuntz, for you, and then work down
the panel, were these efforts of this committee helpful in
guiding FERC in improving efficiency in markets? Yes? No?
Lessons learned?
Ms. Stuntz. Absolutely yes. And as the one person here who
never worked at FERC, I guess, but I worked closely with this
committee both as a staffer but then particularly in the 1990s
Energy Policy Act, which probably gets insufficient
appreciation in my view, for its role of contributing to
generation competition. And the oversight and the guidance
provided by that committee, and I know Mr. Barton remembers
that well, and Mr. Schaefer, I think, was critical in setting a
path which FERC then went beyond. But in 2005 as well, this
committee was very important.
Mr. Olson. Ms. Tomasky, in your comments you mention a
painful experience. Do you want to elaborate on that how we
don't repeat a painful experience? Your comments on oversight
by this committee with FERC and this issue.
Ms. Tomasky. Well, sir, and I am sure Mr. McNerney would
agree that the most painful experience was the experience of
the California marketplace. And there are some really important
lessons from that, I think. I will say that one of the things
FERC didn't do when it moved to competition was require States
to do exactly as FERC was doing and didn't mandate unbundling.
But some States like California did take the lead in moving
forward. And their markets today, I want to say, it ends as a
good story, their markets work very effectively as part of a
competitive market. California was plagued with a lot of
issues. One of the most significant of course was that the
markets were new. The regulations were new. And there was a lot
of market manipulation that led to unfortunate circumstances.
There also were extraordinary supply problems. And California
did a good job under tough circumstances of responding with
efficiency initiatives and things like that that we have also
learned from.
I think the most important thing that we have all learned
from these experiences is that while we have a vision of
electricity as a commodity, we have to always remember that to
society as a whole, it is an essential service. And we all have
to figure out how to come together when there is a crisis, when
there is an outage, when things aren't working right, to
acknowledge that. Because it has to work. And I think that to
me is the most significant lesson of these painful experiences.
Thank you.
Mr. Olson. Thank you, ma'am. Mr. Naeve, you were a FERC
Commissioner. Did we help you or hurt you back in the old days?
Mr. Naeve. I think the oversight of the committee and the
legislation passed by the committee with respect to the power
industry has been helpful. I think, for example, both of the
prior witnesses mentioned the Energy Policy Act of 1992. That
act was very important if for no other reason it eliminated
some of the restrictions under the Public Utility Holding
Company Act.
The independent power industry was being held back by the
Public Utility Holding Company Act. If you owned a generator--
generators were considered utilities. If you owned a generator,
you were a utility holding company. There are a lot of
restrictions on utility holding companies. In some ways they
are a shared jurisdiction with the SEC and FERC over in this
area.
Mr. Naeve. And it eliminated to some extent the
restrictions on generation ownership through EWGs and the
creation of EWGs. That was very helpful. The Energy Policy Act
of 2005 finally repealed the 1935 act. That was extremely
helpful as well. So that gave FERC more or less exclusive
Federal jurisdiction in this area. And the 1935 act had itself
served its usefulness and its purpose and was no longer needed.
So that was also very helpful.
Granting FERC greater enforcement authority and powers was
very helpful again. If one thinks backs about it, FERC was
really a cost-of-service regulator with engineers and
accountants and that sort of stuff. And once we had
competition, the model changed. And FERC, now their role is to
preserve competition. So they need new resources and new
powers, and that statute give it to them. Also you gave FERC
more jurisdiction over certain entities that previously--over
their transmission systems that they previously didn't have. So
that was also very helpful.
But I want to add--I am sorry. Let me add one thing.
Notwithstanding all those important changes, the Federal Power
Act, as I mentioned, like the Natural Gas Act, is very broadly
written. And it is written in a way that has given FERC the
flexibility to adapt to changing conditions. So it is a very
useful statute. And it has served well over the 85 years that
is has been there.
So thank you.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. Mr. Smith, how did this committee
help or hurt restructuring about a decade ago?
Mr. Smith. Well, I will endorse the comments of my
colleagues about the 1992 act and some of the core provisions
in the 2005 act. In addition, I think it is important that the
reliability provisions in the 2005 act were enacted. There was
concern that as the market got more competitive, moved away
from cost-of-service rates, that spending on things, that
promote reliability might decline when all of a sudden that
couldn't necessarily be recovered directly from ratepayers.
So the conversion of what had been up until then
essentially a voluntary industry program of reliability
standards into a regulatory program was important. The 2005 act
also made important policy changes on transmission development,
some of which worked and some of which didn't work. So, for
instance, the Congress directed FERC to provide for incentive
rate treatments for new transmission investment. And I think
overall that has been quite successful at getting the industry
focused on deploying capital to needed transmission
investments.
There were provisions that you might recall on backstop
transmission siting which I would say have had no effect on
easing the problems of transmission siting at all. So it's a
mixed bag on that front.
Mr. Olson. And my time has expired. I now yield time to the
ranking member from California, Mr. McNerney, and you will have
6 minutes and 17 seconds per my example. Bipartisanship.
Mr. McNerney. You know, I really appreciate the sort of
bipartisan sheen that this hearing has so far. So thank you for
that, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Stuntz, you mentioned technology developments had a
large impact. And you cited the jet engine adaption. It seems
to me that technology is changing at a very rapid pace now. And
I think that is going to have a large impact on the way we have
to structure this thing. How do you feel about that?
Ms. Stuntz. I agree absolutely both at sort of the
utilities level but also the whole rise of distributed
generation, is this going to cause a whole new business model,
who will be in charge, are we going to end up with RTO-type
entities at the distribution level the way we have at the
transmission level? You know, New York is sort of probing that.
You know, it is not at all clear whether that is the right
answer.
But yes, it is forcing a change. And there are real
questions, interesting questions, about whether regulators can
keep up with the pace of technology and what happens if they
don't and----
Mr. McNerney. Not to mention that the legislators keeping
up is even more of a challenge. Thank you.
This leads into my next question. Mike, you mentioned a lot
of stuff that the I think the FERC was able to do--or not the
FERC, but the power commission--was able to do before FERC on
natural gas based on the Natural Gas Act. Were there a lot of
court challenges in that time? And if not, has the current sort
of legal ecosystem changed enough that we have to worry
significantly about that today?
Mr. Naeve. Certainly not with respect to natural gas. We
don't need to worry about that. There were court challenges.
And as a general rule, the Commission did very well in those
court challenges. The courts accepted the proposition that if
there is adequate competition, competition can set just and
reasonable rates. The courts accepted the proposition that to
prevent undue discrimination you have to require the pipelines,
if they are going to carry their supplies for themselves or
more specific customers, they have to carry supplies for
everybody.
So the courts as a general rule were very supportive. And
at times the courts actually led the Commission. There was a
famous case, the Maryland People's Counsel case in which the
court turned down a proposal that FERC had approved because it
provided transportation for only a certain class of customers
and not for all customers. So I think that educated FERC that
they had the power to go out and require transportation for all
customers. So as a general rule, I think the statutory
boundaries today in the gas industry are more than adequate.
They are very robust.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Mr. Smith, you mentioned that some of the legislation in
more recent years had some problems in it and some successes.
How hard was it to overcome the problems that legislation
introduced?
Mr. Smith. Well, the particular example I was giving was
about backstop transmission siting. So transmission siting is
fundamentally a function at the State level. The 2005 act
attempted to provide a means through a combination of actions
by the Department of Energy and then the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission for transmission developers to be able to
go to FERC to get certificates to develop transmission if they
couldn't get State approvals. And for a variety of reasons,
including a couple of court of appeals cases, that authority
hasn't gotten used.
So in the absence of that, transmission developers are
going to the individual States in which the transmission is
located and working through those State processes. And if they
need to--if there are disputes about that, they get litigated
in the State courts instead of through a Federal system.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
We talked about technology a minute ago. Cyber issues are a
big part of that. Is that something that we are going to be
able to take specific language out or should we leave that to
the regulators, the cybersecurity and cyber protections?
Ms. Stuntz. The part--because of this committee, and I
remember it was Mr. Boucher was involved in 2005 when it set up
the reliability framework, it expressly granted sort of FERC
the ability to monitor cyber as part of--and to promulgate
reliability standards on the subject of cyber. So under FERC's
direction North American Electric Reliability Corporation or
NERC and its regional entities have been embarked on on doing
that. It is a tough enterprise, very challenging enterprise.
You can never be complacent about it. They are up to like
critical infrastructure protection standards five or six now, I
think. But it is certainly something that bears look because it
doesn't respect jurisdictional lines or the law, for that
matter, and it will affect the weakest link of the systems.
Ms. Tomasky. I would add to that. I would agree with it.
And I would say that the focus of legislators on this issue is
an extremely important one. It is very difficult, and I share
my experience as a member of a board, of an electric utility,
it is very difficult, and it is not appropriate, I think, to
get into the weeds of a lot of these issues. But the importance
of it is significant. And what the committee did, what the
Congress did, was to change the governance structure and
essentially direct FERC to make sure that utilities were
focusing on it in a systemic way.
And having been involved in the implementation of these
from the utility side, I can say that it was an extremely
important refocusing of efforts. It is a very, very difficult
and a constant area. I continue to urge you to oversee it.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back. And perfect 6 minutes
and 17 seconds. Thank you, my friend.
The Chair recognizes the chairman emeritus from a happy,
double-overtime Texas Aggies, Chairman Emeritus Joe Barton. For
5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. Well, let's wait until we see what happens with
Alabama and LSU before we see how happy we are this year in
Aggieland.
Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman and ranking member, for
holding this hearing. And thank you, panelists, for your
excellent testimony. I have been on this committee for 30
years. So I have lived through most of what you folks talked
about. And I would postulate that we have three basic
requirements for our utility system here in the United States.
First and most important is we have to have an absolutely
guaranteed adequate base load supply. If you don't have supply,
the rest doesn't matter.
You saw that in California. The lady talked about the
California market. They wouldn't let outside power bid into the
system and they had $2,000 per megawatt hour charges. And the
State of California, rightfully so, revolted against that. So
we have to have an adequate base load supply. And it is
difficult in the Northeast because the demand is not where the
supply is.
Second, you have to have a transmission system that has
adequate capacity to deliver that supply. In a large State like
Texas, which as Mrs. Stuntz pointed out, we have ERCOT. So we
basically have one entity that regulates the transmission
system. So you don't have the interstate problems between
States.
And finally, you have got to have a retail framework that
the customers consider fair. And we have been all over the map
on that the last 30 years. Again, what happened in California
compared to States like Georgia, Mississippi where they have
always had retail rates regulated by the State PUCs. And in my
State of Texas, we have tried it both ways. We have gone from
retail regulation to an open competitive system where in the
home that I live in I routinely get five or six requests a
month to switch power supply.
So this is a complicated issue. It is not an issue that any
of us get any kudos for at our townhall meetings. You know, I
have never had a question at a townhall meeting about an ISO or
an RTO or any of the things that we have to do to make the
system work.
So I am not sure where the committee is going to go based
on this hearing. I think there is work to be done on a
bipartisan basis if we want to. But this is a very complicated
issue. And we have tried a number--I mean, 1992, 2005. We tried
to handle the interstate transmission siting issue. And we have
yet to get that right. I thought we had it right in 2005, and
the court struck it down two to one.
So I guess my question, since I am supposed to ask a
question, you all are sitting here looking at me. Yes, I could
say: Don't you agree with what I just said. That would be not
fair.
I am going to ask Mrs. Stuntz, which is something that
hasn't come up yet, how do we interact between the Federal
Power Act and the Clean Air Act? Because EPA more and more is
usurping the decisions in providing power at adequate prices to
the customers. The Clean Power Plan that has currently be
stayed, if that is fully implemented, we are going to have base
load supply problems in Texas in the next 4 or 5 years. So how
would you interact those two so that you get a fair balance
between environmental protection and power availability?
Ms. Stuntz. Thank you, Mr. Barton. That is a really----
Mr. Barton. You have got 33 seconds to answer.
Ms. Stuntz. That is a really tough question and it is an
important question, and it is one of the reasons why I commend
you all for what you are doing today. Speaking strictly for
myself, I have thought from the begin--I have not understood
from the beginning of the announcement of the clean power plan
how that would--how a plan that envisions individual States or
potential regions adopting compliance plans on a rate or a mass
basis is going to work on the back of a market base regional
wholesale electric system.
I mean, the simplest way I could put it is, if you are a
State and you have a plan that depends on importing power from
somewhere else, but they are not going to send it out anymore
because they want the clean power, I mean, I don't know how it
is going to work. And it leads to a bigger--you know, maybe the
bigger question is sort of, do these markets adequately
reflect--you know, we want competitive markets that are based
on marginal costs. Is that the value that we want now? If you
want to overlay on top of that environmental dispatch, which is
really what we are doing now, but we are not putting a tax on
carbon, we are doing something else, I foresee real
difficulties. I can't fit them together. I don't know how that
is going to work.
Mr. Barton. I thank the chairman. I thank the panel.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair recognizes
the ranking member of the full committee, Mr. Pallone, for 6
minutes and 11 seconds.
Mr. Pallone. OK.
Mr. Olson. Following Chairman Barton's example.
Mr. Pallone. I wanted to ask Ms. Stuntz, but then anyone
else can answer as well, but in your testimony you raised a
point regarding the Federal Power Act that I raised in my
opening statement, and that is, you know, where you said, and I
quote, ``the Federal Power Act has weathered these changes, but
whether it remains fit for purpose for the electricity industry
in the 21st century is an important question to consider.''
I honestly don't know whether the act has outlived its
usefulness, but I think it is an important perspective to
consider, particularly as I see not only the blurring of
regulatory jurisdictions, but also the growth of technologies
that really make me question whether traditional rate-making
formulas are able to fairly value deployment of things like
distributed generation, micro grids, and storage.
So I just wanted to ask you, and again, I would like to
hear from the other witnesses, this is my only question,
whether we have come to a point in time where all these
technological, legal, and other developments warrant us to
conclude that the Federal Power Act has outlived its
usefulness. I will start with you, and if anybody else wants to
answer.
Ms. Stuntz. I will try to be very brief, because others, I
am sure, have views. As Mr. Naeve said, that one of the
strengths of the Federal Power Act is its breadth that has
enabled regulators to accommodate a lot of developments, but
fundamentally this Colton wholesale retail bright line, I
think, is going to be challenged by things like distributed
generation. I mean, we already--you are seeing on the net
metering sites, I mean, is that really the basis on which you
want to decide whether the Federal or the State regulator has
the ultimate say? And is that a distinction that even will make
sense when, as in California now and some parts, you are seeing
very large amounts given certain times, of generation coming on
the system from the customer. So that may be an adaptation that
is beyond the capability of the current FPA.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Thank you. Would the others like
to--go down the table there.
Ms. Tomasky. Sure. Mr. Pallone, I am not prepared to
conclude that the basic framework of the power act is no longer
useful. As Ms. Stuntz and others have said, it is pretty broad.
And the competitive market design that we have today, I think,
is very effective. I think that we have an inherent problem in
its implementation that is pretty thorny and I don't have a
good answer to, which is that we have a lot of different
approaches, because one of the things FERC didn't do was to
require retail and bundling and have a uniform system across
the country, so you have got some States that have competition
and others don't.
And the way it is relevant to the question of technology is
that I do think that the States and the local--which had the
retail jurisdiction, they are going to be the testing ground
and the proving ground for a lot of these new technologies, but
ultimately their implementation needs to be on a much broader
and regional scale. There really isn't a coincidence between
the boundaries of the State jurisdiction and how a technology
should operate and deploy in order to be efficient. We know
that. That is why we have regional markets.
So I think it is probably fair to say that at the end of
this inquiry, you would come to conclusions that changes to the
power act need to be made, but I think it would be most useful
to try to understand what are the values in terms of generation
power supply you are trying to accomplish, you know, where are
you going to--what technologies and how do you want to
facilitate them, and then figure out how to change the
boundaries under the Federal Power Act to make that effective.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Mr. Naeve. I would add that it is very difficult to always
anticipate the effects of new technologies or new developments.
Often they have unintended consequences, the so-called duck
curve that Ms. Stuntz mentioned is a good example of that.
So I would tend to prefer, as much like the Federal Power
Act statutes, that are broadly written, that delegate broad
authority to the experts and allow them the flexibility to
adapt to changing market conditions as opposed to having
Congress constantly passing new bills trying to catch up with
yesterday's technology.
The Federal Power Act is one of those statutes. It gives
FERC very broad authority. It could well be that they need
additional authority in the future, but to say make rates just
and reasonable, it doesn't tell them how to do it. It gives
them a lot of flexibility to do it. It gives them a large
amount of jurisdiction. I think some of these issues where they
have deferred to the States, they probably have the power if
they want to choose to assert jurisdiction over many of these
issues, they could probably do so.
So I think it is kind of--I would take a wait-and-see
approach, but it is a statute that has served well for a great
many years, and the reason it has held up over that time is
because it does paint with such a broad brush and delegate to
the Commission authority to be flexible.
Mr. Pallone. Thanks.
Mr. Smith. I would agree with the conclusion that I think I
heard from my colleagues, which is that it hasn't outlived its
usefulness, that the core provisions of the Federal Power Act
should be kept in place and then adjusted as necessary as
market changes or technology changes present problems where the
answer doesn't make sense under the current allocation of
responsibilities. And I think the best example of that is for
most of the life of the Federal Power Act, generation was
interconnected to the transmission system. And now that you
have generation in little tiny chunks that is connected to the
distribution system on one side or the other of the consumer
meter and is often owned by a retail seller so that you have
somebody--I mean, retail customer who is both a buyer and a
seller potentially, it leads to versions of this application of
this bright line that were never anticipated when the act was
written.
So in my mind, the way to deal with that is not to get rid
of the Federal Power Act and start over again, but rather to--
if that becomes a problem that is not fixable under the current
regime, to make adjustments for things like net metering,
distributed storage, that is workable for those particular
technologies.
Mr. Pallone. Well, thank you all.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair recognizes
the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is great to have
you here. This shows you how nerdy I am getting. I am really
enjoying this panel.
Ms. Stuntz. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. And this is a great topic, because there are
issues and evolution and processes. Just a brief comment to Mr.
Naeve, though. I understand his statement on vagueness and
flexibility, but really on the Republican side here, we have
been burnt too much by vagueness of law, and there is really a
desire by many of us to be more specific, because in other
agencies, we feel that they have kind of overstepped that, and
then it gets into litigation and you have all these problems.
I want to kind of talk about two kind of regional problems,
and so maybe--and so let's start with the RTOs and, quote
unquote, ``price takers.'' So you know in an RTO, generators
can bid, we have a whole bunch that would bid zero to make sure
that they can keep their plants running, but the question is,
if you have--if the market has too many price takers bidding at
zero, does that mean it is no longer a competitive market? Does
anyone want to try that out?
Ms. Tomasky. Well, I don't know whether it is no longer a
competitive market, but it is not a function----
Mr. Shimkus. Pull that a little closer.
Ms. Tomasky. I am sorry. It is certainly not a functioning
market that is going to bring suppliers in, because there is
only so long you can bid at zero. The----
Mr. Shimkus. See, let me go where I am. Illinois used to be
a net exporter of power.
Ms. Tomasky. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. And now with this change, Illinois may be
transforming through decommissioning for a lot of reasons, one
of it might be this market that is not functioning normally
because of the price takers. So that may be added onto some
generators who now aren't getting a market signal for price,
already feeling the pressure from other regulatory pressures,
and will in essence walk away from the market.
Ms. Tomasky. Well, I think the fundamental problem, as I
understand it, it really kind of goes to nuclear plants. Is
that really what you are talking about, sir?
Mr. Shimkus. No, because I don't think they are the--they
are not the price takers. They are not bidding--they can't,
because their operating costs are too high.
Let me--so I guess the question is, who is a price taker?
Who is a price taker, in your--in these markets?
Mr. Naeve. Let me begin with your first question, if you
have significant numbers of price takers that are bidding zero,
for example, can you have a functioning market? And I think the
answer depends on why people are bidding zero. So, for example,
if you are a nuclear plant, nuclear plants can't be turned off
and turned right back on 5 hours later. They have to run
continuously. So they can't bid a price such that at some
point--if they bid a higher price and then the market sets a
lower price, they will be told to shut down. They can't afford
that. So they bid a very low price so that regardless of the
market price, they are still taken by the RTO, because they
can't turn back on again the next day.
So they hope to make enough money during the daytime to
make up for their losses in the evening, and that is their hope
at least. So----
Mr. Shimkus. But it is a risk, it is a gamble too on their
part?
Mr. Naeve. It is a gamble, right, of course. And if they
are not making enough sufficient revenue, then they may have to
shut the plant down, but they are behaving like a rational
market participant. And I think if participants are bidding
with those characteristics, they are bidding that way, it still
means you have a functioning market. Now, if you have people
bidding----
Mr. Shimkus. Let me stop. I only have 1 minute left, and I
want to get this out. So I do appreciate that, because we are
seeing that right now and it is forcing decommissioning early
of--well, I don't know about early, but plants along with the
other stress.
Let me address another kind of a distortion of the market
that we see right now. So you have, you know, States who enact
PURPA laws, so then you have granted transmission siting which
will go from--and my colleague, Mr. Pompeo, is not here--from
Kansas, through the State of Illinois, through a couple States
just to reach PJM, because some of these States are making
State regulatory decisions on the State portfolio, but there is
really no benefit. That is not feeding into MISO. They are
designed to feed into PJM and access these State requirements.
That is kind of a distortion of the market too, wouldn't you
say? Anybody can jump in. I mean, I don't----
Mr. Naeve. Well, can I finish just one comment on the prior
question, and then I will be happy to respond to that?
Mr. Shimkus. Yes.
Mr. Naeve. That is, if you are bidding as a price taker at
very low prices because of a particular Government subsidy that
you have, then that subsidy makes it profitable to bid at a low
price, like a price below zero.
Mr. Shimkus. What kind of subsidy are you referring to?
Mr. Naeve. Well, like production tax credit, for example.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. We all know what that is, right?
Mr. Naeve. And that does affect the functioning of the
marketplace, so I kind of depends on why they are bidding.
With respect to your second question, I am not sure I quite
understood the context. People are----
Mr. Shimkus. Well, I am just saying you have got multi-
State transmission grids built solely to affect the PURPA
market in PJM, crossing State lines that have no--really in
essence are designed to feed the PJM market and not to feed the
MISO market.
Ms. Tomasky. Sir, I think that that is a legitimate policy
issue. I am not sure that I would agree that it is a function
of the design of the marketplace. I think it is a result of the
fact that the transmission entities have an opportunity, the
suppliers have an opportunity to build, but these lines are not
built yet. They are seeking to build them.
Mr. Shimkus. No. They have being built. There are two
crossing the State of Illinois right now.
Ms. Tomasky. Yes, sir. They are being built. They are not
in service at this point, so I don't think we know how the
market works. But I completely agree with you that one of the
issues that we have as a result of the divisions among the
regions is that we don't have a consistent policy for
reconciling the interests of one region to another. I think
that is a very legitimate issue.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. Thank you.
Mr. Olson. Well, thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr. Tonko, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. And let me thank
our witnesses for being here today. I very much appreciate
hearing more about the historical changes to our electricity
markets from the Federal perspective, because I have a slightly
different perspective from my time as chair of the New York
State Assembly Energy Committee beginning in the 1990s. I saw
the rush to restructure utilities in my home State and some of
the unintended or even unconsidered consequences, where
consumers to this date are paying for stranded assets a long
time after the fact.
That being said, it is clear that utilities' business
models were changing then. It is even clearer now that they
will continue to need to evolve drastically. We should do our
best to understand these changes, and that is why this hearing,
I think, is very helpful. We need to keep up to ensure reliable
and affordable electricity is the result.
So, Ms. Tomasky, let me ask, in the years since FERC's
Order 888, have there been times when competitive markets have
worked better and worse than anticipated? And, in your opinion,
what have been the most influential factors in having a working
market?
Ms. Tomasky. Thank you, sir. I would say that, as I
mentioned earlier, certainly the poster child for failures of
marketplaces were the events that happened in California. There
have been other--and I think that this committee has looked at
them extensively, and they have a lot to do with bad actors in
the marketplace, inadequate supply planning. I personally
believe that supply needs to move effectively across State
lines whenever it can and that that actually creates
efficiency. We had some of those issues in California as well.
There have also been certainly perturbations in the
marketplace, but generally I would say that we have a lot of
good things that happen. They happen--when I say ``good,''
though, I mean from the perspective of achieving that goal of a
competitive marketplace, which is to have your price set by the
marketplace. For example, we have seen a recent decline in
capacity prices into competitive markets that have been
occasioned by the vast supply of natural gas available. So that
is good from the perspective that it brings down the cost, but
as I think others have alluded to, it does create public policy
issues, because it creates questions around the viability of
nuclear plants, it creates issues about local investment values
for other existing facilities, and it really doesn't have that
ability to look at other values.
So I guess I would say that there is a lot of success in
the operation of competitive marketplaces, but there is a whole
host of policy issues that people want to talk about and should
talk about that aren't necessarily able to be addressed by
competitive markets.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And for our panelists that were at
FERC in the 1980s and 1990s, there was this decision obviously
that FERC made to open access, allowing the creation of
competitive markets. Do you, individuals, believe that the
decision to open access envisioned preserving the traditional
jurisdictional boundaries between States and Federal
authorities?
Mr. Naeve. Well, first I would say the experiment proved, I
think, in many ways, certainly with gas markets, incredibly
beneficial and stabilized the gas markets and lowered prices. I
think, as the other witnesses have testified, competitive
markets have functioned in most circumstances, certainly
recently, very well.
With respect to how that has affected--open access has
affected State boundaries--the jurisdictional boundaries, in
some ways the boundaries are the same, but what happens is more
and more of the, for example, power supply becomes wholesale
supply, and wholesale supply is subject to FERC jurisdiction as
opposed to local supply. So FERC's jurisdictional reach has
increased.
When you have regional transmission organizations,
previously most transmission service was part of the integrated
system when serving local service, it was regulated by the
State, maybe 5 or 10 percent or 15 percent for some utilities
was regulated by FERC as they served interstate markets. Today
if you are in a regional transmission organization, 100 percent
of that transmission is now regulated by FERC. So because of
the change in the operation of the industry as a result of
competition, more subject matter is subject to FERC
jurisdiction than previously, although the boundaries are the
same; it is just simply the system operates differently than it
previously did.
Mr. Tonko. Mr. Smith, did you want to add to that at all
or----
Mr. Smith. Well, I would just say I recall specifically
conversations with policymakers from California in which they
seemed surprised that the market restructuring that they had
undertaken was going to cause State regulators to lose a lot of
jurisdiction over things that they had previously regulated. So
I am not sure the regulatory shift that was caused by the
creation of the RTO markets was fully understood by some of the
proponents of the RTO markets.
Ms. Tomasky. Would you like me to add? Having been there, I
can say that we certainly sought to respect at the time that
division, but it was our expectation that over time there would
be a pretty significant shift and that markets should--and
regulators should be adjusting to that.
Mr. Tonko. OK. Thank you. Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair recognizes
the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Latta, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, thanks, Mr. Chairman. And thanks very much
for our panel for being here. Again, it has been very, very
informational this morning. I really appreciate it.
If I could go back to the gentleman from Illinois'
questions, especially when we are talking about the price
takers.
Ms. Tomasky, if I could ask you, when they were designing
the markets, how do you think FERC anticipated the
participation of the price takers? Do you think that there was
a lot of anticipation of exactly what was going to happen
there, the price takers?
Ms. Tomasky. Well, sir, I would say that there were--we
actually did anticipate that there would be--I don't think we
spent a lot of time talking about that particular issue, but I
will say that there was an expectation that there would be
plenty of circumstances--particularly as the RTOs and the more
complicated market structures developed, we certainly did
expect that people would be--that the market would set a price
and people would have to make a decision whether to bid into
that market on the basis of what was there or they wouldn't be
able to support their generation. There were, of course, things
we didn't expect.
And as I mentioned, the price of natural gas and the effect
that it is having on existing generation is not something--
while we expected it to happen at times and in cycles, the sort
of pervasive sustainable preference that the market currently
has for natural gas and the effect it is having on people who
are putting in--having to make those decisions into the
marketplace, I think it is fair to say we did not anticipate
that.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much.
Ms. Stuntz, if I could ask you a couple questions here. You
mentioned in your testimony that during the advent of the
regional transmission organizations, the RTOs, and also the
independent system operators, ISOs, were designed to be
independent entities to manage transmission with the ultimate
goal of opening access to transmission. Would you share your
thoughts to the subcommittee on whether the RTOs and the ISOs
have been successful opening that access to transmission?
Ms. Stuntz. I think they have been. I think fundamentally
FERC started that and imposed an obligation on all entities,
really all transmission owners whether or not they are in RTOs,
but I think the advent of those entities--I mean, it is a sort
of a strange situation where the owners of transmissions still
own them, but they basically have turned over functional
control of those assets to this nonprofit entity who runs
markets as well as sort of really manages the transmission
system to ensure that it is operated on a nondiscriminatory
basis.
It also does planning. It helps determine on a regional
basis where they exist on a regional basis or in an in-State
basis, whether it is just a single State, with ERCOT or
California or New York, here is what we need, here is when we
need it. It has gotten more complicated lately because we now
have fights about who gets to build it, which we don't need to
go into today, but it is--I think they have been successful in
that area.
Mr. Latta. Let me ask you a follow-up. Do you think there
are any improvements out there that you would suggest to the
RTOs and the ISOs, what kind of improvements that could be
made?
Ms. Stuntz. Well, I think there--you know, I think what--
particularly coming into a State like Ohio, I mean, I think the
seams, planning across the seams and where they exist--you
know, electrons don't respect the boundaries of PJM and MISO,
and when you have two RTOs adjacent that have different
policies on capacity markets or different kinds of planning
paradigms, it is creating--even how to measure whether they
are--and FERC has tried to set rules about how you measure
whether transmission is available. FERC has tried to work on
those seams, but to me, that is--it is not so much--I mean,
they are different, they are not the same, they do things
differently, but the seam issue, I think, is a big problem and
stands in the way of, I think, markets that operate better for
consumers and planning that works better for consumers.
Mr. Latta. OK. But when you say that FERC is out there
trying, trying is not the same thing as succeeding.
Ms. Stuntz. Right.
Mr. Latta. Wouldn't you agree?
Ms. Stuntz. I agree. I don't--I would say that on the area
of sort of interregional planning and you across the seams, I
don't think FERC has had a lot of success yet, and they need to
pursue it more aggressively.
Mr. Latta. OK. When you say, ``pursue it more
aggressively,'' how do they pursue it more aggressively, then,
so they can be successful in that, then?
Ms. Stuntz. Well, I don't--I mean, they have created Order
1000, which is more recent history than we are talking about
today, but they have specified that there should be
interregional planning, but I think--and they have sort of--but
it is more--to me it is more an exhortation. It hasn't been
backed up with firm requirements and compliance requirements.
And I think that--and I think they are still struggling with
the balance we have talked about today in terms of trying to be
sensitive to regional differences and the way regions and
States want to do things, but when you have two, as I said,
next to each other in places like Ohio that have differences,
how do you--when do they come in and say, all right, this is
how you have to do it? And being that prescriptive, I think,
has been hard for them. At some point I think they may have to
be that prescriptive on these seams issues.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. My time has
expired and I yield back.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair recognizes
the gentleman from New York, Mr.--oh. Oh, from Texas. I am
sorry. Mr. Green from Texas.
Mr. Engel. Almost got in there when----
Mr. Olson. He slipped in there on you.
Mr. Green. It is very seldom a Texan moves faster than a
New Yorker.
I want to congratulate our new chair and neighbor and
friend. Congratulations, Pete. And I look forward to working
with you. The good news is we both speak Texan and we both work
together on energy, so--but, again, looking forward to working
with you.
I want to thank the chair and ranking member for holding
the hearing. The Federal Power Act has provided a foundation
for stable, low cost electricity, and I hope to learn how the
policy developed and how the market has changed.
Mr. Naeve, Mike, in your testimony, you discussed how over
time FERC has moved from being an agency primarily focusing on
regulating rates to an agency that protects competition and
balances supply and demand, and I think this is an extremely
important role. You also provided an important context on the
difference between natural gas markets and electric power
markets. Can you elaborate on the challenges the electric power
markets face in balancing supply and demand while enhancing
competition?
Mr. Naeve. Well, the ideal would be if we have robust
competition. Competition itself would balance supply and
demand, just as it happens in the natural gas markets. However,
in the power markets, there are, as I mentioned, important
differences; one difference being, for example, that you have
to instantaneously balance supply at any given moment with
demand at any given moment. That is not so much the problem in
the natural gas industry where you have line pack, you have
fuel storage, and so forth. So it is far more complicated in
the power industry. And so consequently, you have to have much
more robust regulation to provide reliability.
In terms of having adequate supply, we have designed
capacity markets to try to ensure sufficient surplus supply,
that we meet the reserve requirements, but that is complicated.
It is really a tweak on the competitive market to add these
capacity markets to see if we can ensure sufficient surplus
capacity, but it is complicated. If you left it purely to the
market and asked the markets to respond to prices, it is not
clear that we would have enough surplus capacity at any given
moment to meet our needs. We may have more, we may have less,
but it wouldn't be the right amount, so we have had to tinker
with the markets to try to address that problem.
Mr. Green. What constraints has the Federal Power Act
placed on these factors, in your opinion, or what improvements,
if any, are needed statutorily that would improve that balance?
Mr. Naeve. In my mind, the jury is still out on whether
additional changes are needed to the Federal Power Act. I don't
see any immediate constraints at this stage. The Commission has
been given additional jurisdiction by this committee and the
Congress over reliability, and they can use those powers. As I
mentioned earlier, the statute gives them tremendous amount of
flexibility. So at this stage, in my mind, the jury is still
out as to whether additional changes are necessary.
Mr. Green. OK. Of course, in Texas we have a deregulated
market for our retail and we have ERCOT, and we still have some
challenges during the heat--we didn't have them this year
during the hot summer, but we have had over the years, and the
interconnect issues. Would States and regions like the
Southeast choose to continue to stay regulated, and what are
the advantages or disadvantages of that model? And, again, even
though we have the three different or four different grids, how
we can somehow still keep their independence and yet still have
the reliability helping one region over the other?
Mr. Naeve. Well, it is interesting with respect to ERCOT,
because ERCOT has limited interconnections with the rest of
the--with the other grids.
Mr. Green. And let me just say, years ago we said we are
willing to sell it to you, we just don't want you to take it
from us.
Mr. Naeve. No. And actually, I was working in the Congress,
in the Senate when we had some issues relative to ERCOT, and
central and southwest company, and attempted to connect their
nonERCOT utilities with the ERCOT utilities, and it created a
jurisdictional crisis. And in PURPA, a statute we have
mentioned, they created a fixer in that which allowed FERC to
order ERCOT utilities to interconnect with utilities outside of
Texas, and by doing it under FERC order, they wouldn't become
FERC jurisdictional. So you do have a few high voltage DC
interconnections between ERCOT and the rest of the country.
Would there be greater stronger reliability if there were
more interconnections? I think there would be, yes. Texas faces
this issue, perhaps some other areas as well, like Florida, for
example, probably could stand to have stronger interconnections
as well.
Mr. Green. Anybody else on the advantage or disadvantages
of the model?
Ms. Tomasky. Yes, sir. I do--the advantages of increased
interconnection, I think, are going to be demonstrated over
time. I really do. I think that, as we have mentioned before,
the physical limitations aren't the same as geography. There is
a lot of important stuff that gets done at States, including
attention to reliability. I can't emphasize the importance of
the State regulator being local and being able to address local
needs, but with that said, we really do have the ability now to
move power in a very broad geographic region to coordinate it,
and there is so much resource that is in one area that can be
moved to another.
I think the key is continued build-out of transmission and
continued build-out of interconnection. It has to be done
sensitively, but I really do think there is a lot of advantage
in continuing to pursue that.
Mr. Green. Mr. Chairman, I know I am out of time. Thank
you.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back. And on behalf of my
friend from Texas, don't mess with Texas.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Mississippi,
Mr. Harper, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Harper. And we are excited to know that the Dallas
Cowboys now have the Mississippi State quarterback, Dak
Prescott starting, Mr. Chairman, so we are happy with that.
But thanks to each of you being here. And I would like to
also say how much we appreciate everything that now former
chairman Ed Whitfield did on this committee. He will be missed,
and we wish him the very best.
These two questions that I have, the comments and then a
couple of questions, are really for the entire panel, so when I
get done, I will start with you, Mr. Smith, and we will go down
the line on this.
We have two basic types of wholesale power markets in the
country today, largely but not entirely coinciding with the
type of retail regulation present in individual States. In
States where there is traditional retail rate regulation, it
seems we have bilateral wholesale markets where generators sell
to utilities through company-to-company contracts for power. In
areas where States have decided to move to retail market
competition, it seems we have bid-based wholesale markets where
multiple generators bid into a centrally operated market to
serve the load.
So my questions are, in which market are we seeing lower
levels of concern about maintaining reliability; and then,
second, in which market are we seeing capital intensive--or
which areas are we seeing capital intensive new facilities like
nuclear power plants being built?
Mr. Smith. Thank you for those questions. I guess the first
observation I would make is I think there is not a perfect
correlation between competitive wholesale--or organized
wholesale markets and retail competition. There are areas of
the country in which there are RTOs or ISOs operating but don't
have retail competition. There are also areas of the country
that have traditionally resisted RTO formation that are now
inching, inching towards competitive markets.
There is something called the energy imbalance market that
is being developed sort of around California starting with
Pacificore and some other utilities in that area joining it. So
anyway, those aren't perfectly correlated.
But to get to the thrust of your question, I think the
question of how to assure adequate capacity is one that was
traditionally handled by States. When States were regulating
vertically integrated utilities, they could establish reserve
margins, they could essentially oversee the resource planning,
including the generation planning, the vertically integrated
utilities. And in States where the utilities were restructured
and in particular divested most or all of their generation, the
States no longer have that sort of direct control over what
generation is owned by the--what generation is being used to
serve the retail customers in that State.
So in many places we have many RTOs, we have now developed
organized capacity markets of one sort or another. As you may
well know, those have--there is controversy around capacity
markets: A, are they too expensive, are there ways they could
work better; B, are they accomplishing what they are supposed
to accomplish, and maybe part of the problem there is they are
supposed to accomplish several different things which don't
always necessarily entirely line up, but certainly one of them
is assuring sufficient resource availability on a long-term
basis.
I think it is--there is a quite observable pattern that
investment in new nuclear carbon caption sequestration
projects, for instance, are happening in States that are not
restructured, where essentially State regulatory oversight of a
vertically integrated utility is providing regulatory comfort
that the utilities will recover their costs for those new
assets.
Mr. Harper. OK. Thank you. And my time will be up before we
can go all the way down the line, but if you have a quick
response, that would be great.
Mr. Naeve. I do think it is not entirely clear that in the
bid-based markets, that reliability have proven to be a problem
at this stage, but it is the case that in, you know, the
markets that have not been restructured, regulators have the
ability to choose particular technologies that might not
otherwise be attractive in a competitive market and saying we
are going to support that particular technology, and can cause
investment in that technology and recovery in that investment
from customers, so it does give regulators more power to direct
resources to particular technologies.
Mr. Harper. It appears that my time has expired, but thank
you all for being here.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman----
Mr. Harper. I yield back.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Vermont, Mr. Welch, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much, Mr. Olson. Thank you to the
panel. Very good testimony.
Mr.--or I guess, Mike, I wanted to ask you a little bit
about your experience doing a very difficult thing when you
were at FERC with respect to the changes you had to make and
how that might apply to trying to have much more sensitivity
and flexibility with demand response energy efficiency and
distributed generation. I mean, one of the challenges we have
with energy policy is trying to make certain that those options
are treated fairly in the process, and it is difficult, because
it is a big change. Generally the focus on reliability and
costs, obviously very legitimate, have been driven by the
centralized generators. They have a seat at the table.
The only ISO where some of these other folks with
alternative energy have a seat at the table is ISO New England,
but in Vermont where we have had some utilities that have been
all in on being leaders rather than resisters to this, there is
documented savings on transmission costs of about $400 million.
Now, we are a small State. That is real money.
So if we want to have some flexibility here so that those
regions of the country want to implement as much as possible
demand response distributed generation, what are the one, two,
three steps that we would need to take in order to facilitate
that effort?
Mr. Naeve. Whenever the Commission goes about trying to
restructure a market, they have to be careful about a lot of
things. If they are restructuring a market, there are going to
be winners and losers. There are some people that will have
invested in reliance on regulations, for example, and then that
regulation is taken away and their investments may not be
attractive at all. They also need to be sensitive to evolving
technologies and to regional differences. And I think FERC has
been sensitive to those concerns over the years.
So, for example, with respect to distributed generation,
some would say FERC has jurisdiction over distributed
generation. Sales back to the utility by distributed generation
to many look like wholesale sales. FERC has chosen not to
regulate many of those sales, and step back. You have a
laboratory in a lot of the States with respect to distributed
generation, with respect to demand response----
Mr. Welch. Yes, but what I am looking for is what, if any,
changes do we need to make at FERC or either expansion of their
authority or legislative direction in order to facilitate
States that are choosing to invest in this distributed
generation approach?
Mr. Naeve. I think States today are making those decisions,
and FERC is not standing in the way, so I, frankly, don't think
that there are changes that are necessary right now. You see a
tremendous growth in distributed generation throughout the
United States, certainly in States that have abundant renewable
resources available to them, but the Commission has exercised
its flexibility to allow that growth to occur. So at this
stage, I am not sure if there is a----
Mr. Welch. I don't have much time, so let me go to Ms.
Tomasky. Thank you very much.
Ms. Tomasky. Same question?
Mr. Welch. Yes, same question.
Ms. Tomasky. Well, I would agree that FERC has done some
things to accommodate that. I would really direct your
attention to the RTOs. I do think you are right. I think ISO
New England has created a framework that is useful for
integrating that. I don't think it is easy. It is certainly
easy to establish the principle. It is--but the system still
has to be managed. And it is really a question of how do you
effectively balance the cost value versus the compensation back
on distributed generation. I think that actually over time,
these costs are coming in and there really will be the
opportunity to do it, but I think it is a nitty-gritty issue,
it is not a big policy issue. And because I think as a policy
issue, it is accepted, so it is really something that the RTOs
have to be told that it is a high value and it needs to be
integrated. I think that is the solution.
Mr. Welch. But there is a tension, I mean, it goes to the
point you made about companies that rely on a certain
regulatory framework. I mean, the old energy model was
centralized distribution, and the more you produced and the
more you could sell, the better it was. We have got some
utilities now. And in Vermont, there was an effort to change
the compensation model to actually include the ability of
utilities to reduce demand and get paid for it, and it has been
a tremendous savings for our businesses and to our consumers.
Ms. Tomasky. Yes.
Mr. Welch. And, you know, on this committee, it is very
tough, because we all come from different regions, and some are
oil areas and some are renewable areas, and we have all got to
try to represent our constituents here, but it has got to be a
policy where FERC has a huge role.
I guess my time is up, but thank you all very much.
Ms. Tomasky. Thank you.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair recognizes
the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Kinzinger, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being out here; appreciate it. Ms. Stuntz, thank you for giving
us your time as well. I appreciate it. My question is for you.
In your testimony, you highlight the vital importance of
balancing supply and demand in realtime to create electricity
service, something that I believe is becoming even more
important as new intermittent technologies are being
increasingly deployed around the country.
In designing electric markets, did FERC consider how
intermittent resources would impact overall reliability?
Ms. Stuntz. I probably should defer to Susan since--Ms.
Tomasky since she was at FERC and I wasn't. I think given the
tremendous growth in intermittent resources and given the
policy framework around them in terms of we talked a little
about it about the investment tax credit and so forth, you
know, I guess I am not sure that they could have anticipated
the way that is--the way that is all developing, but--and it
certainly is producing, I think, some challenges in some
markets, but maybe I would defer to Susan to----
Mr. Kinzinger. Yes. And if you can add on, just, you know,
what considerations were made, like, production tax credit,
things like this into the overall.
Ms. Tomasky. Well, with respect to the issues like
production tax credits, Congressman, we really took whatever
was there as a given. We didn't initiate them, of course. We
accepted them in the marketplace. And they were coming and
going at that point in time. We certainly had the lessons from
PURPA, very, you know, different than the situation we have
today, but what we really were concerned about was making sure
that as an operational matter, whoever was running the utility
system, notwithstanding our competition requirements, had the
ability to operate it effectively, so they had the ability to
make judgments about the integration of resources.
So I think it is fair to say that while we didn't
envision--we certainly didn't envision the issues of
intermittency, we didn't envision the challenges of moving
power across long distances to accommodate that, and the
underlying adequacy issues that needed to be addressed, we did
understand that when you bring a lot of different sellers
together with different performance characteristics and then
you are going to distribute them against long distances, there
were real challenges to getting that done effectively. That is
one of the reasons that we looked to the RTOs as coordinating
organizations, because we thought they had the ability to bring
together the technical knowledge in order to do that.
Mr. Kinzinger. So just to kind of follow up, did anybody
perceive that there could--I mean, obviously we didn't envision
what has happened, but did anybody perceive that wind, in fact,
wind energy would become so dominant that you would see a lot
of these current existing power plants have to actually
throttle back or shut down because of the them?
Ms. Tomasky. Well, certainly at the time of Order 888 we
didn't contemplate that scenario. As you got further down into
the years and we began to see wind development, I saw that as a
utility developer of transmission in Texas, we saw some similar
kinds of issues there.
Mr. Kinzinger. So in the existing regulatory framework,
what options does FERC have to value existing generation that
contributes to overall reliability, generation diversity and
the ability to run in severe weather?
Ms. Tomasky. Yes. I would have to say that FERC has very
little ability to value generation. I think that----
Mr. Kinzinger. Is that because of what we have done or,
like, kind of the rules you are operating under?
Ms. Tomasky. I think it has to do with the basic structure
of the regulatory framework. Now, in the RTOs, there has been
some allusion to capacity markets that overseen by FERC. There
has been some ability to try to think about longer term supply,
but really I think you are hitting on the fundamental policy
issue that has to be addressed, which is are there--do we--are
we going to see values outside the marginal costs of a power
supply that we want to choose to integrate and that we want to
require RTOs. And the problem, of course, is that there are a
long list of those and they are conflicting----
Mr. Kinzinger. Yes.
Ms. Tomasky [continuing]. But I do think that that is very
much something the committee should be looking at.
Mr. Kinzinger. OK. And any--yes. Go ahead.
Ms. Stuntz. Could I just add to that? I do think FERC--
maybe a slightly different take on it. There are--going back to
a thing called ancillary services, which have been developed
and are called transmission services because they support the
grid and they are regulated by FERC, but essentially they are
things like spinning reserve, nonspinning reserve, A black
start capability, there are being developed markets for those
things, they are valued. They can--people that provide voltage
support, reactive power are able to collect a value for that.
And although a lot of this has been developed from sort of the
ground up either by State regulators or by RTOs, FERC has been
pretty good, I think, about saying, yes, OK. And I think the
Cal ISO is now in the lead of trying to say, well, if we are
going to handle that duck curve thing, we need a generator out
there or a demand response offerer who can either ramp up
really quick or ramp down really quick, because when the sun
starts going down at 4 o'clock in the afternoon, we have got to
have somebody that can step up, and if you can do that, we will
pay you for that. I mean, that is the only way these markets
can work, right, is you define a product that meets the need
you have, and then let--and then hopefully find a value for it,
but it is the big challenge, because sometimes standing by with
a gas plant that is only going to operate 20 minutes of a day,
you know, 3 months of a year and then getting a return on that
investment, that is a big challenge.
Mr. Kinzinger. OK. I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair recognizes
the gentleman from New York, Mr. Engel, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I had almost gotten in
under the wire about 20 minutes ago, so it shows you when you
don't get under the wire, things get delayed, but thank you
very, very much. And I want to thank all of four of you. This
has really been very interesting, very enlightening,
bipartisan. That is what makes this committee great. So thank
you.
As we consider applying the lessons of the past to energy
markets of the future, I think it is important to keep three
fundamental goals in mind. First is resilience. We in New York
suffered through superstorm Sandy and other tropical storms,
such as Lee and Irene, which left millions of New Yorkers
without electricity. In the face of increasingly common extreme
weather events, we obviously need to keep the power running at
all times so Americans can keep their food and medicine cool
and their homes warm.
Second is financial cost, because we can't ignore that. As
with virtually all goods, the price of electricity has risen
through the years. Though the increasing electricity prices
have been relatively low compared to other goods, we need to be
mindful of generation, transmission, and distribution costs all
with an eye on keeping prices low for rate payers.
And thirdly, environmental costs. Power generation is the
primary source of greenhouse gas emissions in the U.S. and
across the globe. We have to diversify our sources of energy
and accelerate deployment of clean, low-carbon technologies to
protect the health and well-being of all Americans. So with
these objectives in mind, we must adapt to the changing ways
that we are generating and using electricity.
Today's consumers are taking advantage of various smaller
scale distributed energy resources like solar panels and
electric vehicles to generate and store power in line. They are
monitoring and managing their energy consumption through smart
meters and other devices.
So in light of these game-changing technologies, let me ask
anyone who cares to answer, was there a time in the past when
we experienced widespread changes in power generation similar
to the changes we are experiencing now, and if so, how did we
handle that and what lessons should we take from that
experience?
I stumped everybody.
Ms. Tomasky. Well, I will go. I think it is fair to say
although the pace has accelerated, that we have, throughout the
history that we are talking about, seen new technologies change
where we are and what we--how we needed to adjust. To be fair,
most of those technological innovations have happened in larger
scale generation, but as Linda said and I discussed at length
in my testimony, the natural gas turbine really did precipitate
a lot of this. Similarly, we have seen improvements in solar
and we have seen improvements in wind, and as the cost
structure associated with that has come down, we have had--we
have seen proliferation and changes in the marketplace that we
have had to adjust to.
The specific things that you are talking about, which I
think are very interesting, take us to sort of the different
arena. They take us to the retail side of the equation, because
they really are things that have the ability for the customers
to change the shape of the way the utility does business. We
have seen over the last few years, and I think this is one of
the things that surprised us, is seen relatively flat demand,
even as the economy has come back from the recession, and some
of that has to do with efficiency, some of that has to do with
choices. There is still huge still, in my view, low hanging
fruit out there to be harvested in terms of energy efficiency,
and there is this whole arena of things that you are talking
about.
I think it is fair to say--what we have learned from them
is that you need to be flexible, that you need to have enough
authority in the hands of people making the decisions that they
can move the pieces around to make that happen. I think, to me,
that is the single most important lesson.
Mr. Engel. Well, thank you. I want to get in one other
question before my time is up, and I want to piggyback on some
of the things that Mr. Welch asked, and tie it to my home
State. New York is leading a program called Reforming the
Energy Vision to overhaul the longstanding electricity business
model, and its aim is to modernize, to centralize and
decarbonize the grid largely through substantial additions of
distributed energy. In early July, New York's six investor-
owned utilities submitted their 5-year plans to add distributed
energy sources to the grid.
How do you see the intersection between FERC's oversight of
markets and New York's program, and do you foresee any
potential problems? Let me ask Ms. Stuntz and Mr. Smith,
because they didn't comment on Mr. Welch. And I am wondering if
you could comment on that.
Ms. Stuntz. As I understand it, and I have reviewed it
briefly, because California is very interested and I serve on a
board there, I don't see any conflict at this point, because it
appears to me that New York is focused on sort of the
distribution system.
Now, as I said at the outset, sometimes that line between
distribution and transmission is as wavery as the line between
wholesale and retail, but I think looking at retail and
distribution and what the future of sort of the whole
distribution system means and who administers it and how do you
make it more effective to support distributed generation is
something that California is very much in the middle of as
well, and I don't--you know, I think so long--again, there may
come a time when you run up against that Hughes Supreme Court
decision that you are directly affecting the wholesale rate,
but as I pointed out in my testimony, the court--the majority--
the court there went out of its way to say, you know, we are
mindful that States are doing things like trying to decarbonize
their energy, like trying to increase security, and we will
not--we don't intend this to be read broadly to interrupt those
efforts so long as they don't directly affect a wholesale rate.
I would just add, you know, the three criteria you point
out, you know, resilience, cost, and environmental improvement,
the real challenge to me on a lot of these things is those are
not necessarily going to be consistent. Some of the things that
will make your grid most resilient, you know, there are really
hard questions about how you incorporate a lot of new
distributed generation while maintaining security, while
maintaining safety, you know, both at its very low level, you
have got to know whether the line is energized or not, somebody
has got to be able to work on it, and at a much higher level,
cyber and so forth. So keeping those things in balance, but
keeping them, I think, at the forefront appropriately is going
to be the challenge, but I don't see FERC as being a problem
for what New York is trying to do.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. Thank you both for your answers.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair recognizes
the gentleman from Virginia.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Barton his on it earlier when he said the EPA's clean
air versus what FERC is trying to do and are they in conflict,
and, Ms. Stuntz, you indicated there were going to be some
stress there, if I remember your answer correctly. Those
weren't your words, but that was pretty much what you were
saying, there was going to be some difficulty there. And we
have got all kinds of things going on in my district. I
represent southwest Virginia, the mountains, the coal district.
We have lost two of our power facilities there, as you would
know, Glen Lyn and one of our Clinch River, the other two were
converted from coal to natural gas, given us about half that
power, and so that is a concern to the area, but as a result of
some of what is going on with coal around the country, we also
have the stress of all these pipelines coming through that FERC
has to take a look at. And I am told that in regard to the
pipelines, that FERC is just looking to see if there is some
kind of market, and this is open for everybody, but there is
some kind of a market out there, but not necessarily the full.
So I have got--in coming through the mountains, one of them is
in Bob Goodlatte's district and Robert Hurt's district, the
other is in mine and Robert Hurt's and touches Bob's a little
bit. We have got two large proposed gas pipelines coming
through to make sure that there is reliable electricity in
other parts of the country, and I think Mr. Shimkus touched on
this too, and yet we are disrupting all kinds of communities,
some of them have been there for hundreds of years that are now
having a pipeline going right through them. This is a great
concern.
So how do we balance all that out? And did we make a
mistake in shutting down those plants? And I am not talking
about the electric power companies shutting them down, because
EPA had rules that forced it. But as a sense of reliability,
did we make a mistake in shutting some of these plants down?
Could we not have figured out a way to leave them on to make
sure we had reliability?
I will open that up to you all, and then I have got some
more questions about what do we do about the stranded assets
and the fact that should we be paying those folks who have the
baseload plants for being there, for their reliability, not
just gas, but also coal, because we are losing coal and we are
seeing some even nuclear plants get shut down.
Anybody want to touch any of those five or six issues I
threw out there? That is what happens when you only get 5
minutes and you have got all kinds of things.
Ms. Stuntz. And I will try to be brief, to allow my
colleagues to speak, but you are touching on one of, I think,
the greatest challenges we confront right now, which is
infrastructure. You know, we have the benefit in this Nation of
tremendous clean natural gas resources, and if we want to
decarbonize, it is just a fact that natural gas prior to
electricity is about half as carbon intensive, depending on
your studies, as coal-fired.
So given that premise, so we should want to move to natural
gas generation, but you have to transport it, and, you know, we
have to find a way for people to understand either as a shared
value, this is good and we should accept it given appropriate
royalties and so forth, payments, or not, or we are not going
to get there in terms of where we want to go decarbonizing the
economy, where public policy seems to want to go.
And it is not just gas pipelines. It is oil pipelines. You
see all the news. It is all that infrastructure. We have got to
figure out--because it doesn't always--you are right. Exactly.
It doesn't always benefit the place where it goes. But it
benefits us as a country. So how do we bring that together? And
that is an--I don't have an answer to that.
Mr. Griffith. Well, and as one interesting side note, many
of the people who are opposed to the pipelines also favor
getting rid of coal. So you have got the dilemma that they
didn't want the coal plants. And now they don't want the
pipeline. But you also have this dilemma that I have in one of
my communities that is really--I don't know the answer. And I
guess I should ask if FERC actually pays attention to this.
I have got a little community that butts up against the
National Forest. It even butts up against or pretty close to a
wilderness area. And you have got a historic community, and
they want to put the pipeline basically through the middle of
the town. Does FERC look at those things? Because I got to tell
you, I can't figure out where that goes where you don't destroy
something that is a natural wonder or destroy this little
community that has been nestled in the mountains for a couple
hundred years. Does FERC looks at those things when it is
trying to approve this?
Ms. Tomasky. Yes, sir, the FERC does. And it certainly
should. I mean, that is exactly the kind of thing in the siting
process that should come forward. And I would certainly
encourage that community, if they haven't done so----
Mr. Griffith. Oh, they are all over this.
Ms. Tomasky. I bet they are all over it. It is a
consideration, at least in my experience. We went to great
effort. Even though there was general support for pipeline
development, we went to great effort to make sure that the
right analysis was done and that important issues like that
were protected.
Mr. Griffith. That is my dilemma. I can't figure out at
that one spot, I cannot for the life of me figure out how you
approve the pipeline without doing damage to something. Because
there is just a narrow spot there where you don't have much
choice.
Ms. Tomasky. Of course I don't know anything about that.
Mr. Griffith. Yes ma'am.
Ms. Tomasky. But I would think routing around it, I would
hope, could happen.
Mr. Naeve. You know, it is almost impossible, of course, to
site a pipeline without doing some damage. And the
responsibility of FERC is to try to find a routing that does
the least damage at not too great an expense. But it is not
unusual at all for a pipeline to propose a particular route,
and then that hold--for FERC to hold public hearings and
investigations to decide what are the effects of that
particular route and to ask for changes in the routing to avoid
some of those damages. That is a fairly common result.
Mr. Griffith. Stay tuned. Thank you very much. My time is
up. I yield back.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Johnson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you
to the panel for joining us today. I appreciate your time. You
know, earlier this year in FERC versus EPSA, the Supreme Court
case held in favor of the Commission's demand response program.
Finding that FERC has jurisdiction because the program directly
affects wholesale rates.
And we will go right down the line here to all four of you.
Do you think this ruling could be interpreted in a manner that
expands FERC's jurisdictional or other types of electricity
programs or practices? Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Well, the affecting jurisdiction is one that the
court tried hard to draw some bounds around because--in fact,
it announced a principle about direct effects or directly
affecting. Because there is so much interconnection between--
bad word. So much interrelationship between things subject to
FERC jurisdiction and things subject to State jurisdiction,
that if you read affecting literally, it might swallow
everything that had been previously State jurisdiction.
So the court tried hard to impose some bounds there. I
guess the other thing I would say is the court noted that in
that particular policy that the States had the option of opting
out so that the State could decide that the demand response
providers in its State couldn't participate in the PJM market.
And the court seemed to lean on that as a helpful fact to say
this isn't a FERC power grab. This is FERC trying to stay in
its lane and leaving the related choices that are the State
regulatory choices to the State.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Any of the rest of you have anything to
add to that or you agree?
Ms. Tomasky. I think it is a really good summary.
Mr. Johnson. OK. All right. Well, given the fact that the
Supreme Court ruled on two cases focused on the Federal Power
Act this year, do you anticipate that the Supreme Court will
continue to be active in the area of electricity markets? Now,
you know, this is asking you to pull out your crystal ball. I
realize that. Mr. Naeve, why don't you take that one.
Mr. Naeve. I think they will be merely because we are in
such a state of flux and there will undoubtedly be future
concerns about the scope of FERC's jurisdiction, the scope of
State jurisdiction, other issues. So I do think we will see
future challenges. And the court has shown its willingness to
step in and decide these cases. So I can't say today what that
case may be, but I do think, yes, they will continue to be
active.
Mr. Johnson. OK. All right. You know hydropower often can
be dispatched into the power grid a lot like a battery. That
is, sometimes hydro dams can store up a lot of water and then
they can spill it when it is needed to generate electricity.
When the markets were being developed, how did FERC value that
storage capacity in hydro? Ms. Tomasky, do you have a----
Ms. Tomasky. You know, we certainly were aware of it. But I
have to tell you, there was so little new development. You
know, there is an awful lot of existing facilities out there.
And some of them are within the geographic areas that were
likely to go to competition. But a lot of the larger facilities
out West, sort of publicly owned, and maybe outside the kind of
sort of operation of the system.
So it is something that I would say was probably on the
list of things that we thought might develop in an interesting
way. But I can't say that it was central to our consideration.
Mr. Johnson. OK. All right. Did FERC make any effort, Ms.
Stuntz, to create a market value or product for the
capabilities of hydro plants?
Ms. Stuntz. Not specifically. But they have certainly
approved--I am aware in the Northwest and a litigated
proceeding involving BPA. They have approved sort of tariffs
that essentially offer firming service for wind because you are
absolutely right. Hydro is one of the few things which you
can--by keeping water up or letting it go, it is instantaneous.
You don't have to worry about ramping things up and fuel
and all that. And so when the wind goes down, it has enabled
wind to be sold on a firmer basis in the Northwest, where it is
prevalent. And FERC approved those kinds of services.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Well, thank you very much. Mr. Chairman,
let it be noted that Ohio left 10 seconds on the grid. I yield
back.
Mr. Olson. So noted. And that is all of our members right
now. So here is the second round of questions. Just kidding. It
was his idea.
I thank our witnesses. I also want to apologize. I noticed
about 10 minutes into the hearing your lights aren't working.
They are going straight from green to red. So there is no
warning going to yellow. So that is why we let you go way
beyond 5 minutes. Because you guys had no chance to curtail
your remarks based on those lights. So I apologize for that.
I ask unanimous consent that a letter is entered into the
record from FEC Commissioner Bay to Chairman Upton and Chairman
Whitfield about the current and future state of organized
electricity markets. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
And I remind all Members you have you 5 working days to
submit questions for the record.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:12 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Today marks the first time since I became chairman of the
full committee that my friend Ed Whitfield is not the chair of
the Energy and Power Subcommittee. For 119 hearings over the
last 6 years, Ed has held the gavel. A workhorse for sure.
Today we say thank you. He's been a trusted, respected, and
valued voice and a terrific friend. He's a gentleman through
and through. With Mr. Whitfield's departure, Mr. Olson as vice
chair will carry out the duties for the subcommittee, and we
appreciate him stepping in.
Today's hearing lays the foundation for a new effort to
take a more comprehensive look at recent developments in the
way we generate, transmit, and consume electricity in the
United States, and how that system has evolved under the
Federal Power Act. This effort began with a letter I sent,
along with Mr. Whitfield, to FERC Chair Norman Bay, outlining
several current and evolving issues that the committee will
begin to explore more thoroughly next year. These issues
include newly blurring lines between historic Federal and State
jurisdictional divides, how regulated and competitive markets
continue to fare under both FERC's and the States' oversight,
how reliability and security of the grid, innovation and
distributed energy resources are prioritized in the current
system, and how other external factors, such as tax policy and
renewable mandates factor in to the functioning of competitive
markets.
But before we do that, we need to take a look back in order
to better understand how we got here. Electricity is critical
to all of our daily lives, here, in Michigan, and across the
country--something often taken for granted until the power goes
out. It is also a lifeline to our national security, our
economic interests and our basic health and welfare. Both the
committee and FERC have the important responsibility of
ensuring that electricity markets function in a reliable and
efficient manner. We have an outstanding and distinguished
panel here today to help us learn from the tough decisions that
each of them had to make in the past, in order to help build a
successful grid for the future.
As you know, this committee has a longstanding history of
legislating on these issues, a history that spans numerous
congresses and decades. In fact, Part II of Federal Power Act,
passed in 1935, originated in this very committee under then-
Chairman Sam Rayburn. Those amendments granted the Federal
Power Commission, the predecessor to FERC, its jurisdiction
over wholesale electricity transactions. In the intervening
years, Congress has acted through its oversight role and on
legislation to ensure that wholesale electricity rates continue
to result in ``just and reasonable'' rates. This hearing
continues that long tradition of oversight.
I am glad to say we have worked to conduct this hearing
together in a bipartisan manner. Electricity plays a crucial
role in all of our everyday lives, and disruptions in supply
create farreaching implications. Today, power generated by
windmills in Kansas will energize lights and toasters from
Georgia to Michigan. And natural gas and coal plants in
Kentucky will likewise power smart phones and electric cars
from Iowa to Washington, DC. Nuclear plants, an unknown
technology in 1935, continue to provide a baseload supply of
energy that Americans across the country can rely on for
reliable and carbon-free energy. Modern electricity markets are
unprecedented in scope and scale, allowing us to send
electrical energy across the Nation both quickly and
efficiently.
The evolving questions facing us going forward on
developments and changes in the electricity system will be
difficult. When faced with difficult questions, it's often
essential to understand how we faced--and resolved--similar
issues in the past. That's really the purpose of our hearing.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
