- COMMON CARRIER REGULATION OF THE INTERNET: INVESTMENT IMPACTS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

COMMON CARRIER REGULATION OF THE INTERNET: INVESTMENT IMPACTS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 27, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-93

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
99-417 PDF                    WASHINGTON : 2016
_________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California7
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

Subcommittee on Communications and Technology

GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                ANNA G. ESHOO, California
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BILL JOHNSON, Missouri               JERRY McNERNEY, California
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
CHRIS COLLINS, New York                  officio)
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Anna G. Eshoo, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     7
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Hon. G.K. Butterfield, a Representative in Congress from the
State of North Carolina, prepared statement....................    74

Witnesses

Michael Mandel, Ph.D., Chief Economic Strategist, Progressive
Policy Institute...............................................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Nicholas Economides, Ph.D., Professor of Economics, Stern School
of Business, New York University...............................    24
Prepared statement...........................................    26
Robert J. Shapiro, Ph.D., Co-Founder and Chairman, Sonecon, LLC..    33
Prepared statement...........................................    36
Additional information submitted for the record \1\
Answers to submitted questions...............................    76
Frank Louthan, Managing Director, Equity Research, Raymond James
Financial......................................................    40
Prepared statement...........................................    42
Answers to submitted questions...............................    78

Submitted Material

Letter of October 26, 2015, from James Reid, Senior Vice
President of Government Affairs, Telecommunications Industry
Association, to Mr. Walden and Ms. Eshoo, submitted by Mrs.
Ellmers........................................................    75

----------
\1\ The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at  http://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF16/
20151027/104110/HHRG-114-IF16-Wstate-ShapiroR-20151027-
SD002.pdf.

COMMON CARRIER REGULATION OF THE INTERNET: INVESTMENT IMPACTS

----------

TUESDAY, OCTOBER 27, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:13 a.m., in
room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Greg Walden
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Walden, Latta, Shimkus,
Blackburn, Lance, Guthrie, Olson, Pompeo, Kinzinger, Bilirakis,
Johnson, Long, Ellmers, Collins, Cramer, Upton (ex officio),
Eshoo, Doyle, Welch, Yarmuth, Clarke, Loebsack, Rush,
Butterfield, Matsui, McNerney, and Pallone.
Staff present: Gary Andres, Staff Director; Rebecca Card,
Assistant Press Secretary; Andy Duberstein, Deputy Press
Secretary; Gene Fullano, Detailee, Communications and
Technology; Kelsey Guyselman, Counsel, Communications and
Technology; David Redl, Chief Counsel, Communications and
Technology; Charlotte Savercool, Professional Staff,
Communications and Technology; Greg Watson, Legislative Clerk;
Jeff Carroll, Democratic Staff Director; David Goldman,
Democratic Chief Counsel, Communications and Technology; Jerry
Leverich, Democratic Counsel; and Ryan Skukowski, Democratic
Policy Analyst.
Mr. Walden. We will call to order the Subcommittee on
Communications and Technology for our hearing on ``Common
Carrier Regulation of the Internet: Economic Impacts.''

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Good morning, everyone. I want to thank our witnesses for
being here. I want to apologize for a late start on the
hearing. We had a mixup on my end on the schedule.
Eight months ago, the FCC decided to grab control of the
Internet and regulate it like a monopoly utility under Title
II. Rather than work with Congress to adopt a statute that
would have punished those who engaged in harmful actions, the
FCC yielded to White House pressure and went all in for Title
II. The predictable result is litigation in the courts and
uncertainty in the marketplace. I understand there was great
demand for strong and forceful rules to govern the relationship
between the so-called edge providers, like Netflix, and
Internet service providers. And I still believe that goal is
achievable. But I also believe that Title II is the wrong
approach and is likely to dampen investment in the Internet.
Clearly the private sector will continue to invest in broadband
buildout and improvements. The question is will that investment
plateau or even decline over time. After all, it is the money
on the margins that helps extend broadband into unserved and
underserved areas.
One witness will testify today that, based on the
availability evidence, the economic impacts of this type of
regulation could increase costs and decrease investment of
anywhere from about 5.5 percent to 20.8 percent per year, and
the ratio of investment to capital stock could decline by
roughly those amounts as well. To put that into context, at the
low end, a decrease of that magnitude in 2014 investment could
range from about $4.29 billion to a high of $15.6 billion.
These studies were based on observations of other industries
that have experienced a significant shift toward more economic
regulation and on the pattern of decreased investment in other
countries when they subject their telecommunication sectors to
much higher levels of regulatory oversight than our traditional
light regulatory touch has had.
There are many other ripple effects of the Commission's
actions. There is the uncertainty factor. Businesses don't know
what to expect as they look ahead, making them pause to do risk
assessments of regulatory hurdles before expanding offerings or
investing in infrastructure. What will happen in the courts?
What will happen with the new chairman at the FCC? What if
someone pushes the FCC to walk back some of the forbearance
they agreed to as part of their open Internet order? All of
these uncertainties serve to tamp down dollars spent on
improving networks and services to consumers. There are also
hidden costs of compliance in this new possibly litigious
territory. What about fines for missteps? Given the runaway
nature of the fines from the FCC's Compliance Bureau, you know
this has to be a concern. Trying to navigate murky legal and
regulatory rules puts quite a burden on companies who want to
avoid running afoul of those rules but are unsure how the FCC
will ultimately interpret these new rules.
We are not here today because we think investment will come
to a screeching halt or that most of these providers will stop
putting money into their valuable assets. But given the
incredible levels of investment in the past, any decrease, any
pause is a loss to our economy and to consumers. And in the
end, the customers, the American people, are the ones who will
ultimately bear the greatest loss from these rules, whether it
is because the increased burden drives small providers out of
the market or because there is less incentive for any company
to invest in new and innovative service offerings or because
additional infrastructure investment is no longer attractive to
industry or investors. Title II regulations don't inspire
innovation or investment confidence. In the long term, it means
uncertainty, reduced investment, and a future of what might
have been for our vibrant and thriving Internet ecosystem. We
can do better. I look forward to hearing from the witnesses.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden

Eight months ago the FCC decided to grab control of the
Internet and regulate it like a monopoly utility under Title
II. Rather than work with Congress to adopt a statute that
would punish those who engaged in harmful actions, the FCC
yielded to White House pressure and went all in for Title II.
The predictable result is litigation in the courts and
uncertainty in the marketplace. I understand that there was a
great demand for strong, enforceable rules to govern the
relationship between so-called edge providers like Netflix and
Internet service providers. I still believe that goal is
achievable, but I also still believe that Title II is the wrong
approach and is likely to dampen investment in the Internet.
Clearly, the private sector will continue to invest in
broadband build out and improvements. The question is, will
that investment plateau, or even decline, over time? After all,
it's the money on the margins that helps extend broadband into
unserved and underserved areas.
One witness will testify today that based on the available
evidence the economic impacts of this type of regulation could
increase costs and decrease investment of anywhere from about
5.5 percent to about 20.8 per year, and the ratio of investment
to capital stock could decline by roughly those amounts as
well. To put that into context, at the low end a decrease of
that magnitude in 2014 investment would range from about $4.29
billion to a high of $15.6 billion.
These studies were based on observations of other
industries that have experienced a significant shift toward
more economic regulation, and on the pattern of decreased
investment in other countries when they subject their
telecommunications sectors to much higher levels of regulatory
oversight than our traditional light regulatory touch.
There are many other ripple effects of the commission's
action. There's the uncertainty factor-businesses don't know
what to expect as they look ahead, making them pause to do risk
assessments of regulatory hurdles before expanding offerings or
investing in infrastructure. What will happen in the courts?
What will happen with a new chairman? What if someone pushes
the FCC to walk back some of the forbearance they agreed to as
part of their Open Internet order? All of these uncertainties
serve to tamp down dollars spent on improving networks and
services to consumers.
There are also the hidden costs of compliance in this new,
possibly litigious territory. What about fines for missteps?
Given the runaway nature of the fines from FCC's compliance
bureau, you know this is a concern. Trying to navigate murky
legal and regulatory rules puts quite a burden on companies who
want to avoid running afoul of the rules, but are unsure how
the FCC will ultimately interpret these new rules.
We are not here today because we think investment will come
to a screeching halt, or that most of these providers will stop
putting money into their valuable assets. But given the
incredible levels of investment in the past, any decrease, any
pause, is a loss to our economy and to consumers.
And in the end, the consumers, the American people, are the
ones who will ultimately bear the greatest loss from these
rules. Whether it's because the increased burden drives small
providers out of the market, or because there is less incentive
for any company to invest in new and innovative service
offerings, or because additional infrastructure investment is
no longer as attractive to industry and investors, Title II
regulations don't inspire innovation or investment confidence.
In the long term, it means uncertainty, reduced investment,
and a future of ``what might have been'' for our vibrant and
thriving Internet ecosystem. We can do better. I look forward
to hearing from our witnesses.

Mr. Walden. I yield the balance of my time to the vice
chair of the committee, Mr. Latta.
Mr. Latta. I appreciate the chairman for yielding. And
thanks for holding today's very important committee hearing.
Before the Federal Communication Commission's recent action to
reclassify broadband as a telecommunication service under Title
II of the Communications Act, the regulatory framework that
governed broadband service fostered a pro-consumer, pro-
business environment. However, the FCC chose to abandon the
Internet as we know it today by applying outdated rules that
were developed for an era of monopoly telephone providers to a
cutting-edge broadband marketplace. Subjecting a thriving,
dynamic industry to navigate the FCC's bureaucracy and red tape
and will adversely affect innovation, investment, and consumer
choice.
In addition, the FCC's reclassification will place industry
into a state of prolonged uncertainty for years as litigation
proceeds through the courts. An Internet service provider in my
district, Amplex, relayed this concern to me, stating that the
ruling does such a poor job of defining what the FCC actually
intends, that many years of expensive litigation will result
before we know exactly what the FCC costs are going to be. This
uncertainty poses a risk to investment that could provide a
disincentive to product and service offerings which ultimately
harms consumers. I look to forward to hearing from the panel of
witnesses.
And I thank the chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Walden. The gentleman yields back the balance of his
time.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from California, Ms.
Eshoo, the ranking member of the subcommittee.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ANNA G. ESHOO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing, which I think is an important one. And thank you to
the witnesses.
Some have been here before, and others haven't. Welcome to
you. And we look forward to hearing from you.
We have heard the doomsday scenario brought on by the FCC's
open Internet rule, that stock prices of major broadband
providers would fall, that investment in new infrastructure
would decline rapidly, and that consumers' monthly bills would
become saddled with new taxes. In fact, the sky is not falling.
And we have broadband providers' own data to prove it.
According to an analysis by Free Press of 18 publicly
traded broadband providers, more than half increased their
capital spending during the being second quarter of 2015
compared to spending during the second quarter of 2014. Earlier
this year, Sprint's chief technology officer stated that he,
quote, ``does not believe that a light-touch application of
Title II, including appropriate forbearance, would harm the
continued investment in and deployment of mobile broadband
services,'' unquote. He was right. Sprint increased their
investments by 88 percent between the second quarter of 2014
and 2015. During the same period, Comcast increased their
capital expenditures by 12 percent; Verizon wireless, by 13
percent; and T-Mobile, by 27 percent. Smaller providers also
saw major increases, including Cincinnati Bell by 81 percent
and Frontier by 31 percent.
Following Chairman Wheeler's announced plan in early
February to pursue a light-touch Title II approach, the stock
prices of major cable companies surged. Some suggested this was
an anomaly. Yet, over the past 6 months, while the NASDAQ, S&P,
and Dow have been in the negative, many of the Nation's largest
communications providers, including Comcast, Time Warner Cable,
and T-Mobile have outperformed the market average.
Finally, the story of investment should include not just
broadband providers but the broader Internet ecosystem of
mobile aps, social media, streaming video services, and so much
more. According to a recent study by PricewaterhouseCoopers,
venture capitalists invested $5 billion in 290 Internet-
specific companies during the second quarter of 2015. The study
found that this investment represents an impressive 64-percent
increase in dollars and a 25 percent rise in deals compared to
the first quarter of 2015. Eight months ago, the FCC took the
historic step of enacting robust enforceable net neutrality
rules that ensure millions of American consumers and
entrepreneurs can continue to rely on the Internet they know
and love--underscore that last word, ``love.'' These rules
provide certainty for the entire Internet ecosystem and can do
so without curtailing investment.
Again, welcome to the witnesses. I thank you each of you in
advance. And I yield the remainder of my time to the
gentlewoman from California, Ms. Matsui.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Eshoo follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Anna G. Eshoo

We've heard the doomsday scenario brought on by the FCC's
open Internet rules that stock prices of major broadband
providers would fall; investment in new infrastructure would
decline rapidly; and consumer's monthly bills would become
saddled with new taxes. The sky is not falling and we have
broadband providers' own data to prove it.
According to an analysis by Free Press of 18 publicly
traded broadband providers, more than half increased their
capital spending during the second quarter of 2015, compared to
spending during the second quarter of 2014. Earlier this year,
Sprint's Chief Technology Officer stated that he ``does not
believe that a light touch application of Title II, including
appropriate forbearance, would harm the continued investment
in, and deployment of, mobile broadband services.'' He was
right. Sprint increased their investments by 88 percent between
the second quarter of 2014 and 2015. During this same time
period, Comcast increased their capital expenditures by 12
percent; Verizon Wireless by 13 percent; and T-Mobile by 27
percent. Smaller providers also saw major increases including
Cincinnati Bell by 81 percent and Frontier by 31 percent.
Following Chairman Wheeler's announced plan in early
February to pursue a `light-touch' Title II approach, the stock
prices of major cable companies surged. Some suggested this was
an anomaly. Yet over the past 6 months, while the NASDAQ, S&P
and Dow have been in the negative, many of the Nation's largest
communications providers, including Comcast, Time Warner Cable
and T-Mobile have outperformed the market average.
Finally, the story of investment should include not just
broadband providers but the broader Internet ecosystem of
mobile apps, social media, streaming video services and so much
more. According to a recent study by PricewaterhouseCoopers,
venture capitalists invested $5 billion in 290 Internet-
specific companies during the second quarter of 2015. The study
found that this investment represents an impressive 64 percent
increase in dollars and a 25 percent rise in deals compared to
the first quarter of 2015.
Eight months ago, the FCC took the historic step of
enacting robust, enforceable net neutrality rules that ensure
millions of American consumers and entrepreneurs can continue
to rely on the Internet they know and love. These rules provide
certainty for the entire Internet ecosystem and can do so
without curtailing investment. I welcome our witnesses and
thank each of you in advance for your important testimony.

Ms. Matsui. Thank you. And I thank the ranking member for
yielding me time. I am a strong supporter of a free and open
Internet because it is so central to the daily lives of my
constituents and all Americans. Strong net neutrality rules are
also critical for our economy, for the virtuous cycle of
innovation and investment that has spurred broadband deployment
and the development of Internet-based businesses in every
corner of this country. That is why I introduced legislation
with Senator Leahy to ban paid prioritization or so-called
Internet fast lanes. The FCC did the right thing earlier this
year by including a ban on paid prioritization in the net
neutrality rules. We know that allowing fast and slow lanes
online would harm both investment in edge providers and deter
broadband network investments. Net neutrality has allowed our
Internet economy to become the envy of the world. I hope we can
work together on bipartisan solutions that spur the kind of
investment we all want to see. Thank you.
And I thank the witnesses for being here today.
Thank you. And I yield back.
Mr. Walden. The gentlelady yields back the balance of her
time.
The chairman recognizes the chairman of the full committee,
Mr. Upton, from Michigan.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Few issues have consumed and divided this subcommittee
quite like net neutrality over the last couple of years. From
the early days of the dialogue, much of the thinking and the
conversation have evolved. We are no longer debating whether
there should be net neutrality rules but, instead, how to best
put them into place. However, there is little debate around the
fact that the FCC's Title II reclassification is the wrong way
to implement smart consumer protections for folks in Michigan
as well as across the country. So we are here to talk again
about these rules because they are not the solution that we
need. We need certainty so that companies can continue to plan
their business models for the years ahead. We need investment
so consumers can continue to receive the high quality,
innovative broadband services that we have come to rely on in
our everyday lives. And we need to return to the light-touch
regulatory world that has served the industry and consumers so
well over the last number of years. Recognizing that many feel
that strong net neutrality rules need to be put into place,
Chairman Walden, ChairmanThune, and I put together a discussion
draft earlier this year to protect consumers and encourage
robust investment and innovation at the same time. Instead of
waiting on another round of argument in the court right now, we
could have sustainable, enforceable, and reliable rules to
maintain the Internet that we know. That is not the case. And
we are here to talk about what the alternative means.
I yield the balance of my time to Marsha Blackburn.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Few issues have consumed and divided this subcommittee
quite like net neutrality over the past few years. From the
early days of the dialogue, much of the thinking and the
conversations have evolved. We are no longer debating whether
there should be net neutrality rules, but instead, how to best
put them into place. However, there is little debate around the
fact that the FCC's Title II reclassification is the wrong way
to implement smart consumer protections for folks in Michigan
and across the country.
We are here again to talk about these rules because they
are not the solution that we need. We need certainty, so
companies can continue to plan their business models for the
years ahead. We need investment, so consumers can continue to
receive the high-quality, innovative broadband services we have
come to rely on in our everyday lives. We need a return to the
light-touch regulatory world that has served the industry and
consumers so well over the years.
Recognizing that many feel that strong net neutrality rules
need to be put into place, Chairman Walden, Chairman Thune, and
I put forward our discussion draft earlier this year to protect
consumers and encourage robust investment and innovation at the
same time,. Instead of waiting on another round of arguments in
court right now, we could have sustainable, enforceable,
reliable rules to maintain the Internet we know. But that's not
the case, and we are here to talk about what the alternative
means.
This isn't our attempt to undermine net neutrality, rather,
it is to talk about what the realworld effects of an ill-
fitting regulatory scheme are: depressed investment, fewer
jobs, reduced innovation. Is this really the outcome that
advocates had in mind when they pushed for stronger net
neutrality rules? I don't think so, and that's why it is so
important to not lose sight of the fact that we can have our
cake and eat it to. We can have protections for Internet
consumers and a vibrant investment environment--just not under
Title II. While net neutrality was supposed to protect
consumers, Title II may be having the opposite effect, and that
means nobody wins.

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank our witnesses for being here. As Chairman
Upton just said, this is a discussion that we have had and that
we are continuing to have and there is good reason for
continuing this. We are looking at what are the expected costs
to the system of putting in these net neutrality rules. Now, we
all know that Progressive Policy Institute had done an
estimate. And they said: Well, it will be an $11 billion cost
to new fees and taxes that you are going to see. Free Press had
estimated that it was going to be about $4 billion in new
costs. Well, no one knows exactly where that is going to shake
out.
But they do know this: More Government control and more
reclassification under Title II is going to mean a couple of
things. One is less innovation. Another is less investment by
the companies that could be investing in expansion of broadband
and Internet services. And what that brings to the marketplace
is less certainty whether you are a company that is investing,
whether you are a consumer that is trying to get broadband
services into your community. The Title II power grab is
something that certainly deserves our attention. It is
counterproductive to a free market system.
And, Mr. Chairman, I will yield the balance of my time to
any member who is seeking it.
Mr. Walden. Any members on the Republican side seeking
comments and opening statements? Doesn't appear to be.
Mrs. Blackburn. I yield back.
Mr. Walden. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair recognizes the ranking member of the full
committee, the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Pallone.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Walden and Ranking Member
Eshoo, for holding this hearing.
As I have said many times, I remain a strong supporter of
net neutrality, and I believe that the rules the FCC adopted
have already benefited consumers. And I also believe time will
prove that they benefit the economy as well. We already know
that many of the scariest predications about the devastation
that the FCC's rules would bring have proved to be false. For
instance, days before the FCC's vote. At least one analyst
downgraded cable stocks due in part to concerns over the Title
II rules. A few months later, the fire alarm was called off and
the stocks were upgraded. This makes sense since the value of
networks appears to be on the rise. The Charter/Time Warner
Cable merger announced a few months after the FCC adopted its
rules is valued at $55 billion. That is a nearly $10 billion
increase from what Comcast was willing to pay a year earlier.
And just a couple of months ago, Altice announced it is paying
$17.7 billion for Cablevision.
For all these transactions, high-speed Internet service is
one of the most important parts of the deal. But perhaps one of
the strongest indicators is the spectrum auction the FCC
conducted earlier this year. AT&T spent $18 billion on
spectrum. And Verizon added another $10 billion. Those amounts
dwarf the amount that carriers spent in 2008 for the 700
megahertz auction. The auction is at least one indicator that
carriers are not afraid to invest in their networks.
But the truth is all these statistics miss the point. When
the FCC adopted its net neutrality rules earlier this year,
consumers won, innovation won, and the economy won. The value
of the network goes up for everyone when people are able to use
it the way that they want.
So, Mr. Chairman, again, thank you for holding this
hearing.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Thank you Chairman Walden and Ranking Member Eshoo for
holding this hearing today.
As I have said many times, I remain a strong supporter of
network neutrality. I believe that the rules the FCC adopted
have already benefited consumers, and I believe time will prove
that they benefit the economy as well.
We already know that many of the scariest predictions about
the devastation that the FCC's rules would bring have proved to
be false. For instance, days before the FCC's vote, at least
one analyst downgraded cable stocks due in part to concerns
over the Title II rules. A few months later the fire alarm was
called off and the stocks were upgraded.
This makes sense since the value of networks appear to be
on the rise. The Charter-Time Warner Cable merger--announced a
few months after the FCC adopted its rules--is valued at $55
billion. That's a nearly $10 billion increase from what Comcast
was willing to pay a year earlier. And just a couple of months
ago, Altice announced it is paying $17.7 billion for
Cablevision. For all of these transactions, high-speed Internet
service is one of the most important parts of the deal.
But perhaps one of the strongest indicators is the spectrum
auction the FCC conducted earlier this year. AT&T spent $18
billion on spectrum and Verizon added another $10 billion.
Those amounts dwarf the amounts the carriers spent in 2008 for
the 700 MHz auction. The auction is at least one indicator that
carriers are not afraid to invest in their networks.
But the truth is, all these statistics miss the point. When
the FCC adopted its net neutrality rules earlier this year,
consumers won. Innovation won. And the economy won. The value
of the network goes up for everyone when people are able to use
it the way they want.
Mr. Chairman, again thank you for holding the hearing. I
yield the balance of my time to Mr. Doyle and Mr. McNerney.

Mr. Pallone. I have a little over 3 minutes. I would like
to split it between Mr. Doyle and Mr. McNerney. So I yield to
Mr. Doyle.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Frank.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing.
And thank you to the witnesses for appearing before us
today.
The FCC took historic action this year after nearly 4
million Americans called for strong network neutrality rules.
The order recognized that the Internet constitutes a virtuous
cycle of investment and innovation. We are here today only
talking about ISP investment, when we really need to be talking
about the whole cycle.
Mr. Chairman, I would have appreciated seeing witnesses
representing edge providers, venture capitalists to see how
they see the order and their investment plans. Since the order
was released, Uber has made major investments in Pittsburgh
with a new R&D facility and is planning to raise another
billion dollars of capital. To my mind, the order is driving
innovation, not stifling it.
And I will yield back to the Chair.
Mr. Pallone. I yield the balance of my time to Mr.
McNerney.
Mr. McNerney. I thank the ranking member for yielding. And
I thank the chairman for holding the hearing here this morning.
This year, the FCC took an historic step to protect the
Internet as we know it. Reliable broadband access has been and
will remain essential for the future of commerce, education,
and innovation in this country. As an engineer and as someone
who worked in the private sector for 2 decades, I recognize the
need for investors and companies to make sound investments. But
we also have seen how the market pushes individuals and
companies to innovate, leading to new technologies and benefits
the customers and consumers. And that makes the investments
worthwhile.
The Internet has been a hotbed of economic growth and
forward-thinking ideas. And we have seen great progress to
date. The FCC's net neutrality rule will keep us moving
forward, empowering consumers and businesses as technologies
change and advance, benefiting the economy as a whole.
I look forward to hearing the witnesses today on the
economic impacts of an open Internet.
And I yield back.
Mr. Pallone. I don't think any other Member wants the time.
So I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. The gentleman yields back the balance of his
time. All opening statements are concluded. We will now go to
our panel of expert witnesses. And we will start with Dr.
Michael Mandel, the chief economic strategist for the
Progressive Policy Institute.
Dr. Mandel, thank you for being here. We look forward to
your testimony here, sir.

STATEMENTS OF MICHAEL MANDEL, PH.D., CHIEF ECONOMIC STRATEGIST,
PROGRESSIVE POLICY INSTITUTE; NICHOLAS ECONOMIDES, PH.D.,
PROFESSOR OF ECONOMICS, STERN SCHOOL OF BUSINESS, NEW YORK
UNIVERSITY; ROBERT J. SHAPIRO, PH.D., CO-FOUNDER AND CHAIRMAN,
SONECON, LLC; AND FRANK LOUTHAN, MANAGING DIRECTOR, EQUITY
RESEARCH, RAYMOND JAMES FINANCIAL

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL MANDEL

Dr. Mandel. Thank you very much.
Chairman Walden, Ranking Member Eshoo, and distinguished
members of the subcommittee, my name is Michael Mandel. And I
am chief economic strategist at the Progressive Policy
Institute. I am honored to testify on the investment impact of
common carrier regulation of the Internet. I want to note that
I have been writing about the tech-driven new economy since the
mid 1990s. More recently, I have written a series of papers on
the job impact of the app economy globally, which is enormous.
I am going to briefly make three points here.
First, each year PPI systematically analyzes the financial
statements of large U.S.-based companies. Our goal is to
estimate how much each company actually invests in equipment,
billings, and software in the United States. As part of this
project, we publish an annual list of the top 25 investment
heros, companies that are the leaders in capital spending in
this country. Our most recent list came out in September 2015
based on 2014 financial data. From our perspective, domestic
business investment is an essential part of any progressive
policy for generating higher wages and good middle class jobs.
Unfortunately, domestic investment is still well below its
long-term trend more than 6 years after the official end of the
Great Recession. This investment drought is a key reason for
weak productivity growth and weak real wage gains. Jason
Furman, head of the White House Council of Economic Advisers,
who recently spoke at a PPI event, has called the decline in
productivity growth an investment-driven slow down. However,
our analysis has shown that the telecomm, cable, broadband
sector has been one of the bright spots for domestic
investment. The two top companies investing in the U.S. in 2014
were AT&T and Verizon, as they have been in all 4 years that we
have done this project. Comcast and Time Warner are on our list
as well. All told, the telecom cable sector was the largest
single sector on our investment heroes list, accounting for
almost $50 billion in capital spending in 2014. Needless to
say, these figures pre-date the FCC's imposition of Title II.
Second, this bountiful investment added enough wired and
wireless capacity to hold down consumer bills despite the
soaring demand for data. In a forthcoming paper, I find that
communication services, all wired, wireless, cable, and
satellite, absorb roughly 2.9 percent of consumer spending in
2014. That is up just slightly from 2.7 percent in 2000. In
other words, telecom, cable, broadband investment, under the
previous light-touch regulatory regime, appears to have created
enough capacity to absorb the astounding increase in data use
by consumers without a significant increase in share of
spending going for communication services.
Finally, what about the future of telecom, cable, broadband
investment under common carrier regulation? You know, studies
such as Hassett and Shapiro, 2015, conclude that Title II will
likely have significant adverse effects on future investment in
the Internet. To additionally support this conclusion, I would
like to raise the controversial example of health care. I
strongly favor the extension of healthcare coverage stemming
from the Affordable Care Act. In fact, I regularly cite
healthcare reform as one of the great achievements of the Obama
administration.
However, let's acknowledge that health care has been the
most regulated industry in the economy for decades, both to
protect consumers and to hold down costs. For example, a
Federal law enacted in 1974 required that all major healthcare
capital investments had to get approved at the State level. The
goal then was to eliminate duplication. That law is no longer
on the books. But about 35 States still require certificates of
need for some kinds of healthcare investments. Because of
regulations such as these, health care has consistently
suffered from an investment gap relative to the rest of the
economy. From 1990 to 2014, real investment per worker in
health care rose by 39 percent, compared to 103 percent gain in
real nonresidential investment per worker in the entire private
sector. Economic theory tells us that industries with less
investment will have slower productivity growth and typically
rising costs. And that is exactly what we see in health care.
Now, broadband providers are not hospitals. However, the
application of common carrier regulation to broadband is one
large step towards the all-encompassing regulatory environment
that has historically described health care. The degree to
which common carrier regulation reduces investment and involves
the FCC in micromanaging the industry, broadband consumers may
find themselves with the same rising costs that has beleaguered
healthcare consumers for decades. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Mandel follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. Thank you, Dr. Mandel.
We will go to Dr. Nicholas Economides, professor of
economics, Stern School of Business, New York University. We
welcome you. Thanks for being here. Please go ahead.

STATEMENT OF NICHOLAS ECONOMIDES

Dr. Economides. Chairman Walden, Ranking Member Eshoo,
esteemed Congressmen and Congresswomen, and ladies and
gentlemen, I am a professor of economics at the Stern School of
Business at NYU. And my name is Nicholas Economides. Thank you
very much for inviting me to discuss the issue of network
neutrality. In assessing the impact of network neutrality, we
should look at the total benefit to three groups: Consumers;
applications and content companies, such as Google; and
Internet service providers, ISPs, such as, for example, AT&T.
Looking at only one group would lead us to the wrong
conclusions. Similarly, examining only investment is incorrect
and misleading.
Instead, we should look at the total benefit for all three
groups. Network neutrality has created tremendous benefits for
companies at the edge of the network. It has facilitated
innovation resulting in big successes, such as Google and
Skype, as well as a myriad of smaller innovative companies that
are the engine of growth for the United States economy. Network
neutrality has contributed significantly to the fast and
vigorous growth of the high-technology sector in the United
States. Departures from network neutrality would not be in the
public interest and would create significant social welfare
losses. Consider the possibility of paid prioritization, where
a company, for example, Yahoo, would pay an ISP, for example,
Verizon, to get its content--here search results--delivered
first. Then Yahoo results would arrive first. Google results
would be delayed. This would give a huge boost to Yahoo for
which Yahoo would pay a lot to the ISP. Using this method, the
ISP can choose the winner in the search market and, similarly,
the winner in many other markets. This is highly undesirable.
It would kill innovation, as small, new, innovative companies
would be unable to pay the ISP. What we want instead is a level
playing field for competition. And network neutrality
guarantees that. I want to focus now on the investment issue.
It has been proposed that ISPs invested less in the first
two quarters of 2015 because of the new regulatory rule. I
believe this proposition is incorrect. Why? First, economic
models are divided on whether an ISP will invest more or less
under network neutrality. The models do not tell us that the
ISP will invest less under network neutrality.
Second, investment decisions follow a complex and long-
term, multiyear path. Even with an upward trend, investment
does not increase every quarter. If we observe the decrease in
the quarter, it would not necessarily be from the impact of
regulation. And there have been big fluctuations in investment
in the past. In particular, in quarters 1 and 2 of 2015, almost
all the change in investment came from the investment of a
single company, AT&T. AT&T had advised as early as 2012,
November 2012, long before the passage of the FCC regulation,
that its investment will peak in 2014. In November 2014, it
announced that its investment in 2015 would be at least 16
percent lower than in 2014. Then, in August of 2015, Barron's
reported that AT&T said that it now expected that its 2015
investment would be the same as 2014, and it will just make the
difference--for the shortfall of the first two quarters, it
would make the difference in the remaining two quarters of
2015. So there is no reason for concern.
Third, the appeals process in the courts has not ended.
And, therefore, the final word on the regulation has not been
written. It does not make sense to change the long-run
investment plans of a company already.
Fourth, even if one believes that the ISPs would decrease
their investment as a result of the regulation, the period of
observation between the time of the passage of the regulation
at the end of February and the end of quarters 1 and 2 is too
short to be able to make any meaningful inferences. It is
incorrect to draw the conclusion that the FCC regulation has
either an adverse or a positive impact on investment based on
just observing two quarters of investment.
Fifth, a theory has been proposed that investment is lower
because this regulation increased uncertainty. However, I
believe that the network neutrality regulation, in fact,
decreased uncertainty by clarifying the rules of competition.
In conclusion, I believe that network neutrality results in
very significant benefits to the Internet ecosystem. Network
neutrality's impacts should be assessed at the whole ecosystem,
not just on ISPs and not just on ISPs' investment. And I have
outlined a number of reasons why we should not be concerned
about short-term investment patterns. It seems very unlikely
that these investment patterns are the effects of the network
neutrality rule. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Economides follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. Thank you, Doctor, we appreciate your testimony
and your learned comments.
We will now go to Dr. Robert Shapiro, the co-founder and
chairman of Sonecon, LLC.
Dr. Shapiro, thank you for being here. We look forward to
your comments.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT SHAPIRO

Dr. Shapiro. Thank you, Chairman, and members of the
subcommittee. I appreciate the opportunity to discuss how the
FCC's recent decision to apply Title II regulation to Internet
service providers will affect their investments in Internet
infrastructure. I am Dr. Robert Shapiro. I am on the faculty of
the McDonough School of Business at Georgetown; chairman of the
advisory firm Sonecon; and former Under Secretary of Commerce
for Economic Affairs under Bill Clinton. You have my complete
CV.
On this matter, I conducted my analysis with a co-author,
Dr. Kevin Hassett, director of economic studies at the American
Enterprise Institute. And our study was published by the
McDonough School of Business at Georgetown. I append a copy of
the study to the testimony. The views I express are solely my
own.
The question we asked about how Title II regulation could
affect investments by ISPs and Internet infrastructure is a
subset of a more general issue which economists have pursued
for decades: namely, how regulation affects investment and
fixed capital. Economists have long recognized that, under some
conditions, regulation can increase investment in social
welfare. For example, when regulation forces firms that produce
negative externalities, such as pollution, to invest in ways to
reduce it. In these cases, the goal is to promote more optimal
levels of investment in the presence of a market failure.
Without such market failures, economists have found that
regulation usually reduces investment.
In assessing whether that will happen here, we cannot
proceed directly because it hasn't happened yet. However, my
recent study explored how to approach new regulatory issues
using analogous issues and conditions to assess the direction
and the scale of their effects. In this case, the FCC's
decision reversed its longstanding view of ISPs as information
providers not subject to Title II, an approach that had let the
marketplace drive the development of a range of technologies to
deploy broadband. The result was rapidly rising levels of
investment across cable, telephone, and other types of
broadband service providers. Without Title II regulation,
broadband uptake had proceeded faster than any other technology
on record, faster than telephone, faster than television,
faster than computers, faster than cell phones. Further, the
National Economic Councilhas reported that 94 percent of U.S.
households have access to terrestrial broadband service and the
other 6 percent have access to satellite-based broadband.
Title II regulation in order to ensure universal access to
broadband is a solution in search of a problem. The FCC also
has long barred ISPs from discriminating against any legal
content, guaranteeing consumers access to any lawful content,
as well as the rights to run any lawful applications, and
connect to any lawful device. In this regard, Title II
regulation to ensure that all content providers have access to
high-speed, large-capacity technologies at market prices is
also a solution in search of a problem.
It also is clear that Title II regulation of ISPs falls in
the class of policies that increase costs and regulatory
hurdles. For example, if Title II here entails a universal
service program analogous to that applied to telephony under
Title II, it would mean significant new fees. And the fees
needed to finance it would likely increase costs I believe
enough to depress the uptake of broadband by more households
than would benefit. But we don't know if that will occur
because this is still subject to a very long and extended
regulatory and judicial process.
Even larger costs, however, involve the diversion of
resources and strategic attention by Internet companies from
their basic business challenges and the investments required to
meet those challenges, rather shifting to how best to
accommodate and comply with Title II. These costs could affect
any Internet company with transmission capacity, not just the
Internet service providers, including online video services,
Web search advertising services, and cloud computing services.
This reasoning leads us to conclude that Title II would
negativity affect ISP investment. The question is, by how much?
One analogy involves Title II regulation and telephony
investments. Economists who examined the period of 1996 to
2008, when telecom companies--but not cable companies--were
subject to Title II, found that cable capital expenditures grew
7.5 percent per year over those years versus 3.2 percent by the
telecom companies. We also can compare Internet capital
spending rates here and in leading European nations subject to
title-2-like regulation. OEC data show that in 2012, those
capital spending rates in the United States were about double
those in Europe.
Again, we cannot estimate the long-term effects yet until
this regime is in place. This is designed to give us a sense of
the dimensions of those effects. And it suggests the dimensions
are very substantial and that the direction is negative. Some
of these effects may be felt already because the character of
the proposed Title II regulation remains uncertain. The notion
that, the announcement that Title II creates certainty ignores
the entire--the nature of the regulatory process, and the
nature of the litigation process in response to that.
We certainly know, economists certainly know that
uncertainty adversely affects investment. One analyst reports
that compared to the first half of 2014, capital expenditures
by all wireline ISPs fell 12 percent in the first half of 2015,
and capital expenditures by wireline and wireless ISPs fell 8
percent. ISP capital expenditures, relative to the prior year,
had fallen only twice before, following the dot-com meltdown
and recession in 2001; and in 2009, during and after the Great
Recession. No such conditions held in the first half of 2014.
The only change was the FCC's order to regulate ISPs under
Title II.
The extent to which that order and the uncertainty effects
affected, drove these declines is still unknown. And anyone who
claims that they know it is talking through their hat, frankly.
But what we do know, we have established there is a substantial
effect that we are already seeing. And the direction of that
effect is negative. It is consistent with a long economic
literature on the impact of uncertainty on fixed investments.
That is particularly true in the case of what are called
irreversible investments, which are fixed investments which
cannot be resold. And that happens to characterize much of the
investment by ISPs. I conclude, therefore, that Title II
regulation of ISPs is very likely to increase costs and reduce
investment in Internet infrastructure and likely by very
substantial amounts. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Shapiro follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Additional information submitted by Mr. Shapiro is
available at  http://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF16/20151027/
104110/HHRG-114-IF16-Wstate-ShapiroR-20151027-SD002.pdf.]
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Dr. Shapiro.
Our final witness, Mr. Frank Louthan--thank you for being
here--managing director, Equity Research, Raymond James
Financial.
Mr. Louthan, thank you. And we look forward to your
comments.

STATEMENT OF FRANK LOUTHAN

Mr. Louthan. Thank you, Chairman Walden, Ranking Member
Eshoo, and members of the subcommittee. I appreciate you asking
me to be here today. My name is Frank Louthan. I am a managing
director at Raymond James covering the telecom, cable, and data
center industries. I analyze companies that provide voice,
data, Internet, and pay TV services for the vast majority of
American consumers, businesses, and Government institutions,
both on a wireline and wireless platforms, as well as companies
that transport, store, and enable the majority of the world's
Internet traffic.
In general, we believe that the move by the FCC to impose
Title II regulation on the Internet is a mistake that
ultimately harms consumers, restricts investment, and adds
unnecessary costs to the industry. When you hear me discuss
investment, you should really think of it as the means by which
the industry offers service to consumers, not selfish
moneymaking schemes for wealthy people. The industry is about
providing essential services to individuals, businesses, and
Government, which takes capital to make it a reality. The
overhang from Title II will be a drag on this investment, lower
investment returns, all of which will result in less telecom
deployment, consumer choice over time, in spite of well-meaning
intentions to the contrary. Thus, regulation, in an effort to
prevent problems that could occur instead of addressing actual
consumer harms that have occurred, will restrict the industry's
ability to expand by diminishing returns in attractiveness to
capital.
As I look at the industry from an investment perspective or
a capital required to enable essential services perspective, I
focus on the amount of capital invested, the rate of return on
that capital. The main objectives of my clients, who represent
large mutual funds, pension funds, investment firms, and other
investment institutions, is to get an adequate risk-adjusted
rate of return on their capital. Many of these investors are
individuals with modest 401(k) and pension assets looking for
better growth in their savings. The investment is not about
someone's bank account clipping better interest income, but
rather it provides the ability for companies I follow to
provide essential services that produce the valuable public
policy goals, the near ubiquitous voice service in the last
century, and almost universal broadband availability now. All
citizens in this country benefit from the money invested and
reinvested in the industry, probably more so than the investors
that risked their capital. The telecom industry currently
spends $60 billion to $65 billion in annual and capital
expenditures. While this is often referred to as investment,
the vast majority of this is simply what it table stakes to
keep the business going but with only small amounts of this for
expansion and new investment. This limited new investment is
not surprising since the industry as a whole has earned a
modest 4.9 percent return on capital over the last 3 years and
the long-term returns are not much better. Regulation has
played a significant role in this low investment return. And
less regulation would improve the returns to your constituents'
401(k)s and the telecom choices in your district. More
regulation under Title II will have the opposite effect and
threaten the availability of affordable capital needed to
reinvest to keep the business going, let alone expand broadband
and data services. I cannot argue that the state of Title II
with the heavy forbearance is not, for the moment, impacting
industry any worse than the opportunity costs that have faced
the industry under the prior FCC net neutrality orders. But the
rate of change in the telecom industry is very, very slow.
Network privacy, pole attachments, and interconnection
obligations are all real concerns that are just starting to
come into the marketplace after the Title II regulation, and
they are beginning to add cost.
The deceiving part is that everyone is really waiting on
the court case to see what the real rules are. But don't
mistake this as an endorsement for the current status quo.
Similar levels of capital spending each year do not mean that
all is well. I am also concerned that today's heavy forbearance
will change in the future. This is where the just and
reasonable standard under the future Commissions could mean
something different and costly for the industry. Price
regulation and required resale of facilities are good examples
of future risks. With approximately 10 major wireline ISPs and
6 national and regional wireless providers, consumers have a
diversity of Internet access to judge discriminatory behavior
for themselves, the prevention of which was the original intent
of the open Internet order to begin with.
And I would ask, where have we seen increased access to
capital and higher levels of investment follow once regulation
has been put into place? I would argue we see the opposite. I
cannot imagine growing industries lobbying Congress to impose
regulation on them so they can better raise capital and invest.
Ultimately, I believe the FCC is attempting to use a large,
blunt instrument to address unfounded fears when a swift
surgical procedure in the form of targeted legislation would be
a better choice. I would argue members of this committee should
look to a legislative solution that will not limit investment
choice and/or product development for consumers.
So, from my perspective, Title II is restricting overall
investment and returns; it is beginning to slow down and
overcomplicate an industry in unnecessary ways; and has yet to
see the full effect while the court case is pending. We do not
believe the imposition of Title II regulation will make the
industry as attractive for capital as it has been in the past.
Less investment will eventually result in degrading consumer
experience and fewer choices in the market. I would encourage
members of this committee to seek out a simple legislative
solution to ensure the main goals of Title II proceeding rather
than allow the current blunt force approach to have unattended
consequences that degrade one of the best tech stories in the
U.S. ever--the Internet.
Lastly, I don't have any shares of any of the companies
that we would cover. And we have provided disclosures of any
business relationships my firm may have. I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Louthan follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Louthan. We appreciate your
testimony, as well as that of your colleagues on the panel.
I will start off with questions. And I wanted to go to Dr.
Shapiro first because in your testimony, in additional data,
you indicate that Title II regulation of ISPs will increase
cost, reduce investments. You say reviewing the available
evidence, we estimate the scale of this effect could range from
5.5 percent to 20.8 percent per year. Can you translate that
for me into how many dollars we might not see invested in the
Internet that we would otherwise see?
Dr. Shapiro. Well, as Mr. Louthan just informed us, the
investment rates have averaged about $60 billion a year. And so
5 percent of that would be $3 billion. And 20 percent would be
$12 billion. So these are----
Mr. Walden. Per year?
Dr. Shapiro. Yes, per year. Let me say, that is what our
both models and analogies tell us are the range of the
dimensions. It could be substantially greater. It could be
somewhat less. What we know, again, from decades of economic
analysis of the impact of regulation on this particular kind of
fixed capital investment is that unless it is correcting a
market failure, unless there is something that is suppressing
investment, some distortion in the market that is suppressing
investment, the direction of the effect is negative--costs go
up, attention is diverted, and companies invest less--and that
the scale, particularly based on international comparisons and
the comparisons of telephony before and after Title II is
substantial.
Mr. Walden. Do you think that is part of why the Clinton
administration chose to go with a light-touch regulation as
opposed to Title II through the FCC?
Dr. Shapiro. I know that is why. And the fact of the matter
is that the Clinton administration was absolutely committed to
allowing the Internet to develop in its own way. This is a
sector driven by technological and organizational innovation.
And regulation constricts that.
Mr. Walden. And I just want to point out $3 billion would
be on the low end, you estimate, that we could lose per year in
the U.S.
Dr. Shapiro. Yes.
Mr. Walden. And $12 billion on the upper end. I think the
stimulus spending for Internet was something like $7 billion
that Congress passed. I did not support that. But these are
substantial numbers.
Dr. Shapiro. Right. Let me say that the Obama
administration also supported the view of ISPs as information
providers not subject to Title II regulation for several years
before reversing itself.
Mr. Walden. Yes, it did.
Dr. Shapiro. So this has been a consensus view across both
parties.
Mr. Walden. Up to a certain point. And then Obama, Mr.
President, decided to go a different direction. I want to
differentiate too between the open order and net neutrality
discussion and Title II as common carrier regulation.
And Dr. Shapiro, Mr. Louthan, anybody else on the panel,
there is a pretty distinct difference between net neutrality,
which we proffered a legislative product on, and Title II,
right? And isn't there uncertainty in the marketplace when it
comes to the issue of how much the FCC can forbear against
existing statute and get away with it in courts and just the
uncertainty and the rule structure and litigation? I have heard
from Dr. Economides that there is, this actually gave
certainty. I am hearing from you it didn't give certainty. Dr.
Shapiro? Mr. Louthan?
Mr. Louthan. My argument is that it brought a lot of
clarity to the industry. It absolutely clarified that it is a
less attractive place to investment. I mean, that was what
everyone was sort of waiting for. And right now, that is
current the status quo. Everyone assumed that, if you look at
the way Title II is now with the heavy forbearance, it is not
that different than under net neutrality. What you can see,
what I would argue, the $60 billion, $65 billion they are
spending already reflects a depression in potential investment
in the sector. That is how much the investors and my clients
are willing to put up with these guys investing.
Mr. Walden. And you know that from discussions you are
having with your own clients, the investors?
Mr. Louthan. Yes. The discussions I would have with
investors going into Title II basically would say, well, the
sector is uninvestable, which means they are not willing to
risk capital in the investment if the Title II regulations
are----
Mr. Walden. Because they don't see enough return or there
is more uncertainty?
Mr. Louthan. Because the lack of clarity on exactly how the
forbearance was going to play out. And then going forward, even
if today we say they are going to implement these few things,
these other 200 rules they are going to forbear from, what is
to say that doesn't change in the future? That potential risk
in the future, which could be very detrimental--price
regulation and resale of facilities--limits the amount they are
going to risk.
Mr. Walden. So do you think we would be better off, then,
to go with a statutory framework on net neutrality, as some of
us have proposed, as opposed to letting this play itself out
under Title II?
Mr. Louthan. Absolutely. That would bring a lot of clarity,
and that would open up a lot more investment back into the
sector.
Mr. Walden. Dr. Shapiro?
Dr. Shapiro. Title II regulation was created in 1934 for a
monopoly telephone system. It then developed over many decades
of regulatory responses as conditions changed. That is why the
regulatory process, no matter what is said today about the
particular dimensions of forbearance, is not dependable with
respect to certainty.
Mr. Walden. Thank you. My time has expired. I am going to
turn now to the ranking member from California, Ms. Eshoo.
Ms. Eshoo. For a different point of view. I am having
trouble discerning from at least some of the witnesses between
investments that have been made since the FCC came out with its
net neutrality rules and what your opinion is. So there is a
lot of fog in between because there are facts in terms of
earnings of the major companies. And they are quite robust.
And going first to Mr. Louthan, I think that, you know, the
whole issue--or maybe Dr. Shapiro, in your testimony, you cite
the data from Hal Singer that suggests capital expenditures for
wireline and wireless ISPs fell between the first half of 2014
and the first half of 2015. And, yet, Professor Economides has
told us that this decline in capital expenditures is due almost
entire to one company, a decline which this company predicted
as far back as 2012.
And also I think you all need to take into consideration
that mobile voice has operated under Title II for almost 20
years. So how do you reconcile these?
Mr. Louthan, I know that you are an analyst, a Wall Street
analyst. And your analysis to me sounded extraordinarily dim.
And, yet, that analysis doesn't seem to have had an effect
relative to shareholders or the companies and what they have
produced in the last, in the last quarter since the FCC took
its step. And to suggest that legislation brings about great
stability, I would question that, as a Member of Congress. So
why don't we go with Dr. Shapiro first and then Dr. Economides,
and then Mr. Louthan.
Dr. Shapiro. Sure. Look, there are many ways to interpret
these data.
Ms. Eshoo. Uh-huh.
Dr. Shapiro. Yes, for example, AT&T did announce that when
a certain investment project was over, they would recur to
historic levels of investment.
Ms. Eshoo. Give me an 18-carat example, if you will, of
where investment since the FCC came out with what they came out
with, where essentially the sky is falling in or a dark pattern
has emerged since then that this is so off the charts that
America and shareholders beware across the whole ecosystem.
Where is it?
Dr. Shapiro. What I have said is that economists cannot say
at this point----
Ms. Eshoo. OK. That is a good answer.
Dr. Shapiro [continuing]. With using direct data because
the data aren't in yet. What we can say----
Ms. Eshoo. What is in, though? What is in?
Dr. Shapiro. What is in, according to the way I read those
data, show a decline which I attribute to uncertainty. Now, the
argument about this, for example, on AT&T----
Ms. Eshoo. I only have 1 \1/2\ minutes left. So, Mr.
Louthan?
Mr. Louthan. I think I can summarize this. Net neutrality
provisions were in place. Title II comes in, which looks very
much like the current net neutrality today. It has the
potential to be a lot worse in my opinion. But today it looks
the same. So, as a result, the world the way it was and the
world the way it is now, and the carriers are not necessarily
changing in spending. I can give you a long, what happened with
AT&T was very specific circumstances for them for some--we can
talk about that later. But, in general, the industry is staying
the same. And then they are all assuming until the court case
is over, we really don't know how this is going to play out.
And we are assuming everything is going to stay the same for
the next 18 months until the court case is over. At that point,
then we are going to find out which way it goes in the courts.
And at that point, we will probably see a slow----
Ms. Eshoo. Well, you are making projections about what you
think is going to happen. But the case so far, from February to
now, does not--that is what I am looking for. I am looking for
something different.
Dr. Economides?
Dr. Economides. It is really true, we don't see evidence.
We don't see right now evidence of very significant reductions
or even significant reductions in investment. And AT&T itself
says that whatever lower investment they did in the first two
quarters, they will make it up in the next two quarters. So I
don't see an issue with that. Now, I think that the general
issue that Dr. Shapiro brings up, which is, well, regulation
necessarily reduces the returns on investment, that has to be
looked at more generally in the ecosystem of the Internet
because if we just reward telephone companies much more but it
kills innovation in the whole other sector, then we are doomed.
We are doing the wrong thing.
Mr. Walden. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you very much.
Mr. Walden. The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from
Tennessee, Mrs. Blackburn.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Louthan, I want to come to you and go back to your
testimony on page 3 of your testimony, where you said we are
seeing the beginnings of Title II adding cost to the industry
as negotiations between carriers are taking longer, and it
remains unclear what will and will not be applied or be allowed
and which parts of Title II regulations do and do not apply.
OK, network privacy, pole attachments, and interconnection
obligations are all examples of real concerns in the
marketplace now. And I can tell you they are. And I agree with
you on that. May 15, the FCC issued an enforcement advisory
that broadband providers should take, and I am quoting,
``reasonable and good faith steps to protect consumer
privacy.'' I was recently joined by 14 other members of the
subcommittee in sending a letter to Chairman Wheeler
questioning the FCC's potential entry as a privacy regulator in
the online space. The FTC has traditionally been our
Government's sole online privacy regulator. So now what we have
is confusion and uncertainty. So I would like for you to
elaborate, if you will please, on how the FCC becoming a
privacy regulator and trying to preempt the FTC may lead to
marketplace uncertainty and impact the investments of the ISPs.
Mr. Louthan. Well, in general, what, this complicates
negotiations. So if two carriers have interconnection
agreements and they are looking at what--they knew what the
rules were before. They knew what they were allowed to do. But
now under Title II, if you suddenly have additional regulatory
burdens or like the network privacy issue, are you allowed to
collect data? Are you not allowed to collect data? Who is going
to make those decisions? Well, before, we knew. And well, wait
a minute, if we are interconnecting with you, do you have all
the right approvals to do this? It has become very unclear. So
I have spoken with most of the companies that I follow. And
they all say that they are having negotiations, which normally
they would have expected to, for interconnection agreements and
other things that the carriers all have to rely on each other
for, these negotiations are taking longer than they were in the
past. And they are potentially adding cost. And in some cases,
they are signing agreements that they are not really sure if
they are not going to come out later and find out that they are
not legal.
And, of course, this could all change. And that is the
biggest fear is that you have a tremendous amount of other
regulation under Title II that right now everyone is saying we
don't need to forbear. But what if someone comes later and
says, ``you know what, you can't forbear from that, you have to
enforce this new regulation, you must put this sort of price
regulation''? That is a big concern. And that completely
changes the dynamic of the Internet, the way we have seen it
for many, many years, particularly the privacy issues and being
able to gather network data. That is basically Google's entire
business model. I don't think that is what the intention is.
But that is the potential result of some of this Title II
regulation.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you. I appreciate that.
Mr. Shapiro, I want to come to you for a minute. I have a
lot of rural area in my district. I have 19 counties in
Tennessee. So broadband expansion and the investment for that
broadband expansion is something that is a topic of discussion.
You can't get the education system you want or access that you
want or the economic development that you want unless you are
going to have that high-speed Internet.
And so we look at this, and I was interested in your
comments about Title II regulation of the ISPs would increase
their cost and is going to reduce their investment and the
impact that such regulation and the corresponding higher costs
there are going to be there are going to have on the quality of
broadband service and especially in these less populated areas.
And so speaking to someone that represents rural America and
saying these are the warning signs, what would you highlight?
Because in my district, this is what people are looking for.
They need this high-speed Internet. And they are incredibly
frustrated right now with some of the carriers that are not
living up to promises made.
Dr. Shapiro. Right. Well, I think everybody has complaints
about the providers of services which have become so vital to
us. We expect the service to be 100 percent all the time. We
depend on it so vitally. Having said that, the fact is that as
the National Economic Council has reported, without this kind
of regulation, broadband access is available for 94 percent of
all the households in this country. The buildout of broadband
capacity and the uptake of broadband service has proceeded
faster than any other technology we have ever seen: faster than
telephone service, faster than television, faster than
computers, faster than dial-up. So the model of innovation and
competition has been very successful.
Having said that, there are 6 percent of remote households
who don't have access. And we need to address that. But, again,
that is a very specific problem. And if we address it in a way
which increases the costs for everyone else, for example,
through a universal service fee--and we have experience of this
with telephone. It is not to say universal service isn't
important. It is to say that this particular mechanism if
applied to the Internet would likely increase costs
sufficiently so that the reduction in uptake by people who
cannot afford the increased costs would more than
counterbalance the increase in access by those who formerly
didn't have it. In this case, it is the wrong solution. The
problem exists, but it is the wrong solution.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, I yield back.
Mr. Walden. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Pallone.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support strong net
neutrality rules because they will protect consumers, and
consumers now have guaranteed access to the content that they
want without intervention from the provider.
My questions are for Dr. Economides. Can you please
elaborate on the other benefits that these rules will provide
the consumer?
Dr. Economides. Yes. The network neutrality rules have
allowed the Internet to grow. It allowed companies to innovate
at the edge of the network with great examples such as Google
and Skype. They created a vigorous growth in the high-
technology sector in the United States, which helps everybody
and, of course, helps the consumers. It gives them choice. And
network neutrality has created an equal playing field. It
allows innovative companies that are competent and have good
products to make it, to be there.
I am afraid that if we start violating network neutrality,
then the innovation will dwindle. It won't be easy for small
companies. It wouldn't be a matter of Google, but it will be
the matter of the new Google, a new company, a small company
will not be able to pay the fees to the ISPs that are going to
be levied. And we are going to see a slowdown of innovation.
And, really, innovation the one of the few things we have going
well in this country. It is very important to preserve it, to
expand it, to make it very, very, very important--to grow it.
Mr. Pallone. Well, thank you. You mentioned small
businesses, and one of the reasons I support net--strong net
neutrality is because I want to ensure that small businesses
have an equal playing field. So, Doctor, could you tell us
again, how will the net neutrality rules benefit small
businesses in particular?
Dr. Economides. Well, if I have a small business and
innovative company and I want to access the Web, right now I
can do it without having a special contract with the network
operator or the ISP. I can just go and post my news or my
whatever it is, trying to get customers through the Internet.
And I don't have to have any special relationship with the ISP.
If we abolish network neutrality, we allow the ISP to have
special relationships with the clients, to have special
relationships with anybody who has content out there. And the
big companies that have the money and the ability to pay the
ISPs are going to squeeze out the smaller companies, and that
is going to be a serious problem in the area of innovation,
where it creates a lot of growth, but it will be a problem also
in small companies across the board who do not have the ability
to pay.
Mr. Pallone. All right, thanks. You know, with all of these
great benefits, I am troubled by the assertions from critics of
the rules that allege that the FCC net neutrality or even
healthcare regulations will harm investment, given that there
is very little data that proves that point.
So, Doctor, you have provide at least five different
reasons why it is incorrect to assume there is a systematic
decrease in investment based merely on a comparison of two data
points. Can you elaborate why you believe this is to be the
case?
Dr. Economides. Well, sure. First of all, it seems like
some people believe automatically, without really proof, that
the economic models would say that, under net neutrality, they
would be less investment. And that is not really true. I have
written models myself, but I also quote in my written
submission models of others that say that investment might go
up in net neutrality or might go down. So there is no clear-cut
conclusion there.
Second, there is a multiyear path in investment for any
company. It won't change overnight just because the regulation
has changed. And that is why this discussion of looking at the
two quarters of 2015 and trying to draw conclusions from that
doesn't really make sense, besides the problem of AT&T really
having revised its story and now saying something different
than they were saying before and now saying they are going to
invest in 2015 as much in 2014. I think that it is too early to
say whether the rule is going to create more investment or less
investment. And the economic theory supports that. And I
believe that if you are looking at the whole Internet
ecosystem, there is no doubt that there is a huge benefit from
network neutrality, even if, even if it is true that there is
going to be less investment in one particular sector in the ISP
sector. Still, the huge amount of extra benefits and growth and
investment in the other sector in the rest of the ecosystem
would more than balance that.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you very much.
Mr. Walden. The gentleman's time is expired.
The Chair recognizes the vice chair of the subcommittee,
Mr. Latta, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. I appreciate the chairman for recognizing me at
this time.
And, Mr. Shapiro, if I could start my questions with you,
and following up with what the gentlelady from Tennessee was
speaking about her district and being rural and the question
about the broadband service in her area, and what it could
affect. I am one of the co-chairs of the Rural
Telecommunications Working Group, and I am also concerned about
the negative implications of Title II regulations on our rural
regions of our country. And to follow up with her line of
questions, do you think the reclassification will redirect
industry resources away from network upgrades and broadband
development, particularly in these rural communities, due to
the already high-cost nature of the regions?
Dr. Shapiro. Well, we know that, or we have every reason to
believe that the regulation will reduce investment. It will
reduce investment in particular in areas which produce
relatively lower returns. And that, yes, is likely to include a
lot of rural buildout. If I could make one other point. Dr.
Economides has described the great benefits of the development
of the Internet infrastructure and the Internet ecosystem. All
of that occurred without Title II regulation. It occurred under
the existing nondiscriminatory rules, which all of us support.
That is not the issue here. The issue here is a new regulatory
structure and what impact it would have. And I certainly agree
that all of those benefits are extensive and very important,
and as I said, all developed in the absence of Title II
regulation.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you.
And, Mr. Louthan, if I could go on to you. Again, as I
mentioned in my opening statement, I have got an Internet
service provider in my district that serves about 5,500
customers. And they are concerned about the reclassification.
The company is worried about losing temporary exemption to
enhance transparency rules for smaller providers because if the
exemption expires, they will incur additional legal costs and
network monitoring costs they cannot afford. This is one
example of how Title II regulations are creating unnecessary
burdens on these small businesses and, in turn, will have the
potential to negatively impact the economy and harm the
customers out there.
And I guess my first question to you is, Will stories like
this soon be all too common across the country?
Mr. Louthan. Absolutely. There are hundreds of small phone
companies and cable companies out there that don't have a
tremendous amount of access to capital. They work very hard to
provide services in districts such as yours, and they do a very
good job--generally, small family-run businesses. But the
additional regulatory burdens that are placed on them, where
they built a business model based on one set of rules, and now
when that changes and adds additional costs, that is going to
be very difficult for them. It is probably going to force many
of them to consider mergers and to be selling to larger
companies and to consolidate in order to remove costs because
they won't be--they will have a very difficult time operating.
Mr. Latta. Let me ask you, it is kind of interesting you
just mentioned because in a lot of our areas in our more rural
communities, it is tough to get folks out there that want to
make those investments. When you say that they might be forced
to either merge or have somebody else buy them out, you know,
how typical would that be, though, for somebody else to want to
come into an area that is being served by a very small
community that, you know, that they have to run things out for
long distances before they can get to certain folks in some
cases--if that is going to really happen all the time, or do
you think that some companies, larger companies are just going
to say, it is not worth even looking at or even buying them out
or merging with them?
Mr. Louthan. They definitely would say that. I would argue
that they would change their tune if they were different
business models. One of the things, such as additional sources
of revenue and one of the things that keeps being brought up is
paid prioritization. And, unfortunately, there is always an
assumption that if someone is paying for better access, someone
else--you must be taking that away from someone else. It
doesn't have to be a zero sum gain. But if there are additional
revenue opportunities and additional ways that companies could
make money, then they might be interested in investing. But,
unfortunately, a small 5,500-customer company may have a
difficult time finding a buyer. But I do think that people do
want to serve a lot of those small communities. There are
companies that would like to invest. But they need some more
clarity. And with the clarity the way it is now, I think that
is really going to restrict those kind of investments.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I see my time
is expired, and I yield back.
Mr. Walden. Thank you.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr.
Doyle.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I know this has been covered somewhat by some of my
colleagues, but I think it is important that this is clear on
the record. You know, a study by Hal Singer, a senior fellow at
the Progressive Policy Institute, was published recently in
Forbes this August which claimed that the major ISPs, that
their expenditures were down this year as a result of the FCC's
open Internet order. He cites AT&T specifically, saying that
their capex is down 29 percent for the first half of 2015 and
that there is an industry-wide average decline of 12 percent as
a result of the FCC's open Internet order.
Professor Economides, first, are these numbers accurate,
and second, are the changes in capex cited by Mr Singer related
to the FCC's order?
Dr. Economides. Well, depending on what numbers exactly we
look, I mean, it might be--they might not be exactly the same.
But the fact that the--that AT&T did have lower investment in
the first quarter of 2015, is, in fact, correct.
But I should say, and I have a diagram in my written
submission, where you can look clearly to see that these
investment numbers, both for AT&T and for the whole industry,
vary a lot quarter by quarter. So you cannot necessarily say,
oh, this is because of this particular rule or this particular
action. There is no such thing. They vary a lot.
The second thing is that we know now that AT&T had advised
early that its investment program is going to end in 2014. And,
therefore, necessarily, 2015 would be a bad year. But then
later on in August from an article in Barron's, from August 15,
we know that AT&T has reversed itself, and now it says, after
the passage of the act, that we are going to invest in 2015 as
much as we invested in 2014. And, in fact, we are going to
expand investment tremendously during the last two quarters of
2015 to be able to make up that shortfall of the first two
quarters.
Now, the more general question you are asking, could it be
because of the passage of the act, it really doesn't make
sense. These are long-term decisions of the companies. They
wouldn't really stop investing immediately, even if they wanted
to stop investing. They wouldn't do it immediately. It doesn't
really make any sense. It is not reasonable.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you. I want to talk a little bit about
interconnection, too, Professor Economides. In the past, you
yourself have argued that outside the traditional realm of
blocking, throttling, and prioritizing data traffic, that
interconnection agreements between networks play a critical
role in facilitating a competitive environment for digital
services. Certainly this past year, we saw that Netflix, a
direct competitor with many MPVD saw its service degraded in a
way that hurt consumers and competition as a result of
interconnection. Do you believe that the FCC acted rightly in
the order by including interconnection agreements as part of
the open Internet order?
Dr. Economides. Yes, I do. I believe that interconnection
is a crucial issue in telecommunications. It is a long-term
issue. It goes all the way back to the interconnection between
MCI and AT&T in the 1970s. It is a big long-term issue. It is
important that the regulatory rule sets up a level playing
field so that there will be no abuse of the power of any
Internet service provider because once you are a subscriber to
Comcast, let's say, you are not so easily flexible to change to
AT&T or Verizon or somebody else. So you are, to some extent,
captured by Comcast. So it is important that you don't become a
pawn at being sold to this company or the other. It is
important to have a playing field where companies can
interconnect in that way.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you.
And, just finally, Mr. Louthan, I appreciate in your
testimony that you have said that you have no business
relationships with any of the carriers that we are discussing
today. I appreciate that transparency.
Mr. Louthan. I didn't say that I didn't have them. I said
we disclosed if my firm does have any, there are in the
disclosure.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, and I appreciate it because
transparency has been a big topic of conversation in our
subcommittee this year, whether it is ensuring transparency
from the FCC or political ad disclosures.
Dr. Mandel, I was wondering, does your organization, the
Progressive Policy Institute, receive any money from any of the
carriers or the organizations linked to them?
Dr. Mandel. Yes, so PPI gets funding from a wide variety of
foundations, individuals, and companies, including telecoms and
edge providers.
Mr. Doyle. Can you, for example, what carriers are you
getting funding from?
Dr. Mandel. Without sort of naming names, I am not privy to
the individual details, but when I say ``wide variety.'' I mean
wide variety.
Mr. Doyle. Dr. Shapiro, you cofounded PPI. Can you provide
any additional information on the funding sources for the
organization?
Dr. Shapiro. Oh, I was a cofounder, but I have not been
involved with PPI since I became Under Secretary of Commerce
under President Clinton. So I can't give you any insight into
PPI. But I am happy to say that the research that I conducted
was supported by NDN, not by an Internet service provider, an
organization that I know that Mrs. Eshoo is very familiar with.
Mr. Doyle. Right, but I was referring to PPI.
Dr. Shapiro. Oh, I have no information.
Mr. Doyle. So you say carriers fund you; you just don't
want to name who they are?
Dr. Mandel. Carriers fund us. Edge providers fund us.
Foundations fund us. Individuals fund us.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. Well, we had one other witness we didn't hear
from on this topic.
Mr. Doyle. Yes, Dr. Economides.
Mr. Walden. So isn't it true Google also helps fund some of
your research----
Dr. Economides. No.
Mr. Walden [continuing]. As disclosed in the documents I
have here, really?
Dr. Economides. Disclosed that the only--the only research
that is relevant in the disclosure is my grant from the
National Science Foundation to study fifth-generation networks.
Mr. Walden. Well, we have got to show you some of these
documents that would indicate something different at some
point. This is on your, ``Why Imposing New Tolls on Third-Party
Content and Applications Threatens Innovation and Will Not
Improve Broadband Providers Investment.'' Down at the bottom it
says: The research reported herein was supported by Google
Inc.; the views expressed in this paper are, of course, those
of the author.
Dr. Economides. Yes, this research was many, many years
ago.
Mr. Walden. In 2010.
Mr. Doyle. Well, Mr. Chairman, why don't you read the
disclosures of all of these panelists?
Mr. Walden. I am happy to do it. I don't know that we have
them all here. But they should be in the records of the
committee.
Mr. Doyle. Well, I mean----
Dr. Economides. I fully disclosed it. There is no doubt
about it, but this was 2010. It is not--the disclosure that I
just filed with the committee said to disclose everything from
2013. And I was perfectly OK with that. I mean, let's make
sure.
Mr. Walden. Perfect. Got it. All right, we will go now to
Mr. Lance for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, and good morning to the distinguished
panel. As I understand it, the case is currently pending before
the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia
Circuit regarding Title II, and I would like the views of every
member of the panel as to how this will have an impact moving
forward, beginning with you, sir, Dr. Mandel.
Dr. Mandel. I am an economist and not a lawyer.
Mr. Lance. I won't hold that against you.
Dr. Mandel. I appreciate that. So I have a hard time
predicting what the courts will do. I do think that, you know,
what I worry about, and what other people have mentioned, is
whether or not the Title II regulations will end up being
extended and not just simply touch the ISPs but actually get
applied indirectly to the edge providers.
Mr. Lance. I realize you are an economist. I would presume
that this would eventually reach the Supreme Court. It is
likely to take certiorari, and then we will have a final
decision from the Supreme Court.
Dr. Mandel. Well, and so, like I said, I am not in the
business of predicting that. So what that means right now there
is a lot of uncertainty in the market about what is going to
happen in terms of decisions, and so forth.
Mr. Lance. Dr. Economides, do you have an opinion on that,
on the legal aspect of all of this?
Dr. Economides. On the what?
Mr. Lance. The legal aspect, the fact that it is now before
the DC Circuit and may ultimately reach the Supreme Court?
Dr. Economides. I am not a lawyer. I think that these
regulations tend to be very much challenged. I wouldn't be
surprised if it reached the Supreme Court. But this is a
layman's point of view. I mean, it is not my expertise.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, sir.
Dr. Shapiro.
Dr. Shapiro. Certainly with so much at stake, I would be
surprised if it did not proceed to the Supreme Court.
Mr. Lance. We will have a decision from the United States
Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, I
presume, within the next year or so. And whichever side loses
will petition the Supreme Court for a grant of certiorari, and
it is your best judgment that the Supreme Court of this country
is likely, eventually, to take the case?
Dr. Shapiro. Yes, but I, again, I have no insight into what
the court, either the court of appeals or the Supreme Court
will say. I have--I have been on the other side of these cases
as a Government official and have been assured by the Office of
the Solicitor General what the result was going to be, and it
turned out to be something quite different.
Mr. Lance. Would it be fair to say that there is
uncertainty as a result of the fact that this is now under
major litigation, as some of us predicted several months ago or
perhaps even a year ago as this matter was bubbling up?
Dr. Shapiro. I think it is absolutely accurate that this
process, this judicial process increases uncertainty and,
again, if I could mention the uncertainty is particularly acute
for the kind of fixed capital investment which ISPs undertake
because most of them are what is called irreversible capital,
which is to say capital which cannot be resold. And,
consequently, the incentives to wait until you are certain
about what the conditions are going to be for your rate of
return on that capital investment are very large.
Mr. Lance. And to follow up on that, irreversible capital,
this is the fact that this and this alone is where the
investment is being made, and it would be very difficult to get
your investments back easily. Do I understand that accurately?
Dr. Shapiro. Yes, correct. That is, you know, if you are
investing in a kind of standard machine tool and for a
particular project, and the project doesn't go forward, you can
resell that machine tool.
Mr. Lance. Yes.
Dr. Shapiro. That is reversible capital. Irreversible
capital is capital in which it is very difficult to resell, and
that characterizes much of the fixed capital----
Mr. Lance. This is the type of investment that is occurring
in this field.
Dr. Shapiro. Yes.
Mr. Lance. Mr. Louthan, your opinion.
Mr. Louthan. Well, I am also not a lawyer. I am a much
better stock picker than a predictor of what the courts would
do. But the Wall Street assumption is that it is going to go
all the way to the Supreme Court.
Mr. Lance. Yes, that is my understanding.
Mr. Louthan. I believe that it is possible that the
District Court could affirm in part and either----
Mr. Lance. It would be the court of appeals.
Mr. Louthan. The court of appeals, yes, I apologize. But I
definitely think somewhere all of this ends up in the Supreme
Court, and the simple thing would be for a swift legislative
solution for the basic tenets of net neutrality, very simple,
and all of this could go away.
Mr. Lance. And from your perspective as a stock picker,
would that be better for the economy of this country and for
moving forward in the investment area regarding this field?
Mr. Louthan. There absolutely will be more spending and
more investment by the--my industry. They would provide more
services, more jobs, and so forth if you had more clarity under
these rules rather than the large risk of the what if from what
is left now with Title II.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. And I tend to share that opinion.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back 30 seconds.
Mr. Walden. The gentleman yields back the balance of his
time.
I turn now to Mr. Loebsack for 5 minutes.
Mr. Loebsack. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I do thank the
subcommittee for holding this hearing today as always. My first
hearing on this subcommittee earlier this year was about net
neutrality. It is an important topic. As I said then, I
absolutely support an open Internet. And I am glad that we are
talking today about ways to encourage investment of broadband.
I, too, am from a rural area as so many folks on this
subcommittee are and on the larger committee. I have 24
counties in my district, in southeast Iowa. I have heard I
don't know how many times from my constituents their concerns
about the need to invest in rural broadband. I did a 24-county
tour earlier this year around my entire district talking to
folks about the concerns they had about the provision of rural
broadband. We know how important it is for the local economy,
for the schools, for hospitals, for agriculture, and so, for
me, you know, to think about this--and Dr. Shapiro, I have a
question for you in a second--but to hear folks, you know, I
used to teach at a small college. I am a former academic. And,
you know, people would say: Why don't you get down into the
real world, talk about what is really happening with folks and
all the rest? Being on this committee and being in Congress, I
am sort of out in the real world all the time in these
different counties. And it is a little distressing for me to
hear, for example, that, you know, there is 94 percent of
America covered by broadband. But that says nothing about the
quality of the broadband, says nothing about the speed of the
broadband. It says nothing at all, really, about the real
access that folks in these rural areas have to broadband.
And when I go to schools throughout my district, as I did
recently, I went to 18 different schools in 18 different
counties during the district work period to talk to them about
issues having to do with education, and inevitably broadband
comes up because it is great if students can be on the Iowa
Communications Network at school, but then if they are in a
rural area and they go home and they don't have sufficient
bandwidth to complete their homework, it is a problem. It is a
real problem.
So, Dr. Shapiro, I do want to ask you, you said that in
your testimony you called efforts to ensure universal access to
broadband, quote, ``A solution in search of a problem,''
unquote. However, according to the Council of Economic
Advisors, what we consider really to be sufficient broadband
speeds are available to only 47 percent of rural households. So
how can you explain, if you can, your assertion that there is
not a problem, if you will, with regard to universal access to
broadband?
Dr. Shapiro. I didn't say there isn't a problem. I said the
Title II regulation is not the solution to this problem. The
fact is that, I mean, some form of broadband access is now
available, according to the White House, to the Office of
Science and Technology as well as the National Economic
Council, to 94 percent of American households. That is not
sufficient. But the fact is that has risen at a really
extraordinarily rapid rate through competition, innovation, and
falling prices. And if, in fact, we believe--if, in fact,
Congress believes that this process is not proceeding at the
rate that it should, then Congress has many ways of addressing
that specifically as opposed to imposing this very large,
antiquated regulatory regime on a market-driven innovative
sector.
Mr. Loebsack. Yes. I just want folks to keep in mind and I
think there is probably agreement across the aisle here that
when we talk about rural broadband, that 94 percent figure
sounds really good, but in reality, when we talk about the
bandwidth that is available, that doesn't cover at all, you
know, the reality. That doesn't tell us about the reality.
Dr. Shapiro. Yes.
Mr. Loebsack. You wanted to say something Mr. Louthan?
Mr. Louthan. Well, I was going to point out, I have spent a
fair amount of time covering rural broadband, particularly the
100 and something companies in your State.
Mr. Loebsack. Right.
Mr. Louthan. The issue, I don't disagree that while you
could see more broadband, you have to be able to see a return
on the money spent. There is a tremendous amount of money it
takes to provide that broadband.
Mr. Loebsack. And I am sorry, I am running out of time. I
really do apologize for interrupting, but one of the players
that has not been mentioned here at all is those local Internet
service providers who started out years ago as telephone
companies, and they have really stepped up to the plate, and
they understand it is a bottom-line issue. But they have been
willing to take on that capital expenditure. They have been
willing to invest because they really do think that they owe it
to their folks in the rural areas to provide them with that
service. And I think that is an important factor in all of this
that gets overlooked by the traditional economic studies. So
thank you so much.
Mr. Louthan. I completely agree with that. The issue is, if
you put price regulation and things like that from Title II,
their ability to continue to invest in those networks will not
be there. They will not be able to raise the money.
Mr. Loebsack. And I haven't heard from them about that yet,
just so you know. Thank you.
Mr. Walden. The gentleman's time is expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr.
Guthrie, 5 minutes.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank all the
panelists, the witnesses, for being here today. My first
question is for Dr. Mandel. Mandel, or Mandel?
Dr. Mandel. Mandel.
Mr. Guthrie. OK, do you think communications companies are
going to continue to be among PPI's investment, quote,
``heroes'' if the courts do not overturn the imposition of
common carrier regulations of broadband?
Dr. Mandel. That is an excellent question. I have to say
that when we first started doing this list, it was a surprise
to everyone that they were on the top of the list because no
one would have thought, everyone would have thought that maybe
an industrial company or maybe somebody else would have been
the top investor in the U.S., and this turned out that
consistently that the telecom companies and the ISPs in general
have been up at the top. This is under the previous light-touch
regulatory regime.
Mr. Guthrie. Right.
Dr. Mandel. And so we don't know what is going to happen as
things change, evolve over the next several years, because I
tend to agree with the other panelists that this is not a
short-term thing. These are long-term issues that evolve over
time.
Mr. Guthrie. But we know under the current regulatory
regime, they are the top investors in the country.
Dr. Mandel. They are the top investors, have continued to
be so. And when we first came out with this list, we actually
asked people who they thought were the top investors in this
country and basically nobody got it right.
Mr. Guthrie. And so now we are moving into an unknown?
Dr. Mandel. Yes.
Mr. Guthrie. At best, people say we don't know the effect.
Dr. Mandel. We don't know.
Mr. Guthrie. Yes, so would you assert Title II regulation
might have perverse effects on reducing investment and
increasing consumer cost? Given that you have listed telecom
companies among the largest contributors to investment in our
country, won't that that have a significant negative impact?
Dr. Mandel. Here is the thing. Why mess with something that
is working? Under the light-touch regulatory regime, these
folks were big investors and innovation has proceeded forward
very rapidly. What I don't understand, what I have trouble is,
why if your car is working, why replace the engine? In this
case, we have a system which has produced lots of investment.
We have a system that has produced lots of innovation, both in
the networks and on the edge, and there has been a decision to
change a regulatory system that has been working for everyone
and producing innovation and investment in this industry. So I
see this as creating uncertainty and problems where they did
not exist before.
Mr. Guthrie. OK, thank you. Thank you for your testimony.
Dr. Shapiro, one of the elements that you consider in your
analysis of regulatory impact is the investment climate in
Europe. Can you elaborate on some of what you observed in the
relationship between heavy regulation and in decrease
investment deployment in Europe?
Dr. Shapiro. Yes. There are very useful OEC data on
investment rates in--by Internet service providers in the major
economies of Europe, and as well as the United States. And the
regulatory regime in Germany and France, for example, the
leading markets in Europe, it is not identical to Title II, but
it is a much more--a much heavier form of regulation than the
United States has had.
And in certain respects, it does mirror Title II. And so,
again, it looked to us to be something which could tell us,
suggest what are the dimensions of the effect of heavy
regulation of Internet service providers? And the fact is that
the capital investment rates in Europe have run about half what
they run in the United States. And there are other differences
between Europe and the United States. We do not attribute all
of that to the regulatory change. What we say is this, again,
suggests that the dimensions of the effect are likely to be
large rather than small.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. Dr. Mandel, so you said we have had the
light touch--robust investment growth; we lead the world--
versus we don't know where we are going. So this is obviously a
hypothetical, but what do you think if we had started the
Internet revolution under Title II? Where do you think we would
be now?
Dr. Mandel. Oh, it would have proceeded much more slowly.
It would have proceeded much more slowly. And, you know, I am a
real fan of the app economy. I think I did the first study ever
that measured the number of jobs generated by the app economy.
I think we would have had a much slower introduction of the
smartphone if we had Title II. We would have had a much slower
ramp-up of investment in fast broadband. It just would have
unfolded a lot more slowly. If you sort of look at the way it
happened, you can sort of imagine that Title II, which has more
permissioned innovation, would have required hearings for a lot
of things that happened that have turned out to be very
positive. So I think that Title II would have definitely have
slowed down the Internet revolution. It would have slowed down
the app revolution.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you very much. I appreciate that. I
yield back.
Mr. Walden. The gentleman's time is expired.
We now go to the gentleman from California, Mr. McNerney.
Mr. Doyle. I am from California.
Mr. Walden. No, next on the list. I was making sure I
didn't----
Mr. McNerney. Dr. Mandel, I was intrigued by your comments
on the Affordable Care Act if you don't mind. You said that is
an example of the success of the Obama administration. Would
you characterize that for us a little bit?
Dr. Mandel. Oh, absolutely. If, you know, I have been doing
policy for years, and it used to be that when people sort of
talk about the ineffectuality of Washington, they would talk
about the inability to do healthcare reform. Now, whether or
not you agree with particular details of the ACA or not, it is
clear that it is healthcare reform that has substantially
changed the system and broadened coverage, which I consider to
be the single most important thing that can be done in terms of
health care. So PPI, speaking for PPI and speaking for myself,
we strongly support the ACA and believe that it has been a real
positive for the country.
Mr. McNerney. Well, and part of the reason for the success,
I think you said, is the overregulation of the healthcare
system before the ACA?
Dr. Mandel. So I, you know, I am not sure whether you had
overregulation before the ACA. I think that we have had
regulation of the healthcare system for many, many years under
both Republican and Democratic administrations. And one of the
things that has been a surprise for me as I have done this
analysis is understanding that measures that were put in in
health care that had really good intentions in terms of
controlling costs, have ended up having perverse effects on
productivity and costs going forward. And I am drawing the
analogy in my testimony that you can almost think about our
previous broadband regulation system and healthcare regulation
as two poles. One, we had permissionless innovation, and the
other one we have very permissioned innovation for many good
reasons. And the investment growth has been far faster on the
broadband side than on the healthcare side. And I just find it
interesting and disturbing that we seem to be moving toward
more regulation in broadband for good intentions without
understanding that there is consequences for that. And the
reason why I tried to draw the analogy with health care----
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. I need to move on to some other
questions. Thank you.
Mr. Economides, you commented that investment decisions
require long-term planning, and we are talking about investment
decisions like the ones in the Internet service providers and
so on. What kind of timeframes are we talking about here?
Dr. Economides. Well, most companies look a number of years
ahead, 3 to 5 years, I would say.
Mr. McNerney. Three to 5 years?
Dr. Economides. Yes.
Mr. McNerney. How do changes in the regulation or otherwise
changes in the market impact this planning, investment planning
process?
Dr. Economides. Well, the demands for Internet services is
growing. It is growing fast. So I expect that the telecom and
cable companies will keep investing at a fast rate over time.
Yes.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. One other thing. Does the
investment in other sectors, you mentioned that investment in
other sectors of the Internet makes could make up for the lack
or low investment in the ISPs. Could you expand on that a
little bit?
Dr. Economides. Yes, sure. I think that what is going on
under network neutrality is that we facilitate investment by
applications and content companies, and we facilitate their
operation. Their operation might not have a tremendous amount
of investment, but it still has a lot of income generated and a
lot of growth.
For example, if you take Facebook, the investment of
Facebook is nothing to do, very small compared to AT&T's. But
on the other hand, the amount of money it generates and the
amount of people, the number of people it employees, and the
impact on the economy, is huge. And it is crucial that we
preserve the new Facebooks, the new Googles, to make sure that
they get founded, they manage to operate, they manage to grow,
and they manage to be successful. That is very, very important.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Dr. Shapiro, you mentioned that without market failures,
regulations can dampen growth. Is that right?
Dr. Shapiro. In the absence of market failures, regulation
tends to increase costs, and consequently reduce investment,
yes.
Mr. McNerney. But with 4 million individuals commenting on
the net neutrality ruling, doesn't that indicate either a
market failure or a fear of a market failure, which is almost
the same thing as a market failure? I mean, that is one of the
largest public inputs of any rulemaking process.
Dr. Shapiro. Well, there are lots of issues that people
feel very strongly about, Congressman, and enough to write in
about and to comment about. And the Internet is integrated into
all of our lives. I also think there is probably--well, this
issue as on most issues, a lot of misinformation out. So, no, I
can't say that I think the public response is evidence of a
market failure. A market failure has a particular meaning in
economics, which is a set of conditions which induces companies
to underinvest relative to a kind of optimal level of
investment.
Mr. McNerney. But if 4 million people chime in on this and
businesses mostly in favor of Title II regulation, that is a
fear. That shows a lot of fear in my mind, which is a precursor
to sort of a market failure.
So at any rate, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Latta [presiding]. The gentleman yields back, and the
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Missouri for 5 minutes.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Louthan, in your testimony, you assert: ``We believe
the move by the FCC to impose Title II regulation on the
Internet is a mistake that ultimately harms consumers,
restricts investment, and adds unnecessary cost and burdens to
the industry.''
So I say welcome to Washington. And to paraphrase Ronald
Reagan: ``We are from the Government. We are here to help.''
Could you elaborate on how the imposition of Title II
regulation harms consumers?
Mr. Louthan. It basically gets down to an opportunity cost.
We have been living under this opportunity cost for a while
with the net neutrality provisions in general. But when
companies look at the potential say, OK, if I make an
investment, what kind of revenue am I going to be able to
generate from that and what kind of return am I going to get
for that capital that I have gone out and asked small and large
investors both to give to me to go out and invest? If you don't
see a revenue opportunity, you are not going to make that
investment.
One of the things that has had a tremendously positive
impact on the industry is Google Fiber. Google Fiber came in,
and that spurred additional competition. It showed where you
could reduce regulation. The cities of Kansas City and Austin
both reduced regulations substantially in order to incent that
network build to be made, and then you saw the competitors step
up and everybody has benefitted. I would argue that--and you
specifically saw within that Google take specific steps for the
products they sold to avoid Title II regulation, particularly
with their voice product that they had.
I would argue that with Title II, you would not have seen
that. Look at the success from the wireless auctions last year
which were done, by the way, before Title II came out, and most
industry assumed that they would not impose Title II. All of
these things are benefiting consumers in the absence of this
regulation. You put more regulation on, more restrictions, and
then the potential for a tremendous number of regulations that
complicate things, reduce the costs and returns on investment,
that is a recipe for the phone companies and the cable
companies just to do less.
And just because you see them doing the same amount they
did last year, doesn't mean they could have been doing more in
the first place and could have gotten even better, all of which
would be new products and new services for consumers.
Mr. Long. OK, and staying with you, Mr. Louthan, in your
testimony, you indicate the overhang from Title II regulations
as well as the lighter net neutrality rules that preceded it
have already been a drag on investment.
Does less investment being mean that broadband networks are
being build out more slowly or that consumers in less populated
areas are experiencing slower broadband speeds as a result of
these regulations?
Mr. Louthan. The current, I would say the impact from the
current Title II regulations are really yet to be felt. The
rate of change is very slow. However, over time, if you put
more regulation and more burdens on companies, it is definitely
more difficult for them to justify building out services. What
can they provide? Can they provide video? Can they provide more
data services? Could they provide different tiers of data
services in order to attract different levels of consumers? All
of these things would really play a difference. But I would
argue that in general, the $60 billion to $65 billion that the
industry spends today is already restricted because of the net
neutrality provisions and the fear of the future provisions
from Title II. It could have been a lot higher. With the
difference, we won't really know unless we have I would say
either a legislative solution to get rid of the up certainty.
Mr. Long. A lot of us represent a lot of rural areas in our
districts. I represent 751,000 people. Can you elaborate on how
you think consumer choice is being impacted by Title II
regulation of the broadband services?
Mr. Louthan. To the extent that there are--those services
are difficult and costly to provide. That is why we have
services like Universal Service Fund and the new Connect
America Fund, that should be very beneficial providing services
to constituents such as yours, I would assume. If you take
those, if you take additional costs from regulatory burdens,
whether it is just a legal cost and the accounting cost--some
of the large providers have 40- or 50-person staffs just to
maintain the additional accounting costs for Title II--or you
bring in price regulation or you limit how much that they can
charge or resale of facilities--so a rural provider spends a
lot of money to run facilities to a customer, and someone else
can come in and undercut them and resell it--none of those are
recipes for investment. And all of that would imply, you would
see investors would be less likely to commit capital to provide
those services.
Mr. Long. I was going to ask you about a legislative
solution, but you have already said that you think that would
be a better approach to Title II regulation. If ``the broadband
industry is not as attractive to capital as it had been in the
past,'' quote-unquote, will the industry be able to generate
the money it needs to increase broadband network speeds and
reach?
Mr. Louthan. It will eventually. Technology itself will
eventually increase the speeds because the cost of the
equipment will come down over time. But I would argue it would
not go up at the rate that we have seen in the past as some of
the other witnesses have discussed. The rate of innovation and
the rate of that is going to slow dramatically and that doesn't
help consumers or businesses or governments.
Mr. Long. Thank you. My clock has run out, and I yield
back.
Mr. Latta. The gentleman yields back.
And the Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from New York
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank our ranking member.
Mr. Louthan, I want to pick up on the line of questioning
that my colleague just presented to you, but it takes a little
bit of a different turn here.
You have emphasized uncertainty as one of the overriding
concerns as we examine the investment impacts of net neutrality
and Title II regs. Given the climate of uncertainty that you
have highlighted, are you advising your clients that common
carriers in this current climate are an unwise investment?
Mr. Louthan. No, I am not because my mandate is generally
about a 12- to 18-month view in the future. So in the next 12
to 18 months, I don't see a whole lot changing. I do believe it
eventually goes to the Supreme Court. I am hopeful that some of
the decisions to be made at the district court level the
Supreme Court level that would clarify these rules and possibly
throw out the Title II ruling either on procedural grounds or
other reasons--for that manner, for the investment time horizon
that I am mandated with, I don't really see a whole lot that
changes.
And then, even if you leave, then if you go back to, well,
what if it doesn't get thrown out and they leave Title II with
heavy forbearance? OK, well, then we sort of know what the
rules are. But what I can tell you is a discount will be put on
the returns that investors will expect on this industry. The
amount of risk that they will assign to it will go higher
because of the potential for let's say down the road some of
the things that the FCC is at least forbearing from now----
Ms. Clarke. And at that point, you think it would be an
unwise investment?
Mr. Louthan. I can't say that at this point.
Ms. Clarke. OK. Some of the testimony we have heard today
mentions the harms that can come from regulation, but the fact
remains that three out of four Americans do not have a choice
in high-speed broadband provider. That means these consumers
have nowhere to go if they are not satisfied with their
broadband service. Ultimately, this is a consumer issue, not
just an investment issue.
So, Dr. Economides, do you agree that the FCC has a role to
play to ensure robust broadband competition?
Dr. Economides. Yes, of course. The FCC is there to
represent every part of the U.S. economy, including the
consumers, and including the rest of the ecosystem, not just
the telecom and cable companies. And it is important to create
a level playing field in that respect.
Ms. Clarke. We have heard a lot today about the system
working fine. Would you drill down a little bit more on the
ecosystem because I think that that is a point that is missing
in the conversation.
Dr. Economides. Sure. Well, I mean, the--let's think of
this problem, as I said in the very beginning, of paid
prioritization. The whole problem which created in the end
these rules started when AT&T said that we want to kill network
neutrality. And they said we want to introduce paid
prioritization. So this didn't come out of nothing. It came
from a move by AT&T. And paid prioritization means that if you
pay, your information comes in first, and if you don't pay, it
comes last. And if this gap between first and last is long,
then the company that is first has a big advantage and is
willing to pay a lot of money to AT&T or Verizon or a cable
company to make this happen.
So, in a way, this is a way for the cable companies and the
telephone companies to squeeze the sector which is the most
innovative sector of the economy, which is the companies that
live on the edge of the network, companies like the new Google,
the new Facebook, the new whatever, that are right now given
the advantage of relatively low prices, an equal playing field,
and not having to deal specifically with a cable company or a
telephone company before they actually provide the product.
Ms. Clarke. Very well. Some critics of net neutrality have
equated the FCC's new rules with repressive government attempts
to censor information online. Dr. Economides, what is your
response to these claims?
Dr. Economides. I find it hard to believe that the FCC will
start censoring our information online. I think, in fact, the
lack of net neutrality rules could have that effect because if
the Wall Street Journal, for example, pays for prioritization
but the New York Times doesn't, then there is a skewing of the
way the information comes through. So this is one of the
concerns that has been expressed very extensively, a concern
about the information not reaching everybody at the same time,
a level playing field in political views, in newspaper
distribution, and so on.
Ms. Clarke. Very well. Thank you very much for your
responses.
I yield back.
Mr. Latta. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from North Carolina
for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to our panel today. This has been a very,
very interesting discussion.
Dr. Mandel, I would like to ask you a question. I know we
were just talking about the economic ecosystem, and I have one
for you as well. While much of the discussion is focused on
investment of ISPs, it seems to me that there is also a logical
connection to the investment decisions of the industries that
touch providers. For example, I have a letter here from TIA,
the trade association for equipment manufacturers, that was
submitted to the committee that outlines their serious concerns
with Title II approach. Can you walk us through how investment
and business decisions by ISPs ripple through the economic
ecosystem?
Dr. Mandel. Absolutely. We have a situation where the edge
providers need investment in the networks in order to make
their applications work right. And, actually, what has been
happening over the last few years, applications have been
needing more and more access to data. So you can think of these
things as synergistic. And this is why I am very worried about
the Title II because the degree to which it sort of slows
investments as regulation to the networks, that ripples out in
a negative effect to the app economy, which, you know, I am as
big a supporter as anybody else is. So I see this all as one
big ecosystem where if you sort of impose regulations on one
part or you suppress innovation there, it actually has negative
effects on the rest of the ecosystem rather than positive.
Mrs. Ellmers. So, basically, if I am understanding what you
are saying, you know, we love innovation, and we love the fact
that our technology universe is just expanding greatly, but at
the same time, it can be its own enemy when it comes to the
ability of investment and looking into the future. And we don't
want to hold any of those things back, correct?
Dr. Mandel. That is right. I also think what is important
here when we talk about consumers is that consumers have done
very well under the current system, which is the share of their
spending going to communication services has barely risen over
the last 15 years, barely risen, despite all of the increase in
data that they have been using. So, you know, it has worked for
consumers. It has worked for the edge providers. It has worked
for the ISPs. And it is a surprise to me that we are engaging
in this prospective regulation to deal with a problem that
doesn't exist.
Mrs. Ellmers. I see. Thank you, sir.
And, Mr. Shapiro, I believe you have already addressed this
issue, but one more time, if you could please describe for us
with the actions that the FCC has taken with the open Internet
orders release, what you believe the effect is going to be on
broadband and the effect of regulation on broadband investment.
Dr. Shapiro. Right. All of our analysis leads us to
conclude that, first of all, the effect will be negative. We
know the direction of the effect. There will be less rather
than more investment by ISPs. And, second, that the dimensions
of that are very likely to be substantial, whether it is a
reduction of 5 percent, or 10 percent, or 15, or 20, we don't
know. We will have to see. And that will be an unfolding
process.
I think it is very important to recognize, however, that
the innovations which we all value so greatly that have come
out of the Internet are all ultimately based on robust, fast-
rising levels of investment in Internet infrastructure. These
investments, these innovations more and more are a result of
the ability to tap into very large bandwidth and, you know,
leading to telemedicine and tele-education as well as all of
the video applications, et cetera. All of that depends on the
infrastructure investment. That is, it all comes after the
infrastructure investment because it is not possible without
it. And so, in taking steps, which all of the evidence should
lead us to conclude will have a substantial adverse effect. We
have to recognize that this is not--this is harming, in effect,
the engine of innovation, which is the expansion of the
infrastructure.
Mrs. Ellmers. So, I am just going to assume then that the
comments that Dr. Mandel have made, that you agree with his
assessment?
Dr. Shapiro. Yes, I do.
Mrs. Ellmers. OK, great. Thank you, sir.
And, Mr. Louthan, to you, just touching again on this same
subject of how it affects the ecosystem, I believe from your
testimony already, that you also believe that it will have a
negative effect on investment and also the broadband network
and speed of research and innovation. Is this correct?
Mr. Louthan. Yes, investment is already suppressed because
of these things. And without the ability for companies to have
new products and generate new revenue from the investment, they
are just not going to spend more money to either--whether it is
increasing speeds, extending the reach of the network,
accelerating the pace of new technology invested in the
network--none of these things will happen at quite the same
pace that we have seen in the past when we had none of these
rules and regulations and we saw no real harms.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you, sir, and I yield back the
remainder of my time.
Mr. Latta. The gentlelady yields back her time.
And the Chair recognizes for 30 seconds the gentlelady from
California.
Ms. Eshoo. I appreciate that, Mr. Chairman.
There's been much said about certainty, uncertainty today,
and where we would find certainty would be in legislation; we
have uncertainty because of what the FCC did about net
neutrality.
But I would ask you to consider the following and that is:
it is the ISPs that went to court that created the uncertainty.
So for those of you that have restated all of this uncertainty
because of net neutrality, I would ask you to consider the
facts that I just placed on the table.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to all the witnesses. I think it has been an
excellent hearing.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields back.
And the Chair would ask unanimous consent to enter the
letter that the gentlelady from North Carolina referenced.
Without objection, we will enter that into the record,
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Latta. And also I would also like to thank our
panelists for being with us today. We really appreciate your
testimony.
And on behalf of the gentleman from Oregon, the chairman of
the subcommittee, and also the gentlelady from California, the
ranking member of the subcommittee, and myself, I would like to
thank you for being here today.
And, without any further questions, the committee stands
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:14 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. G.K. Butterfield

Thank you, Chairman Walden for convening today's hearing on
common carrier regulation of the Internet. I understand and
respect the FCC's decision to regulate wired and wireless
broadband Internet services under Title II. Unfortunately, in
doing so, the FCC is now having to defend that decision in
court.
I knew that any move to regulate the Internet under Title
II would be met with swift opposition. And that has proven to
be true.
So that's why I have long advocated for a legislative
solution that codifies the principles that Republicans and
Democrats support without moving to more onerous Title II
regulation. The two aren't mutually exclusive. There is a path
forward here.
My position on Net Neutrality remains the same as it always
has--I strongly support an open Internet where blocking,
throttling, and paid prioritization are banned.
I do believe that a legislative solution is the most
prudent and practical way forward. Absent Congressional action,
I worry about the perpetual uncertainty for investors and
consumers alike.
So, Mr. Chairman, I hope to work with you and our
colleagues on both sides of the aisle to shape a bill that I,
Ranking Member Eshoo, and others can support.
When then-Chairman Henry Waxman put forward a legislative
proposal dealing with an open Internet 5 years ago, he said
that we must ``break the deadlock on net neutrality so that we
can focus on building the most open and robust Internet
possible.'' That statement remains very much true today.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I will submit my
questions for the record.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
