- INTERNET GOVERNANCE AFTER ICANN 53

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

INTERNET GOVERNANCE AFTER ICANN 53

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 8, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-62

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

97-750                         WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Missouri               JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                     Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology

GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                ANNA G. ESHOO, California
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BILL JOHNSON, Missouri               JERRY McNERNEY, California
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
CHRIS COLLINS, New York                  officio)
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Anna G. Eshoo, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     4
Hon. Steve Scalise, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Louisiana, prepared statement...............................    61

Witnesses

Lawrence E. Strickling, Assistant Secretary for Communications
and Information, Administrator of the National
Telecommunications and Information Administration..............     7
Prepared statement...........................................     9
Fadi Chehade, President and Chief Executive Officer, ICANN.......    20
Prepared statement...........................................    22

INTERNET GOVERNANCE AFTER ICANN 53

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 8, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:11 a.m., in
room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Greg Walden
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Walden, Latta, Barton, Shimkus,
Blackburn, Lance, Guthrie, Olson, Kinzinger, Bilirakis,
Johnson, Long, Ellmers, Collins, Cramer, Eshoo, Welch, Yarmuth,
Clarke, Loebsack, Lujan, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff Present: Ray Baum, Senior Policy Advisor for
Communications and Technology; Andy Duberstein, Deputy Press
Secretary; Kelsey Guyselman, Counsel, Telecom; David Redl,
Chief Counsel, Telecom; Charlotte Savercool, Legislative Clerk;
Jeff Carroll, Minority Staff Director; David Goldman, Minority
Chief Counsel, Communications and Technology; Tiffany
Guarascio, Minority Deputy Staff Director and Chief Health
Advisor; Lori Maarbjerg, Minority FCC Detailee; Margaret
McCarthy, Minority Senior Professional Staff Member; Tim
Robinson, Minority Chief Counsel; and Ryan Skukowski, Minority
Policy Analyst.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. OK. We will call to order the subcommittee on
Communications and Technology and want to extend a generous
welcome to our two witnesses today. We are delighted to have
you both back here and look forward to your testimony and
answers to the questions that we all have.
Last year, NTIA announced that it would work to transition
the stewardship of the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority to
the multistakeholder community, frankly, to a chorus of
concern. There were concerns about whether or not this would
open the door to the United Nations, some agency there, taking
over where the U.S. Government leaves off; what of the checks
and balances that NTIA places on ICANN; what is the
multistakeholder community anyway. This was new territory for
some of us. Large and fundamental questions loomed, and this
subcommittee sought to exercise its role as NTIA's oversight
authority and try and get some answers.
A year later, I am proud of the work this subcommittee has
done to ensure that the IANA transition preserves the Internet
we know and makes concerns that if the United States government
steps away from IANA that the system we leave in its place will
not permit another government or intergovernmental group to
fill that void.
From the beginning, this subcommittee sought to strike the
right balance between supporting the multistakeholder model of
Internet governance while still protecting the invaluable tool
of communications and commerce the Internet has become. And
many of the questions we have raised are being incorporated
into the work of the multistakeholder groups committed to
working through this transition.
Now, in the past, I have often made reference to both the
contract between the United States and ICANN as well as the
Affirmation of Commitments. I believe that both of these
documents create valuable protections and rules that serve the
governance of the Internet well.
Among those crucial terms are the requirements that ICANN
remain a nonprofit corporation headquartered in the United
States; that ICANN maintain open and transparent processes, an
ongoing review of ICANN's operations by the multistakeholder
community.
That is why I am pleased to see that the multistakeholder
community has proposed to ensconce the terms of the Affirmation
of Commitments in the ICANN bylaws themselves. These policies
are critical to ensuring that ICANN remain a stable steward of
IANA and must be a part of the successful transition.
We also heard from the multistakeholder community over the
last year, and, with respect to at least one of this
transition, the world spoke with one voice: ICANN must be more
accountable if it is to be trusted with the stewardship of
IANA.
Over the last year, a group of dedicated volunteers have
been working to come up with a structure for ICANN that ensures
that it is the Internet community, not any one group of
players, that will guide the future of the Internet. I couldn't
be happier to see that the issues raised by the subcommittee
have been integral to the work of this group.
The community must be able to hold the ICANN board
accountable, and that means the ability to recall those board
members that are no longer representing their community. It
also means that once this new system is in place it would be
resistant to capture. Fundamental bylaws that require a
supermajority to change, actionable mechanisms that empower the
community, independent review of board decisions, and the
stress tests to ensure the system will work as planned are
essential elements of an accountable ICANN. We have been
talking about these issues for the past year and will continue
to do our jobs to ensure that if NTIA is to agree to a
transition proposal that these changes are fully implemented up
front.
Now, last month, the House passed bipartisan legislation
that originated in this subcommittee called the DOTCOM Act. The
DOTCOM Act was developed through months of hearings,
discussions, and bipartisan negotiations. And, throughout this
process, we made a concerted effort to recognize the impact of
our actions on the international process. But we also felt it
would be irresponsible to ignore the very real risks associated
with the relinquishment of the U.S. role in Internet
governance, no matter how small.
The measured approach of the DOTCOM Act properly balances
the NTIA's role as the U.S. Government participant in the
multistakeholder community with the U.S. Congress' role as
NTIA's oversight authority. Our hope is that the United States
Senate will pass this legislation soon and provide the Congress
with another tool to ensure a transition that will meet our
Nation's and the world's needs.
Finally, we have all said all along that this transition is
far too important to be rushed by an artificial deadline. I was
pleased to see, Assistant Secretary Strickling, your testimony
where you state that the transition timeline is flexible and
will extend beyond the September 2015 expiration of the ICANN
contract. Now, extending the contract will ensure the
multistakeholder community and the U.S. Government through NTIA
and the Congress are driven by a full and robust vetting of the
transition proposal rather than by a calendar.
Moreover, extending the contract is consistent with the
timeline for the work that is taking place on ICANN
accountability reforms. Just last week, the CCWG has indicated
that the Workstream 1 reforms required for the IANA transition
may not be implemented until July of 2016.
There are still many unknowns in this process, and much
remains to be decided before a transition can take place. For
example, how will the transition deal with the dot-mil and dot-
gov top-level domains? And what role will the Government
Advisory Committee have in the new ICANN process? My hope is
that this committee's oversight will continue to strengthen the
process, raise important questions, and improve the outcome.
So I thank our witnesses for testifying today and sharing
their insight into the transition process and answering some of
the many questions that remain as we move forward.
I see I have used up the balance of my time, with apologies
to my vice chair, whom I usually try and leave time for. I now
recognize the gentlelady from California, Ms. Eshoo, for an
opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden

Last year, NTIA announced that it would work to transition
the stewardship of the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority to
the multi-stakeholder community to a chorus of concern. Will
this open the door to a U.N. agency taking over where the U.S.
government leaves off? What of the checks and balances that
NTIA places on ICANN? What is the multi-stakeholder community,
anyway? Large and fundamental questions loomed and this
subcommittee sought to exercise its role as NTIA's oversight
authority and get answers.
A year later I am proud of the work of this subcommittee to
ensure that the IANA transition preserves the Internet we know
and makes certain that if the U.S. government steps away from
IANA that the system we leave in its place won't permit another
government or intergovernmental group to fill the void.
From the beginning, this subcommittee sought to strike the
right balance between supporting the multistakeholder model of
Internet governance, while still protecting the invaluable tool
of communications and commerce the Internet has become. And
many of the questions we have raised are being incorporated
into the work of the multi-stakeholder groups committed to
working through this transition.
In the past, I've often made reference to both the contract
between the U.S. and ICANN as well as the Affirmation of
Commitments. I believe that both of these documents create
valuable protections and rules that serve the governance of the
Internet well. Among those crucial terms are the requirements
that ICANN remain a non-profit corporation headquartered in the
United States; that ICANN maintain open and transparent
processes; and, ongoing review of ICANN's operations by the
multi-stakeholder community. That's why I am pleased to see
that that multi-stakeholder community has proposed to ensconce
the terms of the Affirmation of Commitments in the ICANN
bylaws, themselves. These policies are critical to ensuring
that ICANN remain a stable steward of IANA and must be a part
of a successful transition.
We also heard from the multi-stakeholder community over the
last year. And with respect to at least one part of this
transition the world spoke with one voice: ICANN must be more
accountable if it is to be trusted with the stewardship of
IANA. Over the last year, a group of dedicated volunteers have
been working to come up with a structure for ICANN that ensures
that it is the Internet community, not any one group of
players, that will guide the future of the Internet.
I couldn't be happier to see that the issues raised by the
subcommittee have been an integral part of the work of this
group. The community must be able to hold the ICANN board
accountable, and that means the ability to recall those board
members that are no longer representing their community. It
also means that once this new system is in place, that it be
resistant to capture. Fundamental bylaws that require a
supermajority to change, actionable mechanisms that empower the
community, independent review of board decisions, and the
stress tests to ensure that the system will work as planned are
essential elements of an accountable ICANN. We have been
talking about these issues for the past year and we will
continue to do our jobs to ensure that if NTIA is to agree to a
transition proposal, that these changes are fully implemented
up-front.
Last month the House acted on a bipartisan basis to pass
this subcommittee's DOTCOM Act. The DOTCOM Act was developed
through months of hearings, discussions, and bipartisan
negotiations. Throughout this process, we made a concerted
effort to recognize the impact of our actions on the
international process, but we also felt it would be
irresponsible to ignore the very real risks associated with a
relinquishment of the United States' role in Internet
governance, no matter how small. The measured approach of the
DOTCOM Act properly balances NTIA's role as the U.S. government
participant in the multi-stakeholder community with the U.S.
Congress' role as NTIA's oversight authority. Our hope is that
the Senate will quickly pass this legislation and provide
Congress with another tool to ensure a transition will meet our
nation's--and the world's--needs.
Finally, we've said all along that this transition is far
too important to be rushed by an artificial deadline. I was
pleased to see Assistant Secretary Strickling's testimony
states that the transition timeline is flexible, and will
extend beyond the September 2015 expiration of the ICANN
contract. Extending the contract will ensure that the multi-
stakeholder community and the U.S. Government through NTIA and
Congress are driven by a full and robust vetting of the
transition proposal, rather than the calendar. Moreover,
extending the contract is consistent with the timeline for the
work that is taking place on ICANN accountability reforms. Just
last week the Cross-Community Working Group-Accountability has
indicated that the ``Work Stream 1'' reforms required for the
IANA transition may not be implemented until July 2016.
There are still many unknowns in this process, and much
remains to be decided before a transition can take place. For
example, how will the transition deal with the .mil and .gov
top-level domains and what role will the Government Advisory
Committee have in the new ICANN? My hope is that this
committee's oversight will continue to strengthen the process,
raise important questions, and improve the outcome. I thank
both of our witnesses for testifying today and sharing their
insight into the transition process, and answering some of the
many questions that remain as we move forward.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ANNA G. ESHOO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Two weeks ago, ICANN wrapped up its 53rd meeting in Buenos
Aires, Argentina, and, as expected, the Internet Assigned
Numbers Authority transition dominated the discussion.
For a report on this meeting and an update on the steps
being taken to ensure transparency, accountability, and
adherence to the principles NTIA laid out last year, today we
welcome back to the subcommittee ICANN CEO Fadi Chehade and
NTIA Administrator Larry Strickling.
So welcome, and we look forward to hearing from you.
In the lead-up to ICANN 53, the House passed by an
overwhelming margin H.R. 805, the DOTCOM Act. The bill
reinforces the view of Congress that the IANA transition must
support and enhance the multistakeholder model of Internet
governance; maintain the security, stability, and resiliency of
the Internet Domain Name System; and not replace the role of
the NTIA with a government-led or intergovernmental
organization solution.
Accountability is an essential component of the transition.
I am encouraged by reports that the Cross-Community Working
Group on Enhancing ICANN Accountability is focusing on
accountability measures that are critical to the success of the
IANA transition.
In the long term, I continue to believe that a governance
structure within ICANN that separates policymaking from the
implementation of policy decisions, as well as from the
adjudication of disputes, is needed to enhance accountability
on all ICANN-related matters and ensure consensus-driven
decisions.
In the months since the transition was first announced, 263
meetings have taken place around the world. For people that
attend a lot of meetings, that is a lot of meetings. This
equates to over 13,000 working hours focused on the IANA
transition.
We are at a critical juncture, with less than 4 months
until ICANN's next meeting in Dublin. I commend the work of the
multistakeholder community, as well as Fadi Chehade, who has
announced his plans to step down from ICANN in March of next
year.
I look forward to the testimony of our two witnesses, whom
we have heard from on many an occasion. A lot of work has been
put into this by both of you. We appreciate it. And I thank you
for your commitment to a successful transition of the IANA
functions to the multistakeholder community.
I have 2 minutes and 11 seconds left. I would be happy to
yield to any one of my colleagues if they would like to use the
time.
Passing?
I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. The gentlelady yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentlewoman from Tennessee,
Mrs. Blackburn.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate that our witnesses are giving us the time
today and are putting attention on our concerns with this
transition and with the multistakeholder model of Internet
governance, which--in order for that to work, we have to have
transparency, credibility, accountability, and we are concerned
about where we stand on those measures with ICANN.
That is why there is growing consensus that the IANA
transition isn't quite ready for prime time. One thing in
particular that concerns me is that ICANN, the registries and
the registrars, are not even abiding by sections 3.7, 3.18, and
3(a) in their own Public Interest Commitments and the Registrar
Accreditation Agreement. So I will want to visit that with the
two of you.
These contractual provisions created through the
multistakeholder process require ICANN, the registries and the
registrars, to prohibit domain name holders from engaging in
illegal activity. ICANN says it should not be the content
police, and I agree with that, but that is not the issue here.
Before signing off on the transition, we must make sure that
ICANN is enforcing provisions in its own contracts and not
simply burying its head in the sand to skirt responsibility.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield to the vice
chairman of the subcommittee the balance of my time.
Mr. Latta. I thank the gentlelady for yielding.
And, also, I would like to thank our witnesses for being
with us today on this very important subject.
And as I could reiterate, as the chairman stated, that last
month this committee did report out to the House floor and the
House then passed Mr. Shimkus' DOTCOM Act to ensure proper
oversight of the National Telecommunications and Information
Administration and prepare for the transition of the U.S.
Government's role in the Internet's functions to a global
multistakeholder community.
Now that it has been passed, we must move forward on to the
next steps of the transition process. I am interested in CCWG's
consolidated transition proposal, and I encourage the group to
incorporate public recommendations that may help to ensure
NTIA's criteria are met.
I also look forward to reviewing the final accountability
plan, as protecting ICANN from undue influence from any
government or group of stakeholders is of utmost importance. As
these plans progress, we must maintain the high priority of
safeguarding our national security interests and allowing
citizens to continue to navigate an open and free Internet.
And, with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the remainder of
my time.
Mr. Walden. I was going to recognize the full ranking
member, Mr. Pallone, but I see he has left. Anyone on the
Democratic side seeking time?
If not, then I think we are done on our side, as well. So
all time is used up, and we can get right to our very talented
and capable witnesses.
First up, the Assistant Secretary for Communications and
Information and Administrator of the National
Telecommunications and Information Administration, Mr. Larry
Strickling.
That is a lot to fit on a card, I have to think. We are
delighted to have you back before the committee, Mr.
Strickling. Thanks for being here. We look forward to your
testimony.

STATEMENTS OF LAWRENCE E. STRICKLING, ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION, ADMINISTRATOR OF THE NATIONAL
TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION ADMINISTRATION; AND FADI
CHEHADE, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, ICANN

STATEMENT OF LAWRENCE E. STRICKLING

Mr. Strickling. Well, thank you, Chairman Walden and
Ranking Member Eshoo. I indeed welcome the opportunity to come
back before you today with ICANN CEO Fadi Chehade to update you
on the IANA stewardship transition.
In March of 2014, NTIA announced its intent to complete the
privatization of the Internet Domain Name System as promised in
1998. This long-planned step is critical to ensuring that the
Internet remains an engine for economic growth, innovation, and
free speech.
Completing the transition will show the world that we fully
embrace the multistakeholder approach to Internet governance,
policymaking, and standards development. And history has
demonstrated that this model is the best mechanism for
maintaining an open, resilient, and secure Internet.
Both Republican and Democratic administrations have
consistently supported this model. Members of Congress on both
sides of the aisle have come together on more than one occasion
to express support for the multistakeholder approach. And, most
recently, this committee led the way, with its bipartisan
efforts on Representative Shimkus' DOTCOM Act.
And so, in addition to Chairman Walden and Ranking Member
Eshoo, I want to thank Chairman Upton, Representative Shimkus,
Pallone, committee members, and all your staffs for your work
to ensure that the transition of our role with respect to the
Internet Domain Name System progresses in a transparent,
responsible, and timely manner.
So where do things stand today with the transition? Based
on my firsthand observations last month at ICANN's meeting in
Buenos Aires, I am confident that the community is proceeding
with great energy and enthusiasm to finalize the plan for the
transition.
The global Internet community has been working nearly
nonstop to complete consensus proposals related to the IANA
functions and has engaged in a vigorous debate on the best ways
to strengthen ICANN's accountability. The three stakeholder
groups addressing each of the IANA functions have now completed
their work.
The IANA Stewardship Transition Coordination Group is now
working to combine these proposals into a consolidated proposal
on which they will seek public commitment. The ICG's role is
crucial because it must build a public record on how the
consolidated plan meets NTIA's criteria.
In May, the Accountability Working Group sought comment on
its proposals to strengthen ICANN's accountability. During the
ICANN meeting, the broader ICANN community provided feedback to
the working group that will serve as a basis for more
discussions next week in Paris. Afterwards, the working group
plans to release an updated accountability plan for public
comment.
At the recent ICANN meeting, I took the opportunity to
remind the community to focus on the NTIA criteria and deliver
a plan that clearly and convincingly meets those conditions. I
urged stakeholders to develop a strong record in support of the
plan, answer questions anyone might have about the plan and not
leave them for future discussion and decision. On our part, I
want to assure you that we will carefully review and assess the
community's proposal to ensure that it preserves and protects
the Internet and meets the specific criteria I have previously
outlined.
I want to touch briefly on the timetable for completing the
transition and its implications for the current IANA functions
contract.
The contract expires on September 30, but it is clear we
need to extend the contract to give the multistakeholder
community the time it needs to finalize its proposal. We need
to build in time for NTIA as well as Congress to review and
evaluate the plan. And we also need to factor in time to
implement the plan, assuming it is approved.
Several weeks ago, I asked the leadership of the
stakeholder working groups to provide a status report,
including an estimate of how long it will take to finalize the
plan and implement it once it is approved. We just received
that input, and I will soon be meeting with ICANN to discuss an
extension that considers the community's input. But it is clear
we will need to extend this contract at least through next
July, and we will inform this subcommittee well in advance of
the September 30 expiration date of the length of the extension
that we work out with ICANN.
In closing, I want to assure you that throughout this
process and beyond we will remain strong and vigorous advocates
for Internet freedom, growth, and innovation. We will continue
to play a major role on ICANN's Government Advisory Committee,
where governments develop consensus advice to ICANN on public
policy matters. We will work with other stakeholders to ensure
that ICANN enforces its own rules. And, moreover, we will
continue our efforts to enhance the accountability and
transparency of ICANN, as we have the last 5 years, through our
participation in ICANN's accountability and transparency review
teams.
I am confident that when the transition is completed we
will have a stronger ICANN and a more secure Internet that will
continue to grow and thrive throughout the world.
Thank you, and I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Strickling follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Strickling. We will look forward
to that part, as well.
We will go now to Mr. Fadi Chehade, president and CEO of
ICANN.
We are delighted to have you back before our subcommittee,
and we look forward to your testimony.

STATEMENT OF FADI CHEHADE

Mr. Chehade. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
inviting us back. Good to meet you again, Ranking Member Eshoo,
all members of this committee.
I want to start by thanking you, because if we look at
where we were a year ago in this room and where we are today,
we are in a different place. Your work, your confidence in us,
but also the commitment you made through your staffs to get
engaged with us and our community is paying off. This is
government that is working. We thank you for that.
Your interest is very important. Your leadership has been
even more important in showing us the way, in making sure that
we do this right. So when we were rushed and you were asking
for oversight, I think you did the right thing by asking us to
do the right things and to slow down and to get this done
right.
So we thank you for that; the world thanks you for that.
Because if it weren't for this commitment, we would not be
where we are today. The multistakeholder model is working.
This brings me to some of the statistics Ms. Eshoo
mentioned and others mentioned. The amount of work that has
gone into this process is remarkable. It shows that the
multistakeholder model works. It is actually, itself, just the
transition process, is a triumph of this model, because people
came together and put amazing hours--you mentioned nearly
14,000 volunteer hours in the last year--to get this where it
is today.
So we continue steadfast to get this done. And I agree with
you, we are not done. We still have work to do. The
accountability area still needs to be looked at deeply. I am
committed to that. Our board is committed to that. Our
community is committed to that. I assure you we will not move
forward till the many things that you mentioned also, Mr.
Chairman, in your talk are in place so we assure everyone that
we are not leaving ICANN with any loopholes of accountability.
It has to be done.
I also want to recognize to all of you that the community,
when we say the word ``community''--you asked me before, Mr.
Shimkus, what is the community. The community is not just the
ICANN community. It is also our sister organizations who have
been immensely involved in this process. So I mention here and
I recognize the IETF, the Internet Society, the Regional
Internet Registries. All of them are independent organizations
that work with us and together with us to get this done. We are
linked by mutual commitments and by common principles--
principles of an open, secure Internet for everyone. And to
those, we really salute today the efforts they put, and we look
forward to them finishing their work.
Finally, I would just like to say I believe this process
will leave the Internet more secure, not less secure. This
process will leave ICANN, as Mr. Strickling said, stronger,
more accountable. And I think that is what we want out of any
process, not to take us backwards but to take us forwards.
I want to say something about what we have done here that
is distinctly wearing my American citizen hat. The
multistakeholder model was shepherded and promoted to the world
by us. And, thanks to the great work we are doing here and to
the optics of how well we have together managed this
transition, that model is now a very attractive model to many
people in the world who a year ago were asking the same
questions. We should be very proud of the moment we are in
here, to have nation after nation and stakeholder after
stakeholder now come around and say the multistakeholder model
is the right model. And that we celebrate together today.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Chehade follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. Mr. Chehade, thank you. And, again, thanks for
your many years of service in heading up ICANN and for your
continued efforts. We wish you well in your eventual
retirement, but we may see you before that.
I will start off on the questioning.
Mr. Strickling, currently, ICANN's Affirmation of
Commitments requires ICANN to remain domiciled in the United
States, a distinction that is legally very significant. Will
this continue after the transition? And what reassurances do we
have that this will be the case in the future?
Mr. Strickling. Yes, sir.
So, yes, it is a requirement in the Affirmation of
Commitments, and, as of right now, there is no plan for the
Affirmation of Commitments to go away. Now, it may well be
proposed by the Accountability Working Group to incorporate the
provisions of the affirmation into the bylaws, and that is not
anything we would object to as long as it is clear that those
conditions will continue on. So they will remain in force,
either through the continuation of the affirmation or by their
being incorporated in the bylaws.
It is today in the bylaws that ICANN will remain in
California, and, of course, their articles of incorporation, as
currently established, require that it be a California
corporation.
So there has been no serious proposal made in the course of
these discussions to move the location of ICANN outside of the
United States. Frankly, if it were being proposed, I don't
think that such a proposal would satisfy our criteria,
specifically the one that requires that security and stability
be maintained. So we expect that this will continue on into the
future.
Mr. Walden. Thank you.
Mr. Chehade, what has been the response of other nations to
the inclusion of this provision in the fundamental bylaws?
Mr. Chehade. I must say I am surprised and pleased that
there is general consensus, and we are not hearing strong
voices that propose something different.
As I said before here in this room, we stand by the
commitment that ICANN, as in the Affirmation of Commitments,
shall stay in the United States.
Mr. Walden. And if that provision is in the fundamental
bylaws, what kind of a vote would be required to change the
fundamental bylaws down the road?
Mr. Chehade. This is not set yet. The community is
discussing this now. But I believe the discussion centers
around a two-thirds majority vote.
Mr. Walden. All right.
Mr. Strickling, you said in your testimony it is clear the
ICANN contract will be extend beyond 2015, and I think you
indicated maybe through next July. Is that kind of the range
that you believe will be the case?
Mr. Strickling. Yes. We had asked the community, as I said
in my opening remarks, to give us their best guess, because
before the contract can expire, we both have to have a
proposal, we have to review it and approve it, you have to be
satisfied with it, assuming DOTCOM is enacted, and it has to be
implemented. And so we asked the community for their best guess
as to when that would take place.
The responses we have gotten back from the two working
groups is July at the earliest, possibly going till September.
We want to apply our own analysis to it; we want to discuss it
with ICANN. But it is clear we need to go out at least till
next July.
Mr. Walden. And I am assuming, even if DOTCOM doesn't
become law, you will still give us an opportunity for review
here in the Congress.
Mr. Strickling. Yes.
Mr. Walden. Thank you.
And can you explain, Mr. Strickling, the timeline NTIA will
follow once that proposal is received?
Mr. Strickling. So, under the current timeline, the hope
and expectation is that a final proposal might be delivered to
us in early November. We are expecting that our evaluation,
which we will conduct in as public and transparent a manner as
we can, will take some 60 to 90 days, depending on the
calendar.
We are still working through what the elements of that
review will be. We will take guidance from the GAO. We
understand that the report that they are completing may have
some guidance on that. We will look into that before we settle
on any final plan. But what I can tell you is it will be open
and transparent.
Inside the administration, we are already meeting on an
interagency basis to make sure we have all of the concerns of
other agencies with equities in this, understand what their
issues will be, making sure that those will be factored into
the process.
The record we get from the community will be very important
because, through that, we will have their best assessment as to
how their plan meets our criteria. Out of that, we will have an
opportunity to evaluate the stress tests that they have
performed. We are also looking to make sure that they are not
leaving open issues that could undermine the plan if they are
not settled now. We want to understand that they have looked at
alternatives and have made a good choice based on the
alternatives available to them. We are, frankly, looking to see
that they applied the level of rigor and analysis that anyone
would expect from an undertaking of this magnitude.
Mr. Walden. Thank you.
So, to sum up, just so I understand, the contract will be
extended likely through July of next year. It is highly likely
that ICANN will remain incorporated within California. It is
probably in that same category that that requirement will be in
the fundamental bylaws, which would be very difficult to change
forth post. And, Mr. Strickling, you have committed that
Congress, irrespective of the passage of DOTCOM, will have
adequate time to review this proposal just to continue the
discussion.
Is that a yes? Did I----
Mr. Strickling. That is a yes.
Mr. Walden [continuing]. Get all that right?
Mr. Strickling. Yes.
Mr. Walden. All right. Perfect.
Then, with that, my time has expired. I will turn to my
friend from California, Ms. Eshoo, for questions.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Now, mention was made of a two-thirds vote required to
change what is in the bylaws. What is the universe of votes?
How many voters are there?
Mr. Chehade. ICANN has 16 board members, 1-6.
Ms. Eshoo. Sixteen. So it would be two-thirds of that. And
that is not going to change, a two-thirds requirement?
Mr. Chehade. So, as I mentioned, the discussion of how to
safeguard the fundamental bylaws is happening as we speak. It
is part of the accountability group's decision. So no final
decision has been made on this, but I shared what we are
hearing from them at the moment.
The idea here, Ms. Eshoo, is to make sure that these
fundamental bylaws are safeguarded. And the test to change them
has to be extremely----
Ms. Eshoo. I understand that. I was just curious as to what
the universe of voters are.
Mr. Chehade. Sixteen board members.
Ms. Eshoo. OK.
And can you commit that ICANN will remain in California?
Mr. Chehade. Yes. I think what I committed before, as I
said in this committee, that the Affirmations of Commitment, a
very important document for us, includes this commitment, our
bylaws include that commitment, and that we stand by this.
Ms. Eshoo. Yes. Well, I think that it is even more than the
physical presence in California, which I would happily vouch
for--it is a great place to be--but that the stakeholder
community's work is really predicated on California law. So I
want to nail that down.
Over to Larry Strickling. From your perspective, what is
the top issue that still needs to be addressed before NTIA can
sign off on a transition proposal?
Mr. Strickling. We need to see the proposal, number one.
And we will assess it based on the comprehensiveness of the
complete proposal that we get.
So I would say first and foremost in my mind is to keep the
community focused on our criteria and making sure that they
deliver a plan to us that has been fully vetted and has reached
a strong support of the community that it satisfies our
criteria. So that is first and foremost our concern.
Ms. Eshoo. Well, of course it would be. But do you have any
sensibilities about potential sticking points, or you just
don't want to go there now? Not to be discussed today?
Mr. Strickling. I have tried not to put my finger on the
scale of any particular outcome. I think that is inappropriate
when we are relying on the multistakeholder model.
What I have reminded them of is, focus on the criteria, be
thorough, consider alternatives, don't leave questions
unanswered--the types of things you would expect out of any
planning process.
Ms. Eshoo. Since NTIA's announcement last March, have you
seen greater international support for the multistakeholder
model?
Mr. Strickling. Yes. There is no question about that. I
mean, in the last 2 years, we have seen growing support for the
model worldwide.
I think the evidence for that starts with the NETmundial
conference in Brazil in April of 2014, just a month after we
made our announcement. That carries through to the ITU
Plenipotentiary Conference in Korea, where, again, any attempt
to bring the Internet Domain Name System within the
jurisdiction of the ITU was rebuffed.
As we talk to people, particularly in the developing world,
we see much more support for the model than we saw even 3 years
ago.
Ms. Eshoo. Well, I think that that is very important.
I don't think I have any other questions, but I want to
thank you for the work that you both have done to help bring us
to this point. And if it takes a year from now to get to where
we need to be, I am comfortable with that. I would rather have
a solid agreement that reflects the confidence of the Congress
in this and that that would be the case, rather than us
sticking with some kind of time frame that diminishes what the
outcome is. That just doesn't make sense. So I thank you for
the work that you have put in.
And I thank the chairman for being really insistent on
this, as well. I can see the light, and it is important for the
future of the Internet.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Walden. I thank the gentlelady. And she yields back the
balance of her time.
I recognize the gentlelady from Tennessee, Mrs. Blackburn,
for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, as I said in my opening, I want to talk with you all
about the enforcements and 3.7, 3.18, 3(a).
I am very concerned about Allen Grogan's blog post. I know
you all have seen it. It was the June 12 blog post, and it is
titled ``ICANN is not the Internet Content Police.''
As I said, I don't think you need to be the content police,
but you have things that, contractually, you are to be abiding
by. And you have to be looking at these prohibitions on domain
names for illegal activity such as fraud and IP theft, things
of that nature. That is essential to credibility and to
accountability.
So, Mr. Strickling, I will come to you first. What
assurances can you provide that there will be adequate
enforcement of these contractual provisions?
Mr. Strickling. Well, first, let me state that we are
concerned about ICANN enforcing its contracts, and, in
correspondence and in our work in the Governmental Advisory
Committee, the United States Government has stood up and said
ICANN needs to be doing more in this area.
It is not directly an issue related to the IANA
transition----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Let me just jump in right there, then,
and ask you: Has NTIA had conversations with ICANN about their
responsibilities? And what has been their response?
Mr. Strickling. We have had conversations and
correspondence with them over the last several years about the
need to improve in this area. And, in all cases, ICANN has
indicated a responsiveness to improve.
It is a complicated area because when you are dealing with
registries and registrars around the world, all subject to
different local laws, the question of what is illegal in one
jurisdiction may be different in another. And this is an area
in which there needs to be a tremendous amount of work, not
just at ICANN but I think throughout the Internet community, to
find a good resolution of it.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Do you agree with Mr. Grogan's
statement in his June 12 blog post or not? Yes or no?
Mr. Strickling. Which statement is that?
Mrs. Blackburn. The opening statement, which I have now
read twice, that ICANN is not the Internet content police.
Mr. Strickling. Well, understand, Mr. Grogan doesn't report
to me or work for me. But I do agree with the idea that we do
not want ICANN becoming a regulator of speech in the world.
Yes.
Mrs. Blackburn. I agree with that.
OK, Mr. Chehade, over to you now on this one. Do you think
that copyright infringement is speech?
Mr. Chehade. I am not an expert in this area, but I will
tell you that the issue you are bringing up is very important.
I hold many patents, and I have many trademarks. I did business
for many years, and I fully appreciate this issue. But it is a
complicated issue. It is far more complicated than thinking
that the registrars and the registries and ICANN alone can
solve it. There----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Let me ask you this, then. What about
deceptive trade practices? Is that speech?
Mr. Chehade. Again, neither ICANN nor I are experts on
these issues. We have contracts, and we enforce the contracts.
And, just to be clear, in 2009, when these started becoming
issues, we had six people in compliance. We have 24 today.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Well, let me ask you this. Let's say
that--and these are issues of conduct. And I want to know what
you are doing. If you have acknowledged NTIA, and they have had
conversations, you have given responses----
Mr. Chehade. Yes.
Mrs. Blackburn [continuing]. Tell me what you are
specifically doing to drill down on this and to be sure that
there is transparency and there is compliance in this area.
Mr. Chehade. Absolutely. So, a couple of things.
First, we are committed and we are enforcing the processes
that the multistakeholder community has asked us in the
contracts to do. We are doing that. And we are doing that with
a large team of compliance folks. We have now over 40,000
complaints that are being processed in less than 10 days, all
of them. So there is a tremendous amount of work going there.
The second thing we are doing, which is very important to
the rights holders, is we are bringing them together, we are
facilitating a dialogue between them and the registries and
registrars so they could together produce some mechanisms that
allow us to move forward in a multistakeholder, collaborative
way.
Mrs. Blackburn. All right.
My time has expired. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Walden. I now recognize the gentleman from New Jersey,
Mr. Pallone, for questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Needless to say that the DOTCOM Act was the result of
strong bipartisan work from this committee. And, of course, the
House overwhelmingly passed the bill while both of you were in
Buenos Aires a few weeks ago.
So I just wanted to start with Mr. Chehade. How was the
news received in Buenos Aires about the DOTCOM Act and its
passing the House? If you could comment?
Mr. Chehade. So, as I have said before and ICANN's position
has been that we do not comment on domestic policies, because
if we do that here, we will have to do it around the world. So
it is not our place to do that.
But if you would allow me, just speaking personally----
Mr. Pallone. Absolutely.
Mr. Chehade [continuing]. As a citizen, as an American, I
am a great believer in the deliberative processes that have led
us to that. I do believe that the chairman, Chairman Walden,
has brought together many of us here, many of you, around a
very thoughtful and helpful legislation. I think the multiple
voices that have come together here to help us is impressive.
So, as an individual, I must tell you I am impressed by the
process, and I am respectful of it. And I thank the chairman
and all of you for the hard work you have put in to bring this
together.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Well, thank you very much.
Mr. Chehade, we have seen success of the multistakeholder
approach, and we want that success to continue, obviously. And
that is why I think it is so important to empower the Internet
community to hold ICANN accountable in the absence of a U.S.
Government backstop.
And I have heard concerns about whether contractual
obligations created through the multistakeholder process are
being adequately enforced. And I agree with your statement--I
know Mrs. Blackburn got into this somewhat--that ICANN is not
the Internet content police. But I believe protections designed
by the multistakeholder community to prevent exploiting
children, selling drugs illegally, or intellectual property
theft online should be enforced.
So could you just explain a little more to the committee
how ICANN is working to address those concerns?
Mr. Chehade. Thank you, Mr. Pallone.
Let me be clear. When we say terms like ``we are not the
content police,'' it is important to know that ICANN is not a
regulator. We administer contracts. This is the model we work
with. If it is in the contract, we are making sure it is
followed.
And our contracts, as Mrs. Blackburn said, do call for our
registries and registrars to work within the law. So if the law
is broken in the hundreds of jurisdictions we are engaged in
here and that is made clear, our registries and registrars, per
our contracts with them, must comply. And they do.
Now, when we receive complaints--and I just mentioned that
we have processed thousands, tens of thousands of complaints--
we act upon them. We reach out to our registries and
registrars. We let them know we have a complaint, and we make
sure they follow what is in the contract.
And we are doing this actively. We have, as I mentioned,
gone from 6 people to 24 people in that department just in the
last few years. And we will continue investing to make sure our
job begins and stops with what is in the contract and making
sure people comply with that.
Mr. Pallone. All right.
Let me ask Mr. Strickling, you have been very clear and
consistent about the criteria NTIA will use to evaluate the
transition, and in Buenos Aires you urged the community to stay
focused on those criteria.
But my question is, were NTIA's criteria reflected in the
discussions you participated in at the ICANN 53?
Mr. Strickling. The criteria are in front of the groups
that are working on this throughout the discussion. If you look
at the public comment processes that have been run, they have
sought public comment on this.
What we were reminding the community was that, as we go
through this next round of public comment, first on the ICG
combined plan, as well as with the accountability provisions,
when they go out for public comment, we want to make sure there
is a very clear focus in that public comment round in making
sure that the community is providing its input and its opinion
as to how these measures will satisfy our criteria so that we
have the record we will need to have to be able to certify to
this committee and to Congress overall that the plan presented
to us meets our criteria.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Because I have heard that the U.S.
Government's current role in the IANA functions was described
as largely symbolic. I am not asking you necessarily to comment
on that, but----
Mr. Strickling. Well, we have made clear from the start
that the actual work we do with respect to the IANA functions
is a clerical task, yes.
The accountability discussion, though, emerged out of a
larger sense that the presence of a contract between ICANN and
the United States Government provided a certain backstop for
ultimate accountability of ICANN.
The community clearly believes that. And that is reflected
in the strength of the discussions that they have been holding
on what they want to do to make ICANN accountable when the
United States Government is no longer there with the IANA
contract to provide whatever perceived backstop folks thought
exists.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. I now recognize the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Latta, for 5 minutes, the vice chair of the committee.
Mr. Latta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, again, to our witnesses, thanks very much for being
here and testifying.
Mr. Chehade, if I could ask you the first question. In your
testimony, you state, ``The best way to safeguard the Internet
we all want--a free, open, secure, stable, and resilient
Internet--is to ensure ICANN is strong, independent, and
thriving.'' And I appreciate and agree with that viewpoint. The
work being done by the CCWG-Accountability, or the Cross-
Community Working Group-Accountability, seems to be designed to
ensure such an outcome.
We have all heard a lot about the work being done to get
ICANN ready for the IANA transition, but that is not all the
CCWG is considering. What are some of the issues that the CCWG
has begun to take up for Workstream 2, the ongoing changes to
ICANN accountability beyond the transition?
Mr. Chehade. I believe right now most of the focus of the
community has been on Workstream 1 because there is a bit of a
sorting process going on. All the ideas have been put on the
table. What is listed in Workstream 2 at the moment has been
what I would call tweaks to our accountability rather than some
large concepts that are coming.
Mr. Latta. So are Workstream 1 and Workstream 2 going in
kind of a parallel course right now?
Mr. Chehade. I think most of the work is now focused on
Workstream 1. As ideas come in the discussion, folks may
immediately put them into a holding pattern in Workstream 2.
But I do think very soon, as Workstream 1 starts coming to a
close, a lot of the energy will shift to seeing what didn't
make it in Workstream 1 that will shift to Workstream 2 and
what new ideas may come out of Workstream----
Mr. Latta. Is there a timeframe on Workstream 1?
Mr. Chehade. Yes. I think----
Mr. Latta. And what is that, please?
Mr. Chehade. I think most of the community members are
telling us that sometime in the fall, in the October-November
timeframe, they will also finish their work on Workstream 1 so
that it merges with the ICG proposal.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Mr. Strickling, to follow up, there have been suggestions
by the community that some of the more difficult changes to
ICANN's bylaws be committed to in the transition but
implemented in Workstream 2. Does this meet with NTIA's
requirements?
Mr. Strickling. I am not sure I have heard that. What we
have said is whatever is part of Workstream 1 needs to be
implemented before the contract expires.
Now, under the DOTCOM Act, we understand we can certify to
Congress once the bylaws have been adopted. But that doesn't
end the contract. They have to actually implement that before
the contract ends. And that is what we are looking at in this
July or post-July timeframe in terms of how long it might take
for the community to actually go ahead and implement the bylaws
changes once they have been adopted.
Once they are adopted, they are enforceable. But the issue
will be, to the extent that any new structures are being
created, such as are being proposed in, say, the naming
proposal, they will need some time to do that. But we have made
it clear that those have to be done before the contract
expires.
Mr. Latta. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Chehade, there has been ongoing concern that the
expansion of the generic top-level domain, the gTLD, program
would exacerbate the existing potential for abuse of the Domain
Name System. And this was brought into sharp focus over the
last few months as a rather offensive domain name was
delegated, leaving registered brands and trademarks with the
unenviable option of paying $2,500 to reserve that offensive
domain name or face potential predatory registration.
Is there more than ICANN can be doing to prevent the
exploitation or extortion of registered brands and trademarks
as more strings are delegated? And how is ICANN learning from
the first round of the new gTLDs?
Mr. Chehade. I think the community has spoken, over the
years, multiple times that they do not want to see ICANN become
a competition authority or a price-setting body. And so the
contracts have been set up by the community, through community
input, including business, government, and all stakeholders,
and we are enforcing those contracts. Those contracts today do
not include pricing provisions that allow us to cap prices.
Now, if we receive complaints, as we did with that
particular top-level domain you referred to, Mr. Latta, we act
on these complaints. We follow them. And, in this case, for
example, we asked authorities in the country where that
particular operator is to see if they have any guidance for us.
We did not receive guidance that allows us to do anything at
the moment different than what we have been doing.
Having said that, we are watching very carefully those top-
level domain operators, especially the ones we receive
complaints about, making sure that they are working within the
provisions of the contract.
Finally, if the community wishes to change what they asked
us to enforce, the multistakeholder model allows them
immediately to get together and to start moving a policy,
bottom up, that will change what we are able to enforce. That
is all we have as a tool, as a mechanism, to do our work. We
cannot regulate; we can simply administer and enforce these
contracts. And that we are doing.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I see my time has expired, and I yield back.
Mr. Walden. The gentleman yields back.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, one of
the authors of the DOTCOM Act, a leader on this issue, Mr.
Shimkus.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you for being here. And, yes, we are in a better
place than we were a year ago, and it is thanks to your help
and, obviously, Chairman Walden and the chief counsel and,
obviously, the ranking member.
Not only were we frustrated last year, but I have a son who
is an Internet type of kid, so I am going to get a copy of the
transcript where you all said nice things about me and make
sure I show that to him so----
Mr. Walden. You could post it on Snapchat or something.
Mr. Shimkus. That is right. So hopefully he will like me a
little bit better, that I am really trying to be helpful. I
wasn't so helpful last year, in his eyes.
I have a copy of the DOTCOM Act, and really, all we did was
took NTIA principles, put them in the legislative language.
That is kind of the agreement that you said you are going to
comply with.
We also took what ICANN was doing and the working group,
the Cross-Community Working Group, and the Stewardship
Transition Coordination Group and say they have work to do, we
should see what is going on, certification, and get done.
But extending the contracts is still a pretty big deal,
don't you think, Mr. Strickling?
Mr. Strickling. I am not sure what you mean by a ``big
deal.'' I think what it demonstrates, though, is that we want
this process to proceed in an orderly fashion----
Mr. Shimkus. Right. And we almost have to do that by--the
contract has to get extended to do that----
Mr. Strickling. Right.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. In a formalized process.
Mr. Strickling. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. And then, also, on the review process, which
was set up in the DOTCOM Act, there is no mandate, unless we
pass the DOTCOM Act, of you all bringing that back towards us,
right?
The law says--is the whole trust-but-verify portion of what
we have been trying to talk about for the last year, is that
that is the forcing mechanism. I am not saying you wouldn't do
it. But the DOTCOM Act still is, I think, pretty important to
try to get to completion and have, if it is unchanged as it
goes through the Senate--and however the administration then
asks for counsel from the Department of Commerce to NTIA of
whether the President should sign it, what would your
recommendation be?
Mr. Strickling. So, as long as we are clear we are speaking
for NTIA--because the administration hasn't actually come to a
position on this--it is NTIA's view we would recommend to the
President to sign it.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes. And that is what I was asking, I mean,
what would you recommend that he do. And I appreciate that.
Because I think it is important. I think the Senate is on
board. We will let the leadership of the--Mr. Upton and folks
make sure that they move those things the way they hopefully
will get moved.
I want to ask a question, Mr. Chehade, about the Government
Advisory Committee and the way in which governments are
supposed to participate in the ICANN process. Currently, there
is no voting rights in that group. What do you think the role
will be as we move forward?
Mr. Chehade. If you would allow me, Mr. Chairman, I will
start by addressing Mr. Shimkus' son, because it seems like we
caused him some difficulty there.
Mr. Shimkus. I cause a lot of difficulty. It was just one
of many.
Mr. Chehade. So I am addressing him, wherever he is, to
thank him for your leadership.
And I know we had a difficult beginning together, but if it
weren't for your passion and your commitment to this, we
wouldn't be here today. So thank you for that.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. I am going to wrap that up and put
it under the Christmas tree.
Mr. Chehade. Now, I do want to answer you on the GAC
question. This is an important question.
I do believe we have achieved in the role of the Government
Advisory Committee at ICANN today a very powerful and unique
balance, where we have governments in an advisory role. I do
believe that maintaining that balance is important, that any
effort or any unintended consequence that will lead to
governments suddenly being voting bodies at ICANN changes the
great formula that got us here today.
So let's keep things calm and consistent, as they have
been. And I hope that this process will not cause,
unintentionally, a change in the relative role of governments
within ICANN.
Mr. Shimkus. Great. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
Mr. Walden. The gentleman yields back. There will be DVDs
of Mr. Chehade's comments to your son available in the lobby
afterwards.
We will go now to Mr. Lance for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lance. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And I apologize for going back and forth between two
subcommittee hearings, and I certainly respect both witnesses.
Mr. Chehade, I understand comments were filed yesterday
with an ICANN working group regarding proposals for addressing
privacy/proxy services.
It make sense to me that there are legitimate reasons for
the use of privacy/proxy services. However, there also must be
a process for addressing cases where parties are hiding behind
privacy and proxy services to engage, and perhaps engage
repeatedly, in illegal activity harmful to the public.
Can you please explain to me the current status of the
privacy/proxy accreditation process?
Mr. Chehade. Thank you.
I want to be clear that there is no change yet. This is
simply a typical policy development process in the ICANN
community, and, as part of that process, some stakeholders
suggested some changes to how our privacy policies exist today.
Those changes are still in discussion; they are in the
public comment phase. The fact that the community is paying
attention and sending letters to all of you and to all of us,
as well, is actually a perfect sign that the multistakeholder
model works.
In terms of the status of this particular provision, Mr.
Lance, I think that what is clear right now is that there is
not consensus in the community on this change. And unless there
is consensus, it doesn't come for a recommendation to the
community for approval, to the council called the GNSO.
So that is where we stand today. I encourage all of us to
ask our stakeholders and our communities to participate in the
public comment period so we can guide this process in the best
way possible.
Mr. Lance. Thank you.
Mr. Strickling, would you like to comment, sir?
Mr. Strickling. So the United States Government hasn't
taken a position on this issue yet. It is a difficult one
because we need to balance the privacy interests of people who
want to express themselves on the Internet against the interest
people have in knowing who they do business with.
Mr. Lance. Yes.
Mr. Strickling. So the actual proposal that was out for
public comment was whether or not people who are running Web
sites to engage in business transactions--in other words, to
take money from you--should be excluded from being able to
stand behind privacy or proxy-type services as a way to shield
their identity from people they are doing business with. That
is what is out for comment.
So even the proposal that is out there is not as broad as
some people have feared, which is that it is to remove the
ability of anybody who wants to perhaps express themselves in a
way that others might not agree with, to harassment or that
sort of thing. So I think we need to stay focused on the actual
issue that is out for comment.
But, as Mr. Chehade said, we are still a long ways away
from any final judgment being developed in this. And, again, to
the extent any judgment is rendered, it will be a
multistakeholder consensus working through all of these issues.
And there are strong arguments on both sides in terms of how to
work this through. And it is a marvel to watch the community
work their way through these very difficult issues.
Mr. Lance. Thank you.
As a follow-up, some concerns had been raised by various
advocacy groups that under the new proposal those who have used
privacy proxy settings could be the target of harassment
online. And, of course, we are all concerned about First
Amendment rights on the Internet as it pertains to political
activity. As you both know, Alabama v. NAACP found that
anonymity is important in maintaining coercion-free speech as
it relates to controversial political activity.
Gentlemen, what is ICANN's responsibility to protect the
First Amendment rights of those who own domain names? And could
you explain to the committee what safeguards you propose to put
in place to make sure that this type of harassment does not
occur?
Mr. Chehade.
Mr. Chehade. Thank you.
The provisions to protect anonymity are in place, let's be
very clear. So we do have proxy services that do this today. I
think the community that is reaching out to many of us is
concerned if change occurs. I think, as Mr. Strickling
described very carefully the change being proposed, which,
again, still does not have consensus, is actually very narrow
change that is very limited to certain conditions.
Again, for those who are concerned, we encourage
involvement, we encourage exactly what they are doing, and I do
believe the consensus of the community will be upheld and will
maintain, hopefully, the proper rights for people to continue
their free speech as well as their anonymity.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. My time has expired.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. I thank the gentleman.
And we will now go to Mr. Long, Missouri, for questions.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Strickling, if the transfer goes through, it seems
to me we should at least ensure that we keep .mil and .gov for
our government's exclusive, perpetual, and cost-free use. What
do we need to do before or after the transfer to make that
happen?
Mr. Strickling. So thank you, Congressman, for that
question.
There is nothing in the transition of our stewardship which
actually implicates .mil or .gov, and also .us, which we
administer at the Department of Commerce. But we understand
this is an issue of concern and so we will do whatever is
appropriate, in consultation with the Department of Defense and
GSA and the other agencies that have equities in this, to make
sure that these names are protected going forward. We
understand the importance of it.
Today, they are not under any particular contract. These
are legacy names that go back to the very beginning of the
Internet. I think .mil was delegated back in 1984. That shows
you how old it is. So there is no contract today, but there is
a whole structure of these informal regulations within the
Internet model that govern how----
Mr. Long. So you think informal regulations would hold up
through this process?
Mr. Strickling. There is no reason why they should change,
but we are not going to rest there. We are going to take a look
at them and make sure that if there is a way we can strengthen
the U.S. Government's rights to those names, we will do so.
Mr. Long. OK. And do you have any idea how we could do
that?
Mr. Strickling. We will be evaluating that. Right now,
there is a reluctance, I think, to enter into a contract for
these names since they have been working well over the years as
legacy names, as there are many other legacy domain names,
particularly in the country code. So this is not an issue
unique to these particular names.
And the process is very clear that they can't be
redelegated or reassigned to somebody else today without the
approval of the current holder of the name, the Department of
Defense or Department of Commerce. So the question is, is there
some additional structure we could put in place to tighten that
up even further? And that is the evaluation we will conduct
before the transition is completed.
Mr. Long. OK.
Mr. Chehade, I am going to repeat myself and repeat the
question for your benefit just to make sure that I get it out
there right and you will have a chance to respond. You were
doing a lot of head nodding during his response.
Mr. Chehade. Yes.
Mr. Long. So if the transfer goes through, it seems to me,
we should at least ensure that we keep .mil and .gov for our
government's exclusive, perpetual, and cost-free use. What do
we need to do before or after the transfer to make that happen?
Mr. Chehade. So, first, I agree wholeheartedly that we
should make sure that these remain with their owners. There is
no question about it. Let me clarify: Today, no one can touch
.mil or .gov without us getting direct and clear instructions
from the U.S. Government. No one else.
Mr. Long. And that will be true after the transfer goes
through? That is my question.
Mr. Chehade. And it will be exactly the same after the
transfer. Having said that, if, as Assistant Secretary
Strickling said, we need to enter into any other form of
agreement or arrangement to assure the U.S. Government of their
ownership, we are happy to do it.
Mr. Long. OK. Thank you.
And staying with you, Mr. Chehade, could you give us a real
world example of how the changes the bylaws will make the
Internet Corporation for assigned names and numbers--ICANN we
have been speaking about today--more responsive to the
multistakeholder community?
Mr. Chehade. I will give you one or two, sir. I think a
very important one would be to make sure that our appeal
mechanisms are strengthened and accessible to those who need to
use them when anyone in the community feels that our work is
not adhering to the policy set in the community.
A second one that would be helpful would be to make sure we
strengthen how we hold our board members, including myself,
accountable to the community's policies that have been handed
to us to be implemented. And there are ways to do that, and I
hope these things are done and implemented into the bylaws,
even before we hand Mr. Strickling our proposal. So we are
going to be on the ready to strengthen these things as soon as
we can.
Mr. Long. OK. One discussion around the increasing of the
ICANN's accountability has included the idea of recall
provisions, the ability to remove members of the board. What is
your opinion of that proposal?
Mr. Chehade. I think it is a good idea.
Mr. Long. You have one second.
Mr. Chehade. It is a good idea.
Mr. Long. OK. You did it in a second. I appreciate that.
If I had any time, I would yield back, but I don't, so I
won't.
Mr. Walden. OK.
We are going to go now to the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Olson, for questions.
Mr. Olson. I thank the chair and my colleagues. That is a
tough act to follow.
Welcome to our witnesses, our panelists.
My first questions are for you, Mr. Chehade. One proposal
from the ICANN accountability working group is the
``fundamental bylaws'' that include required three-fourths
approval by the ICANN board for any changes, as well as a way
to reject changes by the multistakeholder community? That
sounds a lot like our Constitution, to amend it or override a
veto. But remember, the 25th Amendment took 203 years to become
a full amendment.
So can you elaborate on how this process works, and do you
think it will approve accountability? How will this thing work,
making sure we have an accountable ICANN?
Mr. Chehade. I believe that creating a subset of the bylaws
that here are being called fundamental by our community is
going to strengthen our accountability ultimately, because
today the community feels that our board of directors, 16
people, can get together and amend the bylaws. Yes, they have
provisions for notice and all of that is in place. But
sequestering or creating a certain set of bylaws is
fundamental, and putting a much higher test for touching these
I think makes us a stronger organization with very clear
institutional core commitments, and I support that. I believe
it will make us stronger.
The question, of course, in the next few months would be to
decide what goes into that fence. And it is important that we
think through this clearly so that we make sure that it doesn't
end up either crippling the organization or making us
ineffective. But I am very supportive of the concept, and,
frankly, I am very pleased the community is putting it forth.
Mr. Olson. And that leads to my next question. Do you
believe that there is a culture of accountability within the
membership of the community to make this effective? Do they
take this seriously? I mean, they would have to. Do you think
they do that right now, sir?
Mr. Chehade. Oh, yes, sir.
Mr. Olson. Great.
Mr. Chehade. Let me tell you, they take accountability very
seriously in our community. I think for some of your staffers
who visited our meetings, they can assure you this is not a
community that lets anything go by, and we thank them for that.
Mr. Olson. Mr. Strickling, what role will NTIA play in
Internet governance after transition is complete?
Mr. Strickling. We will continue to play an important role.
At ICANN specifically, we will continue as a key member of the
Governmental Advisory Committee through which governments
render public policy advice to the board. We will continue to
participate with other stakeholders on matters of importance at
ICANN. The issue of enforcement came up earlier. That is an
area that we will continue to pay attention to, as well as the
other policy issues as they arise.
So we are not going anywhere in any of this. As I said, the
one thing that changes is that we will no longer be verifying
changes to the root zone file. That is the clerical task we
perform now and that is what will go away when the contract
terminates.
Mr. Olson. So America will have a strong process in the
decisionmaking process going forward to ICANN. That is correct?
Mr. Strickling. Yes.
Mr. Olson. OK. Good to hear.
Another question for you, Mr. Chehade. With the current
process of assigning gTLDs and generic Top-Level Domain, do you
expect this process to change with this transition? If yes, how
so?
Mr. Chehade. The only thing that this transition will do to
affect that process is very minor, and that is, after the
process is finished and a new top-level domain needs to be
delegated, which is the word for putting it into the root of
the domain name system, today that process involves NTIA.
So it is the very end of a long process that takes years.
There is a final function to simply add it. And it is that NTIA
transition bit of the process that will change. Everything else
before that, that qualifies people, brings them on board,
ensures they serve the community, ensures they adhere to their
contracts, unchanged.
Mr. Olson. Unchanged.
Final question for you, sir. There has been talk about
outstanding applications of TLDs, that domain, outstanding
applications. Is there a plan on how to proceed? I have heard
some problems with outstanding applications for TLDs, top-level
domain names. Looks like I have got you confused.
Mr. Strickling. I am not sure exactly what you are
referring to. But I will say this about the controversies about
the addition of top-level domains, which is that it is a big
program. They have added over 600 new top-level domains so far.
Mr. Olson. But applications like .med and .cpa. Does that
clarify things? Yes, I am sorry. That is my fault.
Mr. Chehade. I apologize, Mr. Olson. Now I understand what
you meant.
Mr. Olson. No, no. That is my fault, sir. Don't apologize.
Mr. Chehade. So, yes, very important. For example, the .cpa
addition, which is very important, and I think will serve the
community of certified public accountants, we are now going
through a process to decide if one of those applications,
because there were multiple applicants, is what we call a
community application. And community applications at ICANN
receive different criteria in the way we work with them.
When that process ends, and I hope it ends soon, if AICPA
is selected as a community applicant, then they will have
certain rights to move forward with, with their contract. If
not, they will still be able to continue, but they will need to
then compete with other applicants.
Mr. Olson. Sorry for the curve ball.
I yield back.
Mr. Walden. Gentleman yields back.
I recognize the gentleman from Florida now, Mr. Bilirakis.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
Like many of my colleagues, one of my greatest concerns
with the transition is the susceptibility of ICANN to
manipulate or be captured by foreign governments. You both
assert in your written testimony that this is a concern you are
working to safeguard.
Mr. Strickling, what specific concerns remain after your
latest meeting about encroachment from the intergovernmental
body like the U.N., and how would you evaluate the proposals
being considered by ICANN? And then I have a couple more
questions too.
Mr. Strickling. So this is a very important issue, and it
is one of our key criteria, to ensure that as we step out of
our stewardship role that we are not replaced by another
government or group of governments.
I have to tell you, there is nothing in the planning that
we have seen so far that indicates this is a likely or even
possible outcome. The current board structure does not allow
governments to sit on the board. The government advisory
committee's role is limited to providing advice to the board.
There haven't been any proposals to change that. Indeed, the
proposals that are being discussed right now would actually
make it clearer exactly under what conditions the governments
can provide advice that the board would have to follow.
So I think all signs are that the end of this process will
yield a result that will satisfy that criteria, but I don't
have the final plan yet, I don't have the final proposal, and
we will need to see that before we can render a comprehensive
conclusion on that score.
Mr. Bilirakis. Mr. Chehade, what are your thoughts? I am
sorry if I mispronounce. I just came in. I was in another
meeting. I apologize.
Mr. Chehade. No, no. I think we probably both suffer from
that, so it is OK.
Let me be clear: Governments today have an advisory role at
ICANN. No government can sit on our board of directors. They do
not have a voting mechanism. We hope this will be maintained as
we move forward.
I must tell you also that the process that the U.S.
Government started here to make the transition move forward has
become itself an attraction to many others, including
governments who did not believe or understand how the
multistakeholder model works.
So I think we are seeing governments participate in the
process in their advisory capacity and continue to do so in
more numbers than we did before. And we thank them for that,
and we believe they should continue in their advisory role. So
we are seeing, as Mr. Strickling said very clearly, we are
seeing no signs at the moment of any government asking for new
or different powers, and I hope we maintain that balance moving
forward.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you.
Another question for you, sir. Two months ago we heard from
Matthew Shears from the Center for Democracy and Technology,
who mentioned a hybrid proposal of separating functions and
oversight to ensure accountability. He concluded by saying this
can work if ICANN is held accountable to its own internal
governance structures and stressed the multistakeholder
community needs to be more empowered than it is today for it
all to work.
Again, can you address his argument and speak on if the
multistakeholder community is more empowered after the latest
proposals and meetings? And I know you have touched on the
recall procedures, I have heard, and is it true? Anything else?
Mr. Chehade. What is left is, for me, right now the only
decisions I can make is to pick the coffee in my office. So if
they take that away, they pretty much have every decision that
happens at ICANN. And that is how it should be. That is how
ICANN is designed.
Can we strengthen that? Yes, and we should. How do we do
that? By making sure that policy is always started in the
community and actually goes through a community process before
it gets to us, and that if the board, with its power, at any
time does not follow community policy, or the board changes
community policy, that the community has a recourse to be able
to get the board to actually perform what they are supposed to
do, which is the community policy.
So I support strengthening that and doing everything
possible we do, but I must assure you that today our community
is firmly rooted in the decisionmaking of policies that affect
the domain name system of the Internet. So are the communities
that give us the other policies, such as the IETF for critical
parameters and the Regional Internet Registries for numbers.
They are the communities that are empowered to make the
policies for their important identifiers. We simply are here to
facilitate, coordinate, not decide or change community
policies.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you.
Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Appreciate it.
Mr. Walden. The gentleman yields back the balance of his
time.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. I am sorry. Mr. Johnson, I am sorry. Mr.
Guthrie had returned.
Mr. Guthrie. I will be here. I will let him go ahead.
Mr. Walden. All right. If you two work it out, I will go
back to Mr. Johnson. Sorry about that.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank
my colleague for yielding.
Mr. Strickling, last year members of the committee sent a
letter to GAO requesting a nonpartisan review of the transition
and subsequent report, which is expected sometime later this
summer. Do you intend to take this report into account when
evaluating the proposal?
Mr. Strickling. Assuming we get it in a timeframe that is
relevant, yes.
Mr. Johnson. If we get it this summer, is that going to be
within the timeframe?
Mr. Strickling. Then I do believe we will be able to take
their learnings and advice and incorporate them in our review,
yes.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Chehade, one proposal from the ICANN Accountability
Working Group is to make changes to the ICANN mission statement
to enumerate and restrict the authority of ICANN. Can you
elaborate on how you think this will help improve
accountability?
Mr. Chehade. I first will just preface by saying there are
many, many proposals. We are in the early stage of people
proposing a lot of changes to our bylaws and to our operations.
So I don't want to specifically speak about any one particular
proposal, lest the community think, frankly, we are rendering
opinion on their work. We want them to give us at the end of
the day--and they are working very hard, next week they have a
big meeting again on that--they are going to give us a list of
things, including changes to our mission and our bylaws. We are
going to wait to see all of this to support their efforts to
strengthen our accountability.
However, if I could say to everyone watching this closely,
it is equally important to make sure that we don't
unintentionally introduce things that destabilize what we have
been working on for over 16 years. So while we should always
strengthen accountability, we should strengthen our mission, we
should stay very focused in our mission, we should not in any
way increase our remit. We have a very specific remit and a
very, very careful balance with our partners, the IETF and the
Regional Internet Registries. We must maintain that, keep our
roles where they are.
So looking forward to see what the community will come back
with and committed, sir, committed to improve our
accountability, but not at the expense of stability.
Mr. Johnson. Well, in light of that then, are there more
effective ways of achieving the goal of better accountability
in your mind?
Mr. Chehade. No. I do think the community is right now
debating the right ideas. There are just many of them on the
table, and I think the process is not yet at the point where we
are out of the tunnel. We are still in the sausage-making phase
of watching how the community's ideas are being put on the
table.
So I think in the next 4 or 5 weeks we are going to get
more clarity, and we leave it to the community, we are not
influencing the process. I am not even participating at the
meetings. Our board members, when they do, they do it as
individuals who are contributing, not as a board. So we are
letting the community lead, and that is how it should be.
Mr. Johnson. OK. All right.
Mr. Strickling, you have stated that NTIA will not permit a
government-led organization or an intergovernmental
organization from overseeing the IANA functions. How would the
proposed changes prevent the IANA functions from being
transferred to an intergovernmental organization in the future?
Mr. Strickling. The proposals that are being considered by
the community themselves make it very clear that these
functions will remain at ICANN. There has been no proposal to
move them anywhere else. And when you look at the makeup of the
board, when you look at what is being proposed in terms of new
bylaw changes, it will assuredly prevent a government from
stepping in and taking over any of the roles at ICANN based on
where the community is at and the provisions of the bylaws that
will come out of this process.
So I think on that we are pretty confident that will be the
outcome of the plan that is submitted to us. But, again, I have
to put the caveat in that we haven't seen a formal proposal,
and I really want to reserve final judgment until we have a
plan to officially comment on.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Well, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the 24 seconds I have.
Mr. Walden. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
We will now recognize the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr.
Guthrie.
Mr. Guthrie. Hey, thank you very much.
And my questions are for Mr. Chehade.
But before I get started, Secretary Strickling, thanks for
all the work. We worked on spectrum together, different things
together, and I have always enjoyed working with you.
And I actually have a sheet of acronyms if anybody needs
any, because I was in the military and I thought they had
acronyms. So I am going to read through them, and if you need
me to clarify anything, I will let you know.
Mr. Chehade, the CCWG-Accountability and the ICG have both
recently sent letters to the NTIA indicating that it will take
until next summer to make the changes necessary to transition
to IANA. Can you elaborate on the time line that you are
envisioning for the transition process?
Mr. Chehade. Thank you.
I think that there will be three phases ahead of us. The
phase we are in now is the community's phase to finish the
proposals. The ICG and the CCWG need to finish their proposals
and hand them to the U.S. Government. As Mr. Strickling said
earlier, what we are hearing from the community is that this
will take place in early November.
The next phase after that is the phase Mr. Strickling
described carefully as to what the U.S. Government will do with
those proposals once received. And if the DOTCOM Act becomes
law, then it is within that period that all of us, including
the Department of Commerce and Congress, should have all the
time we need to look at these proposals carefully and assess
them.
Our estimate from listening to the community is that that
phase will last 4 to 5 months total, in total lapsed time. So
that leaves us with one last phase, as Mr. Strickling
described, and that is implementing whatever has not yet been
implemented in order for the contract to lapse. That last phase
right now we are estimating will end sometime between July and
September of 2016. And, again, all these dates are up to the
community. They are flexible.
Mr. Guthrie. Well, thank you.
And another question. ICANN's board chose to suspend
Amazon's application for the .amazon gTLD, generic Top-Level
Domain, .amazon, after governments objected. What is the
current status of Amazon's application? And what can be done to
ensure Amazon's legitimate use of that space?
Mr. Chehade. The company Amazon is a great partner of
ICANN, and they are going to be holding tens of new top-level
domains, and we are working very closely with them on a much
broader agenda of things. So we are very close to them, and we
work very closely on the issue of .amazon.
Specifically there, the board has for now put that
application aside. What we have been doing lately is
facilitating a dialogue between the company and those who have
objected to that TLD, and that is the role ICANN should play.
We should not be directing. We should not be involved in these
discussions. We should use our good offices to facilitate
dialogue between different parties, and that dialogue is going
as we speak.
Mr. Guthrie. Thanks. And it is important to us, all this
happens in the Internet world or whatever, but there are good,
hard-working Kentuckians in Campbellsville, Kentucky, shipping
the stuff out that goes through Amazon. So we want to make sure
that that company is successful, continues to be as successful
as it is.
And the final, the Accountability Working Group has
proposed several mechanisms intended to improve the
accountability of ICANN to the multistakeholder community. Can
you elaborate on some of the key proposals and how they will
operate.
Mr. Chehade. Yes. I do believe the proposals relating to
strengthening the appeals mechanisms at ICANN are important.
The proposals pertaining to ensuring that either individual
board members or the board can be recalled under certain
conditions that would give the community the strength and the
belief that board members are accountable to the community's
policies, these are important proposals.
And we believe that the combination of these and the
fundamental bylaws, which we discussed at length today, the
idea that some of our bylaws can be enshrined in a certain part
of our governing documents and with higher tests to touch them,
to change them, I think these things are very fundamental. And
we thank, frankly, our community for the work they are doing to
understand proposals like these and how we can put them in
place.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you very much. I appreciate your answer.
I appreciate working with you, Secretary Strickling.
I yield back.
Mr. Walden. Gentleman yields back the balance of his time.
And our last participant today, who has been here
throughout, but not least, the gentlelady from North Carolina,
Mrs. Ellmers.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, gentlemen, for being here. And I apologize
for being here, leaving, coming back, dueling subcommittee
hearings today.
And so, if I ask a question that you have already responded
to, please indulge me so that we can get to the bottom of this
issue.
Mr. Strickling, I am going to start with you. In your
testimony, you state that you believe ICANN has made
``significant progress in fulfilling the commitments
established by the affirmation.'' Can you tell us more about
the accountability and transparency reviews--I know that has
already been addressed--that were conducted by the review teams
as part of the process?
Mr. Strickling. Yes. So accountability and transparency has
long been on the agenda at ICANN. It even predates the
affirmation of commitments that we signed in 2009 with ICANN.
As part of the affirmation, on a 3-year cycle, ICANN has
organized stakeholder groups to perform a review of the
accountability and transparency organization.
I have personally participated in the first two of those
teams in 2010 and again in 2013. A lot of this is now being
dwarfed by a much broader multistakeholder process that we have
been talking about today, the Working Group on Accountability,
related to the IANA transition. But the work of the first two
accountability teams went through issues like board selection,
issues of how does the board respond to advice from the
Governmental Advisory Committee. We looked at the appeals
mechanisms that were in place at that point in time that are
now being reevaluated yet again as part of this review related
to the transition.
Out of the first review, I think there were 29
recommendations. ICANN, the board, agreed to implement all of
them. Out of the second review--I can't remember the exact
number of recommendations--again, the board agreed to implement
all of them and is in various stages of completing that work.
So this has been a long-term process at ICANN. And while we
know that improvement can always be made, and we are seeing
that coming out of the Accountability Working Group that is at
work today, I would tell you that this organization still is
about as accountable a group as any I have ever worked with. It
is setting the standard for that. And we look forward to the
improvements that will emerge out of the current process,
because I think that will leave ICANN an even stronger
organization and one that is even much more directly
accountable to its stakeholder community than it is today.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you.
And, Mr. Chehade, I want to give you a chance to respond to
that as well. I do want to ask, as the debate continues for
CCWG. The continuing debate that is going on is the independent
review board, the IRB. Essentially, this is the structure that
acts as the judicial branch of ICANN. Would you sum it up that
way?
Mr. Chehade. Yes, that is true. And that process has been
tested a couple of times. We need to make sure that that
process answers the community's need for independent review,
and we need to strengthen that process. I believe there is room
to continue strengthening that process.
And I would, frankly, second everything Assistant Secretary
said about our commitment to accountability. I recently met
with one of the, frankly, top academics in the U.S. on
corporate governance, and he quizzed us quite hard. And at the
end of this he said, ``You are more accountable than 95 percent
of American corporations.''
And my answer, frankly, was, ``That is not good enough. We
need to work harder.'' Because we have a public mission in the
public interest and therefore we have to answer to a higher
mission even than most corporations. So we will continue
strengthening that.
But I want to also leave you with the impression Mr.
Strickling did that ICANN is actually a very, very accountable
firm. I have worked for IBM, for AT&T, for many companies, and
I can tell you ICANN is in a great position, and we are seeking
to further improve it.
Mrs. Ellmers. Just summing up what you said in my 40
seconds left, basically, the goals that remain or the issues
that are still playing out are issues in regard to
strengthening ICANN----
Mr. Chehade. Yes, absolutely.
Mrs. Ellmers [continuing]. In its present form and moving
forward.
Mr. Chehade. Absolutely. And we welcome them.
Mrs. Ellmers. Great. Thank you both so much for being here
today with us.
Mr. Walden. I want to thank both of our witnesses for your
exemplary testimony and answering our questions and the good
work that you are doing to address the concerns that I think
you have heard expressed here.
I want to thank our members for their active participation
in the hearing.
And with that, we stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:44 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Steve Scalise

Since the National Telecommunications and Information
Administration (NTIA) announced its intention to transition the
U.S. government's role in the Internet's numbering functions to
the multistakeholder Internet community, I have remained
concerned whether this transition was in the best interest of
the Internet and whether the global community was capable of
taking on this responsibility.
No one can argue with the success of the Internet since its
inception, and this is due to the United States' commitment to
innovation and Internet freedom. My concern has been that
changing the Internet's governance structure could jeopardize
these two ideals, especially if enemies of Internet freedom and
bad actors in the international community have more control
over its management.
Much work has been done by NTIA, the Internet Corporation
for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), and the global Internet
community to develop a plan for transitioning the Internet
Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) function. It appears that
ICANN and the global community are making progress in
developing a plan.
However, progress does not guarantee a successful outcome.
And given the importance of the Internet, anything short of a
successful outcome is unacceptable. I remained concerned about
the transition and NTIA's commitment to the criteria it
outlined to assess any potential transition proposal.
As has been repeatedly stated, ICANN must improve its
transparency and accountability. This will give all
stakeholders greater confidence in ICANN's ability to manage
these important functions, as well as its ability to remain
free of undue influence by a foreign government or any portion
of the multistakeholder system.
NTIA has repeatedly expressed its commitment to the
criteria it outlined in March 2014, and my hope is that this
commitment remains strong until the transition is complete. I
am pleased that Administrator Strickland has stated that NTIA
will renew the current contract.
My hope is that any future decision to renew the contract
or complete the transition is based on the existing NTIA
criteria and the U.S.' strong commitment to Internet freedom,
not on inevitability or political expediency. I caution
Administrator Strickland against completing the transition just
because a new administration will take over in January 2017,
and I hope this is not a factor.
Completing the privatization of the Internet domain name
system must be done carefully and must be done only if Internet
freedom remains strong.
----------

[all]
