- MEDICARE ACCESS AND CHIP REAUTHORIZATION ACT OF 2015: EXAMINING IMPLEMENTATION OF MEDICARE PAYMENT REFORMS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MEDICARE ACCESS AND CHIP REAUTHORIZATION ACT OF 2015: EXAMINING
IMPLEMENTATION OF MEDICARE PAYMENT REFORMS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 17, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-127

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

20-459                 WASHINGTON : 2017
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                     Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          KATHY CASTOR, Florida
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina         Massachusetts
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TONY CARDENAS, California
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
CHRIS COLLINS, New York                  officio)
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Gene Green, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     3
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................     5
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7

Witnesses

Patrick Conway, MD, Acting Principal Deputy Administrator, Deputy
Administrator for Innovation and Quality, and Chief Medical
Officer, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services..............     9
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Answers to submitted questions...............................    68

Submitted Material

Statement of the American Hospital Association, submitted by Mr.
Pitts..........................................................    44
Statement of the American Academy of Dermatology Association,
submitted by Mr. Pitts.........................................    50
Statement of the American Society of Clinical Oncology, submitted
by Mr. Pitts...................................................    54
Statement of the College of Healthcare Information Management
Executives, submitted by Mr. Pitts.............................    62
Statement of the Healthcare Leadership Council \1\...............    65

----------
\1\ The attachments to this document can be found at: http://
docs.house.gov/meetings/if/if14/20160317/104683/hhrg-114-if14-
20160317-sd008.pdf.

MEDICARE ACCESS AND CHIP REAUTHORIZATION ACT OF 2015: EXAMINING
IMPLEMENTATION OF MEDICARE PAYMENT REFORMS

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 17, 2016

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
room 2322 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joe Pitts
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Pitts, Guthrie, Shimkus,
Murphy, Burgess, Blackburn, Lance, Griffith, Bilirakis,
Ellmers, Bucshon, Brooks, Collins, Green, Capps, Schakowsky,
Butterfield, Castor, Sarbanes, Matsui, Kennedy, and Pallone (ex
officio).
Staff present: Rebecca Card, Assistant Press Secretary;
James Paluskiewicz, Professional Staff Member; Graham Pittman,
Legislative Clerk; Adrianna Simonelli, Legislative Associate,
Health; Heidi Stirrup, Health Policy Coordinator; Christine
Brennan, Minority Press Secretary; Jeff Carroll, Minority Staff
Director; Kyle Fischer, Minority Health Fellow; Tiffany
Guarascio, Minority Deputy Staff Director and Chief Health
Advisor; Samantha Satchell, Minority Policy Analyst; Andrew
Souvall, Minority Director of Communications, Outreach and
Member Services; and Arielle Woronoff, Minority Health Counsel.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Pitts. The subcommittee will come to order. The chair
recognizes himself for an opening statement.
Today's hearing will provide an opportunity for the Health
Subcommittee to review the implementation and progress of the
Medicare payment reforms as included in the historic
legislation which repealed the Sustainable Growth Rate, the
SGR, and replaced it with new payment models and other reforms.
And I say historic, because my colleagues know well we
worked over many years to address problems associated with the
SGR and impending yearly payment cuts to doctors that
inevitably were avoided thanks to short term, temporary
patches, 17 in all.
Many were interested in finding a solution, but not until
the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act 2015, MACRA,
was enacted with overwhelming bipartisan support in the House
and Senate did we finally achieve reforms for physician
payments while also promoting high quality care for patients.
Through a variety of incentives, physicians are encouraged
to engage in activities to improve quality. Existing quality
reporting programs are consolidated and streamlined into a new
Merit-based Incentive Payment System, MIPS. Strong incentives
are created for physicians to participate in the qualified
Alternative Payment Models, APM, and I would like to speak to
one such APM, patient-centered medical homes, which are an
innovative model of care that has been shown to improve
outcomes, patient experience, and reduce costs.
Physicians in qualified medical homes will get the highest
possible score for the practice improvement category in the new
MIPS program. Medical homes that have demonstrated to the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services the capability to
improve quality without increasing costs, or lower costs
without harming quality, will not have to accept direct
financial risk.
Physicians in qualified APMs will receive a five percent
bonus from 2019 to 2024. Technical support is provided for
smaller practices funded at $20 million per year from 2016 to
2020 to help them participate in APMs, or the new MIPS program.
Funding is also provided for quality measured development at
$15 million per year from 2015 to 2019, and physicians will
retain their role in developing quality standards.
Along with these physician payment reforms, MACRA also
reauthorized the National Health Service Corps, community
health centers, teaching health centers and Children's Health
Insurance Programs, CHIP, all of which will help to ensure
patient access to primary care.
Today's hearing will be focused exclusively on the Medicare
payment reforms and with our expert witness from the Centers
for Medicare & Medicaid Services, CMS. Members will have an
opportunity to learn about CMS' work to leverage performance
measures with new payment models to build a better system that
improves overall care for our seniors while also reducing
costs.
I will now yield to the vice chair of the full committee,
Mrs. Blackburn.
[The statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Joseph R. Pitts

The Subcommittee will come to order.
The Chairman will recognize himself for an opening
statement.
Today's hearing will provide an opportunity for the Health
Subcommittee to review the implementation progress of the
Medicare payment reforms as included in the historic
legislation which repealed the Sustained Growth Rate (SGR) and
replaced it with new payment models and other reforms.
I say `historic' because as my colleagues know well, we
worked over many years to address the problems associated with
the SGR and impending yearly payment cuts to doctors that
inevitably were avoided thanks to short-term, temporary
patches--17 in all.
Many were interested in finding a solution, but not until
the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015
(MACRA) was enacted--with overwhelming bipartisan support in
the House and Senate--did we finally achieve reforms for
physician payments while also promoting high quality care for
patients. Through a variety of incentives, physicians are
encouraged to engage in activities to improve quality. Existing
quality reporting programs are consolidated and streamlined
into a new Merit-based Incentive Payment System (MIPS).
Strong incentives are created for physicians to participate
in qualified Alternative Payment Models (APM) and I would like
to speak to one such APM, Patient Centered Medical Homes
(PCMHs), which are an innovative model of care that has been
shown to improve outcomes, patient experience, and reduce
costs. Physicians in qualified PCMHs will get the highest
possible score for the practice improvement category in the new
MIPS program. PCMHs that have demonstrated to the U.S.
Department of Health & Human Services the capability to improve
quality without increasing costs, or lower costs without
harming quality, will not have to accept direct financial risk.
Physicians in qualified APMs will receive a 5 percent bonus
from 2019-2024. Technical support is provided for smaller
practices, funded at $20 million per year from 2016 to 2020 to
help them participate in APMs or the new MIPS program. Funding
is also provided for quality measure development at $15 million
per year from 2015 to 2019 and physicians will retain their
role in developing quality standards.
Along with these physician payment reforms, MACRA also
reauthorized the National Health Service Corps, Community
Health Centers, Teaching Health Centers and the Children's
Health Insurance Program (CHIP) all of which will help to
ensure patient access to primary care.
Today's hearing will be focused exclusively on the Medicare
payment reforms and with our expert witness from the Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), Members will have an
opportunity to learn about CMS' work to leverage performance
measures with new payment models to build a better system that
improves overall care for our seniors while also reducing
costs.
I will now yield to ------------------------------------.

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Conway,
welcome. We are delighted to see you here.
And as I have been about in my district the last several
days, one of the things I have heard from health care providers
and heard at one of my health care town halls over in Bolivar,
Tennessee, is that population health tools are useful, they
want to utilize these, and in the Nashville area they want to
see continued innovation in this arena.
We are kind of the Silicon Valley, if you will, of health
care informatics and utilization with all the hospital
management companies that are there. They have a problem and
this is that meaningful use has become meaningless in many
instances, because you have got a few big players in the space
and in order for innovation to continue there has to be a way
to address interoperability and the sharing of this and allow
some of these smaller utilizers and smaller vendors into this
space so that the APM model can continue.
So we look forward to visiting with you today. We thank you
for being here and we will look forward to addressing these
issues on behalf of our constituents. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady. I now recognize
the ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr. Green, 5 minutes
for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GENE GREEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Green. Thank you, Chairman, and I thank Dr. Conway for
being here this morning.
As we know, the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization
Act, or MACRA, repealed the flawed Sustainable Growth Rate,
SGR, formula to provide long term stability to Medicare
Physician Fee Schedule. It was critically important that
Congress institute a reasonable and responsible payment policy
for physicians and reward value over volume.
The SGR was a budget gimmick which caused unnecessary
uncertainty for Medicare beneficiaries and doctors. Congress
had to enact short term patches to prevent physician payment
cuts called for by the SGR 17 times. These short term SGR
patches cost taxpayers more than $170 billion and did not
contain real payment reform.
Now that the historic achievement of finally repealing or
replacing SGR has been made, staunch oversight over the
implementation of MACRA is critical. This will ensure that we
do not make the same mistakes of the past and that a system is
set up that is fair, smart, and sophisticated enough to meet
the unique challenges and variabilities of providers
participating in the Medicare system.
As we know, MACRA provides stable updates for 5 years and
ensures no changes are made to the current payment system for 4
years. In 2018, it establishes a streamlined and improved
incentive payment program that will focus a fee-for-service
system on providing value and quality.
The incentive payment program referred to as the Merit-
based Incentive Payment System, or MIPS--we all have these
abbreviations; it is really interesting--consolidates the three
existing incentive programs continuing the focus on quality,
resource use and meaningful electronic health record use, but
is a cohesive program that avoids redundancies.
Further, this section provides financial incentives for the
professionals to participate in tests of alternative payment
models, APMs. It is the intent of Congress that the specific
quality metric used to be tailored to different provider
specialties and each eligible professional will receive a
composite quality score.
The challenge is with constructing a system that fully
accounts for the variabilities in providers and the type of
care they are trained to provide and patient mix as how to
meaningful evaluate quality or significance, but I believe it
can be accomplished.
To do so, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services,
CMS, has initiated the rulemaking process. And I thank the
agency for their diligent attention and hope to see continued
stakeholder engagement and collaboration in a transparent and
public process throughout the course of the implementation.
MACRA has also provided another route to incentivize the moving
away from the volume based payments by giving financial bonuses
to providers who participate in alternative payment methods.
APMs hold great promise, but their variability and
effectiveness require sophisticated construction and
implementation.
I look forward to hearing from the agency through this
process about its vision of the APMs, specifically how the
models will be designed so they are relevant to different
specialties, different sizes of practice and in line with the
state based initiatives and private insurance models.
In order to both streamline and fill in current gaps in
quality measures, the Secretary is required to create and
publish a quality measure development plan to be used in both
MIPS and APs with the input from stakeholders by May 1st of
this year. This plan should prioritize outcome measures,
patient experience measures, care coordination measures,
measures of appropriate use of services, and should also
consider gaps in quality measurement and applicability of
measures across the health care setting.
Interoperability, or lack thereof, has plagued the health
care system since the enactment of the HITECH Act. It is
important to know that MIPS and thus electronic health record
meaningful use, even more tied to provider payment, the
importance of getting to an interoperable system has never been
greater--interoperability essential to the care, coordination
and integration, the heart of the move toward a system that
rewards value over volume and provides cost effective quality
care to beneficiaries. MIPS is still around the corner and time
for action is now.
I look forward to continuing to work with my colleagues. I
want to thank Chairman Upton, Ranking Member Pallone,
Representative Burgess, for their partnership and leadership on
the issue, and thank our chairman for calling this hearing
today and Dr. Conway for being here. I look forward to hearing
and continuing engagement with CMS through the process, and I
yield back 32 seconds.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes Dr. Burgess, 5 minutes, filling in for the chair of
the committee.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Chairman Pitts. And I will confess
it is a little bit surreal to be here discussing the
implementation of this Medicare provider payment reform. So
many times we were here worrying about how we were going to
keep the dire wolf away from the door yet one more time to stop
a substantial double-digit cut to our doctors under the
Sustainable Growth Rate formula.
Repeal of the Sustainable Growth Rate formula was one of
the reasons that I ran for Congress, and coupled with that was
a sincere desire to help my profession and to help the
country's patients and to strengthen the state of health care
in this country. When I ran for Congress and through the years
that I have served here, the Sustainable Growth Rate formula
was public enemy number one.
So we worked for 13 years after I got here to get the SGR
repealed, and now with the passage of the Medicare Access and
Chip Reauthorization Act of 2015, having crossed that major
milestone I also recognize that our work is not done and this
is going to require a significant amount of care and feeding as
this program gets started and the implementation continues.
I just will make the commitment to you, Mr. Chairman, and
to you, Dr. Conway, at the agency that this will remain my
highest priority for the time that I remain in Congress.The
Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act does represent a
fundamental change in the health care payment system, a health
care payment system that had remained static for many years.
In one of our other subcommittees in Energy and Commerce on
the Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade Subcommittee, we are
focused on what is called the Disrupter Series. I would submit
that this is disruptive, the MACRA is disruptive in the payment
system space and it is disruptive by design. MACRA creates an
unprecedented amount of flexibility and it will allow federal
policies to keep pace with the speed of innovation and change,
which we all know is just, it is breathtaking.
To balance that flexibility there are guardrails placed on
the roadside that will ensure that implementation is
responsible, and mostly that it is driven by the needs of
doctors and their patients and it doesn't follow a political
agenda or be sidetracked by what might be characterized as
bureaucratic inertia.
The Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act has been
bipartisan from the start. Two numbers that we all ought to
bear in mind this morning, 392 aye votes in the House and 92
aye votes in the Senate in a time of divided government that
was unprecedented, and it simply, I think, reflects the strong
desire of certainly members of this committee where, after all,
is really what kicked this all off was the Energy and Commerce
Committee, the sincere desire of this committee to see that
this is done correctly. A common theme in the bill was to put
doctors and their patients in the driver's seat, and certainly
I am grateful for the ability for provider and patient groups
to be able to enter their comments on the Web site at CMS. And
I have spent, I haven't read all 463 responses, but your
request for information I thought was timely and it is
certainly instructive, and we encourage members to look at
those responses that you have received so far.
And Dr. Conway, I do want to say that I appreciate the time
you spend with this committee. I appreciate the time you spent
coming to my office to talk about this implementation. I
appreciate your continued commitment. There will be days
obviously where tempers grow short and friction may be evident,
but underlying I think we all recognize we have got a major job
to do for our doctors and patients in this country, and I for
one intend to see it through. It is critically important that
we get it right, no less than the future depends upon it.
This subcommittee, or this committee and this subcommittee
has worked very hard on the Cures Initiative. We need somebody
there to deliver the cures when we get them and this is a major
down payment on keeping doctors involved in delivering care for
patients. And for that I am so very grateful for the committee
for having worked hard on it and I am grateful for the agency
to continuing to put it as a number one priority. I am looking
forward to hearing about your work so far.
Mr. Chairman, I will yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Pallone, 5 minutes for opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Dr.
Conway, for being here and for all the important work you do at
CMS.
We are here today to discuss one of the great bipartisan
success stories of this committee during this Congress, the
Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015, also
known as MACRA. Though it seems like just yesterday, it has
already been nearly a year since MACRA passed the House with
overwhelming bipartisan support.
The primary goal of MACRA was to resolve the issue of the
Sustainable Growth Rate, or SGR, an issue that had haunted
Congress for years. Created in '97, the SGR had tied the growth
of Medicare physician payments to growth in gross domestic
product. However, it wasn't long before Congress realized that
the SGR was far from sustainable. In order to avoid massive
payment cuts to physicians in the Medicare program, Congress
had to temporarily fix the flawed SGR nearly 20 times since it
was enacted, and these constant doc fixes came at a high price.
Since 2002, Congress spent more than $170 billion on these
short term fixes, but none of these short term patches did
anything to fix the underlying issue. The fee-for-service
system is broken, incentives were misaligned, Medicare was
rewarding volume over value and quantity over quality.
And that is why I am so proud that this body was able to
work together last year to finally come up with a solution that
both repealed the SGR and put our health care financing system
on a path toward rewarding value over volume or quality over
quantity.
MACRA put in place a dual track system for providers.
Providers who chose to remain in fee-for-service are able to do
so. Instead of the patchwork of quality reporting systems that
providers currently use, they will instead use the Merit-Based
Incentive Payment System, or MIPS, and MIPS will streamline
quality reporting for providers and incentivize high quality
efficient care.
Providers can also choose to use alternative payment
models, or APMs. APMs have proven to increase quality and lower
costs. Providers who receive a significant portion of their the
revenue from APMs will be eligible for a five percent bonus.
And I am especially interested in the potential for
telemedicine in the new system, both as a clinical practice and
proven activity in MIPS and as part of alternative payment
models.
While I am proud that our committee is such an integral
part of the passage of this historic bipartisan bill, I know
that our work isn't done here and that is why I am pleased that
we are holding this hearing today to check in on the
Administration's implementation of this law and assess what
steps we should take to build on its success.
I now would like to yield the remainder of my time to Ms.
Matsui.
[The statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Good morning. Thank you Mr. Chairman for holding this
important hearing today, and thank you Dr. Conway for being
here and for all the important work you do at CMS.
We're here today to discuss one of the great bipartisan
success stories of this Committee during this Congress, the
Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015, also
known as MACRA. Though it seems like just yesterday, it's
already been nearly a year since MACRA passed the House with
overwhelming bipartisan support.
The primary goal of MACRA was to resolve the issue of the
sustainable growth rate (SGR), an issue that had haunted
Congress for years. Created in 1997, the SGR tied the growth in
Medicare physician payments to growth in Gross Domestic Product
(GDP). However, it wasn't long before Congress realized that
the SGR was far from sustainable. In order to avoid massive
payment cuts to physicians in the Medicare program, Congress
had to temporarily fix the flawed SGR nearly twenty times since
it was enacted, and these constant ``doc fixes'' came at a high
price. Since 2002, Congress spent more than $170 billion on
these short-term fixes. But none of these short-term patches
did anything to fix the underlying issue-the fee-for-service
system was broken. Incentives were misaligned. Medicare was
rewarding volume over value. Quantity over quality.
That's why I'm so incredibly proud that this body was able
to work together last year to finally come up with a solution
that both repealed the SGR and put our health care financing
system on a path towards rewarding value over volume. Quality
over quantity.
MACRA put in place a dual track system for providers.
Providers who choose to remain in fee-for-service are able to
do so. Instead of the patchwork of quality reporting systems
that providers currently use, they will instead use the Merit-
Based Incentive Payment System or MIPS. MIPS will streamline
quality reporting for providers and incentivize high-quality
efficient care. Providers can also choose to use Alternative
Payment Models or APMs. APMs have proven to increase quality
and lower costs. Providers who receive a significant portion of
their revenue from APMs will be eligible for a five percent
bonus. I am especially interested in the potential for
telemedicine in the new system-both as a clinical practice
improvement activity in MIPS and as part of alternative payment
models.
While I am so proud that our committee was such an integral
part of the passage of this historic bipartisan bill, I know
that our work isn't done here. That's why I'm pleased that we
are holding this hearing today to check in on the
administration's implementation of this law and assess what
steps we should take to build on its success.
Thank you, I look forward to today's discussion.

Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much, Mr. Pallone, and thank
you, Dr. Conway, for joining us here today. I am pleased that
the committee came together last year to replace the broken SGR
system with a new system that should provide CMS with new tools
to continue on the path of rewarding physicians for value and
quality rather than volume of services. I look forward to
hearing today some of your ideas about what will work, and we
look forward to working with you as we move ahead with the
implementation.
I am particularly interested in ways that CMS can
incorporate telemedicine into these value based systems. This
is such an important opportunity to leverage existing and
emerging technology to improve care and reduce costs.
Telemedicine can accelerate our ability to coordinate and
integrate care, facilitate population health management, and
increase access to needed services.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask unanimous consent to
introduce into the record a letter written this week to CMS
from the Energy and Commerce Telehealth Working Group which
highlights these points. We look forward to working with the
agency to utilize innovation to achieve the goals of delivery
system reform. Thank you, and I yield to anyone else the
remaining time.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, that will be in the record.
[The information was unavailable at the time of printing.]
Mr. Pitts. I also have UC requests. I would like to submit
the following documents for the record: statements from the
American Hospital Association, American Academy of Dermatology
Association, American Society of Clinical Oncology, the College
of Healthcare Information Management Executives, and the
Healthcare Leadership Council \1\, without objection. Without
objection, so ordered.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The full statement can be found at: http://docs.house.gov/
meetings/if/if14/20160317/104683/hhrg-114-if14-20160317-sd008.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Pitts. That concludes our opening statements, and as
usual the written opening statements of all members will be
made part of the record.
I would like to thank Dr. Conway for coming today. He is
the Deputy Administrator for Innovation and Quality and Chief
Medical Officer, Centers for Medicare & Medicare Services.
Your written testimony will be made a part of the record.
You will be given 5 minutes to summarize your testimony, and
thank you very much for coming this morning. Dr. Conway, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PATRICK CONWAY, MD, ACTING PRINCIPAL DEPUTY
ADMINISTRATOR, DEPUTY ADMINISTRATOR FOR INNOVATION AND QUALITY,
AND CHIEF MEDICAL OFFICER, CENTERS FOR MEDICARE & MEDICAID
SERVICES

Dr. Conway. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Green, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the invitation to
discuss CMS' work to implement the Medicare Access and CHIP
Reauthorization Act, or MACRA. We greatly appreciate your
leadership in passing this important law which provides an
opportunity for CMS to leverage performance measurement and new
payment models as a key driver to further our shared goals to
build a system that achieves better care, smarter spending and
healthier people, and puts empowered and engaged consumers at
the center of their care.
Today, almost 60 million Americans are covered by Medicare
and 10,000 become eligible for Medicare every day. For many
years, Medicare was primarily a fee-for-service payment system
that paid health care providers based on the volume of services
they delivered.
Earlier this month, the Administration announced that it
had reached its goal of tying 30 percent of traditional
Medicare payments to alternative payment models, 11-plus months
ahead of schedule. An alternative payment model is a model that
holds providers accountable for quality and total cost of care
that they deliver to the population of patients they serve.
These models provide a financial incentive to coordinate care
for patients and to achieve better health outcomes.
Whereas, several years ago, Medicare essentially paid zero
dollars through these alternative payment models, today 30
percent of Medicare payments are made through these models.
This represents approximately $117 billion in payments and is a
major milestone in the continued effort towards improving
quality and care coordination. We also reached our goal of
having at least 85 percent of Medicare payments with a link to
quality or value.
MACRA combines three existing quality programs: the
Physician Quality Reporting System, the Physician Value-Based
Payment Modifier, and the Medicare Electronic Health Record
Incentive Program into one aligned, new program, the Merit-
Based Incentive program, or MIPS, beginning with payments in
2019.
Physicians and other clinicians will be evaluated under
MIPS based upon a single composite score which will factor in
performance on four weighted categories: quality, resource use,
clinical practice improvement, and meaningful use of EHR
technology. We are in the process of developing a scoring
methodology that is meaningful, understandable and flexible.
Our goal is for the program to be meaningful both to physicians
and clinicians and the patients they serve and help shape our
system for the better.
In implementing MIPS, we are committed to building a
program that fulfills the goals of advancing quality and value
while being adaptive to the needs of each clinician's
individual practice and patient population. CMS is in the
process of gathering or viewing feedback from patients,
physicians, providers, payers, government, businesses, and
other stakeholders regarding many of these topics.
In particular, we have been working side by side with the
physician and consumer communities to address needs and
concerns about the Medicare EHR Incentive Program as we
transition it to MIPS. We aim to develop policies that will
reward providers for the outcomes technology helps them achieve
with their patients, provide flexibility to customize health
technology to individual practice needs, and increase
interoperability and promote innovation by encouraging the flow
of data necessary to meet the needs of patients.
With a large majority of physicians and other clinicians
who will be required to participate in the MIPS program,
Congress did establish exceptions in certain situations
including those clinicians participating in eligible
alternative payment models, or APMs.
Professionals who meet certain thresholds of participation
in these eligible APMs will be exempt from MIPS and receive a
five percent incentive payment. While the statute establishes a
high bar for these eligible APMs such as more than nominal
risk, we will continuously search for opportunities to expand
the range of options for participation in eligible APMs within
the contours of the statute.
It is our intent to align MIPS and APM components of the
new payment system allowing maximum flexibility for clinicians
who are not ready or choose not to participate in an eligible
APM and instead choose to participate in the MIPS program. Both
MIPS and APMs are viable choices for physicians and other
clinicians, and our goal is to enable that choice. MACRA will
help Medicare move towards rewarding value and quality of
physician service not just the quantity of such services.
As a practicing physician who has also led quality
improvement efforts in health systems, I know the importance of
quality measurement improvement. I have led work to improve
quality and safety across the health system, such as measuring
patient outcomes or rapidly implementing best practices.
We are at a critical juncture. We must demonstrate to
clinicians and patients both the value of these new payment
programs established by MACRA and the opportunity to save the
health system of the future. The program must be meaningful,
clearly focused on improved patient outcomes, contain
achievable measures, engage physicians and other clinicians,
and enable improvement over time.
Moving forward we will continue to pursue a patient-
centered approach that leads to better care, smarter spending,
and improved patient outcomes. The program must be meaningful,
understandable and flexible for participating clinicians. It is
our role and responsibility to help lead this change and to
continue partnering with lawmakers, physicians and other
providers, consumers and other stakeholders across the nation
to make a transformed and improved health system a reality for
all Americans. We all want the best care possible.
We look forward to working with you as we continue to
implement this seminal piece of legislation which we thank you
for, and Happy St. Patrick's Day. Thanks.
[The statement of Dr. Conway follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Thank you very much for that. We are now voting
on the floor, so we are going to start the questioning and then
recess and come back. I will begin the questioning and
recognize myself 5 minutes for that purpose.
Dr. Conway, MACRA provided great flexibility in its effort
to streamline the three major physician quality reporting
systems. It did this by sunsetting and reconstituting them into
a single reporting system, MIPS, Merit-based Incentive program.
This provides CMS an opportunity to reevaluate these programs
and make changes to them that furthers the legislative goals of
coordination and ease of reporting. Administrator Slavitt has
made comments regarding meaningful use, for example, that
appear to recognize this flexibility.
Question, will CMS embrace this flexibility to eliminate
duplicity, reduce redundancy, and increase effectiveness and
simplicity in physician reporting?
Dr. Conway. We will embrace this flexibility. If it is OK I
will add just a bit more. Specifically, we have tried to align
various programs on the back end, if you will, of this statute.
One of the beauties of the statute is it puts them all, as you
said, in one program focused on quality and value.
Specifically, we are looking at each area and how we make
it flexible and meaningful to physicians and patients, and on
the meaningful use arena we do think the statute gives
additional flexibility to really focus on interoperability,
outcomes for patients, simplifying the program and making it as
meaningful as possible to physicians, clinicians, and the
patients they serve.
Mr. Pitts. Would you expand on CMS' plan to develop
appropriate awareness among providers of what is required to
succeed in MIPS and the APMs.
Dr. Conway. Yes. We think this is a critical factor in
terms of awareness and engagement of physicians and clinicians
both in shaping the program and then ultimately being
successful.
I will give you a few of the aspects that we are focused on
and working on. One, we want to thank you for the technical
assistance funding that you provided especially focused on
small rural practices and practices that serve underserved
populations. So we think that technical assistance funding will
help us support physicians and clinicians to be successful.
We are also broadly, through our QIO program and a
Transforming Clinical Practice Initiative, which is over a $650
million investment over 4 years, trying to support physicians
and clinicians to improve quality and lower costs. In addition,
I met with AMA yesterday, and we meet with specialty societies
all the time about how do we leverage these societies and
organizations that physicians and clinicians trust and work
with, to work with whether it is GI physicians or
ophthalmologists or whatever the special society, really to
deeply engage their own set of physicians and clinicians so
they understand the program and can be successful.
Mr. Pitts. In the short term, would you describe CMS'
approach to quality as more focused on ensuring providers are
ready to transition to qualified APM or in simply getting more
providers in the value based payment arrangements?
Dr. Conway. That is a good question. I think it is both,
and then let me describe. So, one, the good news on quality
reporting is that many years ago when I started we had a
fairly, we had a minority of physicians and clinicians
reporting quality. We now in 2014 had over 800,000 eligible
professionals, physicians and clinicians reporting in the
Physician Quality Reporting System.
This statute allows us to move that to the next stage, if
you will, to really have a whole program, as you said, focused
on quality and value. The goal is to have not only the vast,
have the vast majority as close to all physicians and
clinicians as possible to be reporting and reporting
successfully and then measuring their value and improving over
time.
In addition, as you mentioned, for those physicians and
clinicians that want to move to eligible alternative payment
models, we want to help them make that transition. And we are
really engaging deeply with physician and specialty societies
and encouraging them to develop the alternative payment models
that may be most relevant to that specialty, bringing those
forward to the--sorry to use more acronyms--PTAC committee that
was part of the legislation so that they could then make
recommendations to CMS.
So we think that deep physician/clinician engagement and
enabling those physicians and clinicians when they are ready to
make that choice to move into an eligible alternative payment
model is a goal. But some physicians and clinicians may choose
to stay in MIPS, and that is OK. It is a choice to be made by
those physicians and clinicians.
Mr. Pitts. Just very quickly, have physician groups
expressed to CMS that they are satisfied with the interaction
so far with CMS on MACRA development?
Dr. Conway. So I would say we interact significantly with
physician and clinician groups. I also think you almost can't
do too much. So with any request for an interaction we do have
that interaction. I still, to get--it is over a million
physicians and clinicians across America, so I think we will
need to continue to work on this to really engage down to the
front line.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you. We have got 8 minutes left on the
floor vote. The chair recognizes Mr. Green, 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Chairman. And we are here almost a
year after the passage of MACRA. Although it has only been a
year, it is important we take a moment to remember how we
arrived at this moment. As we know, MACRA Medicare providers
were subject to the Sustainable Growth Rate formula, the SGR.
Dr. Conway, can you explain the basics of the SGR and why it
wasn't working, so we don't repeat it again?
Dr. Conway. Yes. So the basic says, where certain targets
weren't met, then you were going to have what became more and
more dramatic reductions in payments that were a blunt tool. I
think the beauty of the legislation is you put in place an
overall quality and value program in MIPS and an ability to
incentivize quality and value and also the eligible alternative
payment models for population health management.
Mr. Green. Well, my next question is why was it that
Congress deemed necessary to provide a total of 17 temporary
patches between 2003 and 2014? I can tell you that because
Congressman Burgess and I were here. It was because we wanted
doctors to actually serve Medicare patients and that is the
fear of it. How do you foresee that MACRA fixing this perennial
issue?
Dr. Conway. Yes. I think the MACRA statute does, as you
say, is a major steps forward in fixing this issue. I think,
specifically, the MIPS program is much more understandable. We
will need to think about branding and how we communicate with
less acronyms if possible.
But I think when I--I was just talking to a group of GI
physicians last week. I think one program makes much more sense
to them than individual separate programs. Two, a stable
predictable future makes much more sense to them than not
knowing what the next year or the next several months might
hold in terms of payments.
And then I do think the eligible alternative payment
models, we have been excited about the number of physicians and
clinicians beginning to think about what is the alternative
payment model for their specialty, for their area of practice,
and are hopeful that they come forward with many great ideas on
eligible alternative payment models.
Mr. Green. I think what CMS is doing to reach out to the
specialties and of course everyone to get their input in how we
can do it. Practice transformation is an expensive and time-
consuming process for small practices and few of them have
resources to tackle it. Challenges invariably in these
practices differ greatly whether the practice is independent or
only have one or two physicians and is part of a larger system
with physicians as employees. The problems are different for
practices that are rural, where the available technical and
support resources are scarce, or urban where these resources
are so expensive. And what is CMS considering in setting up
this program of technical assistance to support small clinical
practices for effective participation in both MIPS and APs?
Dr. Conway. Yes. So I think you hit on a key issue. This
technical support is critical. I actually grew up in not a
large town in Texas cared for by a family practice, and many of
my family members are in private practice across the U.S.
First, on the funding that was provided, we will look to
utilize that funding as described to focus on small rural
practices plus practices that serve underserved patient
populations, because we think that is a critical set of
practices to work with. We will likely do the funding in a way
similar to how we have done other funding, where we fund
entities and networks that have a history of working with these
practices and working with them successfully and are trusted
partners.
So things like Partnership for Patients we funded networks
that work with hospitals. We are looking at likely funding,
putting out an RFP that would fund networks working with these
practices that are trusted partners to help them be successful
in these programs. And those could be state, regional or
national focused on a given specialty area.
Mr. Green. Mr. Chairman, I am proud our committee did the
work to repeal the SGR, but I also know I am hopefully to have
these continual hearings and get reports back from CMS to
support systems that CMS envisions and how to ensure that
information feedback provided to clinicians and practices are
clear and actionable. So, but anyway, and I will yield back my
time.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. We still have a
couple minutes left on the floor vote, so if it is all right
with you we will take a brief recess. We will be right back.
The committee stands in recess for floor votes.
[Whereupon, at 10:35 a.m., the subcommittee recessed, to
reconvene at 10:56 a.m., the same day.]
Mr. Pitts. We will reconvene the subcommittee hearing, and
the chair recognizes Dr. Burgess, 5 minutes, for questions.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, thank you, Dr.
Conway, for being here.
Can I just ask you a brief question about the Physician
Technical Advisory Committee and how you see that interfacing
with the CMMI stuff, the center for Medicare and Medicaid
improvement? As I understand, with the Physician Technical
Advisory Committee there is an obligation to evaluate those
things that are brought forward and that the agency is required
to respond. Is that correct?
Dr. Conway. That is correct.
Mr. Burgess. So in the request for information that you
have had so far, has anything that would trigger the PTAC, has
that come up?
Dr. Conway. No. So the Physician Technical Advisory
Committee, or PTAC, has been established, as you know, and a
set of members that very well qualified experts across
physicians and non-physicians. We look forward to models being
sent forward to the Physician Technical Advisory Committee from
physicians, specialty organizations, and others, and then as
you say, the PTAC, the advisory committee evaluating those
models and then making recommendations to CMS and then we would
respond to those recommendations.
But we think that process could yield some excellent models
for us to implement. And I think the first stage, which I know
we have talked about, but the first stage of that process is
critical. The physicians and specialty sides, when I interact
with them now I encourage them to start working on what they
think those models would be so that they can send them forward
to the PTAC for consideration.
Mr. Burgess. And when, just so I will know, when do you
expect that to start occurring?
Dr. Conway. Yes. So the Physician Technical Advisory
Committee, the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation
is the lead, internally, in the department for convening that
committee. What the department has said is that they expect to
finalize criteria in the fall and then will be asking for
models at that point.
I also, when I meet with physicians, specialty societies
and others, I say CMS and CMI can always take input. So we
interact on models with groups often, so we are happy to take
ideas prior to that time as well.
Mr. Burgess. Well, as I referenced in my opening statement,
I mean, no rollout is perfect and there is always going to be
points of friction. Recently, I had an opportunity to go
through the Inspector General's report on healthcare.gov, so it
was like a walk through memory lane for me.
But with ICD-10 a lot of things that I worried about the
implementation of ICD-10, that from what I can tell those
problems have been manageable. But one of the takeaways, I
think, from the Inspector General's report was the ability to
have contingency plans, the ability to have a system that will
work in place of the big system if it doesn't work.
So what are we looking at during your transitioning period?
What sort of contingencies are you building into the system?
Dr. Conway. It is a great question. Mr. Slavitt and myself
are working, have a management structure very similar to what
we did in ICD-10 where we identify it is a high priority arena.
On MACRA implementation we have, literally, weekly meetings,
with work in between those meetings with Dashboards, et cetera,
to go through where we are in the process and the structure,
both the policy and the operations.
Also to your point with contingency plans on if certain
aspects of implementation have difficulty what is our
contingency plan. As you alluded to, we agree with you that
this is a critical, important piece of high priority
legislation, so we will manage it that way. I think the last
thing--sorry--just to mention similar to ICD-10 we are doing
engagement now with physician and clinician groups to help us
with the implementation.
Mr. Burgess. One of the things that is so critical that
doctors get into the correct merit-based incentive payment
schedule or the eligible alternative payment method, and so you
are aware of the fact that you need people to get to where they
need to go even if they may not understand how it is they need
to get there?
Dr. Conway. Yes. I should mention Mandy Cohen is also
positioned very active in the management. Yes, we are aware. I
think we need to interact in a bidirectional, communicative
manner to help outline the pathway and also help people succeed
along that pathway, including for eligible alternative payment
models if that is the path they choose.
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Green made fun of the fact that there were
so many TLAs--that is three-letter acronyms--in the bill.
Dr. Conway. Yes.
Mr. Burgess. I regret that it was necessary, but sometimes
for the economy of language you just have to pursue those,
hence, your agency being called CMS, when in fact it is the
Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you. The chair recognizes the gentlelady
from California, Mrs. Capps, 5 minutes for questions.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It will be hard for me
to top that one. But I appreciate you being here today and for
your testimony, and thank you, Chairman Pitts and Ranking
Member Pallone, for holding this important hearing.
The passage--well, here goes the acronym--MACRA was the
culmination of many years of work to move beyond the flawed
SGR. It was an important compromise that showed how well this
committee can work when we put aside our differences and focus
on a common goal. MACRA passage was a notable achievement that
put this on the path to rewarding quality and value instead of
just quantity and volume of care.
The only way to truly move to a more quality based system
that is accessible to all who need it is to ensure that we have
the health care workforce available and engaged in providing
the care. And that means we need the engagement of physicians
and nonphysician health care providers alike. And I am
referring in my questions especially to nurses.
When we think about the delivery of health care and all the
innovations taking place in this area, terms such as
coordination, patient-centered, integration are often used.
These ideas that we are finally starting to realize in the
broader health care system have long been the tenets of nursing
practice. Patient-centered care, continuity, coordination in
cross settings, disease management, patient education, the list
goes on. Nurses, especially advanced practice nurses are, by
nature of their training and licensure, leaders in these areas.
Dr. Conway, can you elaborate on why it is so important
that non-physician providers like nurse practitioners are
included, not replacing but included in the delivery care
system reform?
Dr. Conway. Yes. Thank you for the question. I think the
integration of nurses and advanced practice nurses and the
whole care team is critical for this success. I can tell you,
and it sounds like you know very well that what we are seeing,
for example, in our accountable care organizations, our
advanced primary care medical homes, they truly operate as an
integrated care team, so physicians, nurses, medical
assistants, and sometimes community health workers and others
across the medical neighborhood focused on population health
management.
Both from being married to a nurse and still working with
nurses and other health care professionals, that care team
aspect and coordination across the care team and leveraging the
talents of the entire team are going to be critical to the
success in these alternative payment models.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you. Nurses, it is my conviction at least
that nurses are the backbone of the health care delivery
system. Nurses do health care delivery with more than 2.7
million qualified professionals providing care to America's
patients, including our nation's servicemen and women.
And more than any other health care provider, nurses spend
time at their patient's side whether in the public setting,
home setting or acute care, and they monitor the full scope of
their care. So they are a critical part of the patient's care
team in a variety of settings, as I mentioned earlier,
including the emergency room, the health clinic, the long-term
care setting, anywhere you might find someone needing medical
care, health services, you will be requiring this team
approach. That is one of the best parts of what we are
discussing today, in my opinion.
So what are some of the ways that nurses are being
incorporated into the new innovations that are occurring as a
result of MACRA?
Dr. Conway. Terrific question. I will just give you a few
examples.
Mrs. Capps. Sure.
Dr. Conway. Our bundled payment initiatives, you have
nurses both in hospitals and long-term care settings and others
as the primary care coordinator. So we have examples, including
successful entities on bundled payment for things like
surgeries or medical procedures, where their critical
intervention is nurse care management both in the hospital and
then outside the hospital and into the home, so home health
nursing, et cetera, as well.
Our Comprehensive Primary Care Initiative practice in rural
Arkansas where the physician leadership will talk about the
nurse care managers and their nursing care is the critical
success factor in their primary care medical home. I could tell
you more stories in accountable care organizations than others,
but this, the whole health care team, and I think especially
nurses, are critical parts of success in these models.
Mrs. Capps. And there are some specialized positions within
nursing. It is not just one entity. It is a broad spectrum of
entities that some come from management, some from delivery of
service. It is a very complex model, but also one that with the
right kind of coordination is very possible to deliver and cuts
down on duplication in so many areas. So we are talking the
same language, it sounds like, and I will yield back to the
chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady and now
recognizes the vice chair of the subcommittee, Mr. Guthrie, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I
thank you, Dr. Conway, for coming today. I appreciate it.
Recently the agency announced that 30 percent of payments
were tied to quality. However, the definition used does not
necessarily comport to the definition of qualified alternative
payment models under MACRA. So the question is, or a series of
questions here.
Do you envision all of these programs as qualified APMs? If
not, how many might qualify? And conversely, what are the major
issues you see in having these quality linked payment programs
qualify as eligible APMs and for the bonus payments provided by
the statute?
Dr. Conway. Yes. So the definition that the agency has used
for eligible alternative payment models is that the provider is
accountable for quality and total cost of care for a
population, either an ACO could be for year or a bundled
payment for an episode of care.
The Health Care Payment Learning and Action Network,
actually, which is a public-private partnership including many
payers, providers, et cetera, adopted a very similar definition
with some subcategories--sorry for the long answer--and one of
those subcategories talks about the level of financial risk.
So I think the key, there are some key phrases in the
statute that the CMS will have to propose how to define, so one
of those in eligible APMs is more than nominal risk. So we will
have to define what more than nominal risk means from the
statute. We are going to make a proposal on that and we will
seek comment on that. That will be a factor in how many of the
current alternative payment models, some of which are ones are
one-sided risk, currently, so the question will be how do we
define more than nominal risk, will be an example of one of the
key questions.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. And also under MACRA, the first APM
payment update is scheduled for 2019. What will CMS identify as
the performance period for assessing whether a physician is a
qualifying APM participant for the 2019 APM payment update?
Dr. Conway. Yes. So a number of the requests for
information comments, and the agency is dealing with this now,
and as I think you know we will put out a proposed rule this
spring, so we are working on that expeditiously now.
Historically, what we have done is had a performance period
that is 12 months, then often providers have wanted 3 or 4
months to finish reporting on quality measures, et cetera. So
right now, there is a performance period for Physician Quality
Reporting System which was 2015, and providers are reporting
their quality measures through about the middle of April.
Then there is claims processing, et cetera, to make the
payments what ends up being 12 months after the end of the
performance period, about eight months after the end of the
finishing reporting quality measures, et cetera. We are looking
at that now and determining is that the right structure.
I will say, a few years ago we asked physician and
clinician groups did they want to do quarterly reporting like
hospitals which allows for more rapid feedback. We heard at
that time people did not want to do that. They wanted an annual
reporting cycle. But we will be making a proposal on the
performance period and look forward to your feedback and others
about that.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. Thanks. And also, some physicians also
make us aware that instead of actually driving quality practice
and furthering medical information exchange, sometimes
Medicare's quality efforts have served to turn providers into
click and check data clerks. I think you have heard that as
well. What is CMS doing to ensure MIPS is designed with an eye
towards driving quality that is relevant to all individual
practices?
Dr. Conway. Yes. So our goal is for the quality measure
programs to enable measurement that is meaningful, and
improvement. I will give you an example where I think we are, I
was with the GI physicians last week speaking at a conference.
Participation in these programs have gone up dramatically. They
are using a qualified clinical data registry which they
developed and it includes outcome measures that they feel are
meaningful for their specialty. And we have deemed that is a
qualified data registry and can meet criteria for our programs.
Their participation in that room, 70 to 80 percent of the
people, actually, probably 80-plus in that room, nationally a
huge percentage of the GI doctors using that registry, and what
they reported is that to them it feels seamless. They do
clinical care. They do clinical care the way they would with
any patient.
It is measuring outcomes, it is giving them feedback, and
it is being used for reporting. We need more examples.
Ophthalmology, similar, has done that. We need more examples
where we work with specialty societies to have measures that
are meaningful to them and their physicians and clinicians, and
those also can be used for our payment program.
Mr. Guthrie. I do have a final question, so I am about to
lose time. And my question was rather than one-size-fits-all,
the MIPS was designed for you to have these relevance's of
individual specialties, and I was going to ask you how CMS is
approaching that implementation, and the law allows you. It
sounds like you are doing it by having input. I know I have
just ran out of time, but input from the individual specialty,
I think, is very important to the----
Dr. Conway. OK, if I answer briefly, so yes, input from the
various specialties. We have also done some work with
specialties and payers on core measure sets for various
specialties in aligning across the public and private sector.
So those are a few examples we are trying to make this
meaningful to the diversity of specialties.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. Thank you for your answers. I yield
back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Castor, 5 minutes
for questions.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning, Dr.
Conway.
Dr. Conway. Good morning.
Ms. Castor. Happy St. Patrick's Day to you.
Dr. Conway. Thank you.
Ms. Castor. I want to congratulate you and everyone at the
agency for the progress that has been made so far. Even before
the Congress passed MACRA and it was signed by the President,
the agency had already embarked on many of these payment
reforms. And it must be very gratifying for it to come to
fruition. I know it is for us as we continue to grapple with
how we move from volume to value and continue to tackle the
challenges of the aging population in the U.S.
The flawed SGR formula was well overdue and it was great
that we could bring in as part of the repeal significant
reforms. It came with a lot of new changes. One is the way we
define and characterize quality in our health care delivery.
One concern that I have heard back home is that the pre-
MACRA set of quality measures often became an administrative
difficulty for providers to collect and organize and submit.
Can you give folks some assurances now on how MIPS will change
the quality reporting system for providers, and do you expect
MIPS to help providers focus more on patients rather than
paperwork?
Dr. Conway. Yes, so thank you for the kind words and the
question. A few examples, and I do think this is a critical
issue. One, I think the flexibility in MIPS allows the agency
to lower the burden of reporting, so to make it more
meaningful, part of the clinical work flow, et cetera, focus
more on outcomes measures less on process.
We will need to continue to have partnership and help from
the various physician, clinician and specialty sides. To
elaborate a little bit more, we have some great examples of--
the ophthalmologists report that 75 percent of ophthalmologists
in the country now are using their registry, using it in a way
that they find meaningful to their practice and reporting on
quality including outcome measures.
We have other specialties that maybe don't have registries
or electronic health record mechanisms yet and are still doing
G-code claims and mechanisms that people find, and we have
evaluated this, less meaningful to quality improvement.
The goal is to maximize electronic health record reporting
and registry reporting that is more meaningful for quality
improvement, focus on outcome measures that are meaningful to
physicians and their patients. And this public-private sector
alignment piece, I think, is critical. I used to work for a
provider where I had to report quality measures to the various
entities that wanted quality measures, so aligning across
public and private payers will help physicians report on an
aligned set of measures.
Ms. Castor. One of the strengths of the law is that it
allows some flexibility among the medical specialties. They can
have a say in the quality measures that apply to them. On the
other hand, we don't want providers to take the easiest
pathway. As you move forward with rulemaking, what overarching
principles will CMS employ to ensure that there are enough
appropriate and relevant quality measures in place?
Dr. Conway. Yes, a few things there. Terrific question.
One, we are considering how you would have central flexibility
in what measures are reported, but still the ability to focus
on outcome measures and more cross-cutting measures.
Two, in our qualified clinical data registries and that
reporting mechanism, how do you allow flexibility but also the
ability, for example, to validate or audit data to ensure that
quality improvement is occurring? And we do that in our
hospital systems. So it is how do you take some of this
learning from the hospital side into the diverse physician side
of quality.
And then lastly, on the measure development there was
funding in MACRA for measure development, so we plan to utilize
that funding to develop the next generation, if you will, of
quality measures for physician and clinician measurement.
Ms. Castor. Well, I want to thank you again. It is pretty
remarkable. I will run into doctors in the grocery store or at
various events and they want to jump right in and talk about
all these things, and I bet some of my colleagues are
experiencing some of the same things.
But the goal eventually is to ensure that our neighbors can
live longer and healthier and not just get the test or medicine
earlier. I know those are your shared goals too, so I will look
forward to collaborating with you on this as we move forward.
Dr. Conway. Thank you.
Ms. Castor. Thank you very much.
Mr. Pitts. The gentlelady yields back. The chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Dr. Conway.
Kind of following up on Congressman Guthrie's questions, how
many qualified alternative payment methods do you envision once
we get into implementation. Do you have a universe? Do you
know?
Dr. Conway. Yes. So I think the eligible alternative
payment models, we will make proposals on this as I said, but I
think the eligible alternative payment models, we will have a
reasonable set of eligible alternative payment models, I think,
in the early years, and we hope that to grow over time.
So I think we talked a bit about a physician technical
advisory committee and other methods to have more specialty
oriented, eligible alternative payment models over time, but
our expectation is we will have a reasonable set of eligible
alternative models out of the gate, and then we will work with
physicians and clinicians so those number of models that meet
the criteria in the statute grow over time.
Mr. Shimkus. And it will again, a mechanism to reevaluate
and refine, because obviously modern medicine changes so
quickly and so that there would probably be new variables in
the process.
Dr. Conway. Yes. So yes is the short answer. We think both
the list, if you will, of eligible alternative payment models
will be refined over time and probably some will be added and
some may move off the list, depending, and also the actual
models. I mean, this is true of the innovation center models
now. We will make adjustments frequently based on feedback.
One of my calls before the hearing this morning was with a
provider organization on one of our models giving us feedback
that some of the eligibility criteria for the patients in the
model may need to be adjusted. So we take that kind of feedback
and make adjustments frequently based on feedback from
physicians, clinicians or patients or others in the health
system.
Mr. Shimkus. So for the 2019 APM update, obviously we are
not there yet, and if folks are qualified when would a 5
percent distribution be paid? Do you have any idea? Have you
gamed that out?
Dr. Conway. Yes, so our goal operationally would be to have
a performance period that allows us then to make the five
percent incentive payments at the start of the given payment
period. So our goal would be to have the payments start in the
beginning of 2019.
Mr. Shimkus. And let me just finish with this one. I was
interested in your response on the trying to define nominal
risk.
Dr. Conway. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. So, and I don't know, Mr. Chairman, if in the
report language of the bill if whether there was report
language that addressed that at all. Do you know if there was?
Dr. Conway. I do not know for sure, sir. We could check on
that.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes. And my point being obviously, there is
always the debate here in Washington about us being specific or
being vague and the agency then doing the definition, and which
is leading, I think, many of us to say we have to be more
precise so that maybe a definition might go awry of the intent
of the legislative branch. So we want to be careful that we are
not calling you back in and then having this big fight of why
was your definition of the nominal risk different than what we
intended in the passage of the legislation.
Dr. Conway. Yes, so our goal as well would be to align with
congressional intent and the statute. Obviously the statute is
what we work with from a rulemaking standpoint. So more than
nominal risk, we think, is a good guidepost. We will make a
proposal based on that statute. Obviously if you have feedback
on that proposal, or if at some point you want technical
assistance on any statutory changes we would provide that.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. Mr. Chairman, that is all I have. Thank
you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now recognize
the ranking member of the full committee, Mr. Pallone, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Dr.
Conway, for joining us today.
Ever since the passage of the Affordable Care Act our
nation's health system is in the midst of unprecedented reform
and MACRA has accelerated many of these improvements. And one
of the reforms that I believe may be among the most crucial is
our shift away from paying for volume and towards paying for
value.
So, Dr. Conway, the Administration has set goals to
rounding Medicare's shift toward alternative payment models.
You mentioned this initiative in your testimony, but can you
elaborate on CMS's efforts?
Dr. Conway. Yes, thank you for the question and I could
talk a long time on this so I will try to be brief. I have been
working on health system transformation for quite a while, both
outside of government and in government, and I think the
progress in the last 5 years is substantial, the last 3 to 5
years.
Some of those numbers I gave you would sound like just
numbers when you go through them, almost zero percent in
alternative payment models to 30 percent. That is 2011 to the
beginning of 2016 numbers, so fairly rapid period of time, $117
billion. And the important part is not just the dollars, but
what it means for patients. I mean, we can't recount all the
stories, but advanced primary care medical homes where the
patients love the care they are receiving, it is well
coordinated, they understand what they need to do, and a
physician will tell me, I am finally practicing medicine the
way I want to after many, many years.
Our ACO models have grown where we are serving almost 9
million Medicare beneficiaries and growing, so a huge number of
beneficiaries in accountable care organizations, including my
own mother. And so I think the level of transformation that you
have enabled through the statutory language CMS has tried to
help catalyze, and then importantly, really driven by states,
communities, providers, people moving forward and helping drive
the change, I think it has made our care system quality
results, over 90 percent of our quality measures improved
significantly in the last 3 years.
Safety results, safer in the hospital today than
previously; cost results, lowest cost growth in many years. We
have got to keep going though. There is more work to do and we
want to do that with you. But I think the opportunity here for
improvement on behalf of patients in the system is huge. We
have made a lot of progress and we will have to continue to
accelerate that progress. Sorry for the long answer.
Mr. Pallone. No, that is all right. In that vein I know you
have mentioned that CMS has already mentioned its first
benchmarks, achieving the 30 percent payments through
alternative payment models this year, but just give me some
more information about efforts undertaken that build on this
momentum.
Dr. Conway. Yes, so I think we have a number of new models.
We do have a goal by the way to achieve at least 50 percent by
the end of 2018, so we are still on that trajectory. I think a
number of new models we are excited about. We have a model for
episode-based payment for joint replacement that will be
starting April 1st. When I interact with hospitals and
physicians and they say what that means to them in terms of
coordinating care across a 90-day episode for a patient that
needs a hip and knee replacement, which is a very common
procedure in Medicare, I think a huge opportunity for
improvement. And we saw that in an earlier model on hip and
knee where it improved quality, lower cost.
We have an oncology model we are hoping to announce, the
oncologists that came forward, but a very robust response from
oncologists saying they want to do episode based care for
oncology cancer care, deliver the care they know is better. And
they are partnering with us and other payers so that is a
multi-payer model.
So we think there is a number--so both of those will add to
the alternative payment model numbers I gave you and are just a
few examples of how we think these programs and alternative
payment models will continue to expand over time and improve
care for patients.
Mr. Pallone. OK. And I only have a minute left. But one
issue that hasn't been raised as much here today is the
alignment between Medicare and Medicaid. MACRA specifies a
participation and certain Medicaid payment models could allow a
provider to meet Medicare's all-payer APM targets. Is alignment
between Medicare MIPS and APMs and Medicaid a priority for CMS?
Dr. Conway. Yes, definitely, and I will even broaden it a
bit, alignment between Medicare and Medicaid and commercial
insurers as well. So I think we are doing a lot of work at the
state level, for example, and nationally to align on quality
measures on approach to payment models. Our Health Care Payment
Learning and Action Network has put out proposals on alignment
for ACOs, alignment in bundled payment. We think that Medicare,
Medicaid and private sector alignment is critical to success.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Thanks a lot. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentleman from Indiana, Dr. Bucshon, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, a couple comments and
then a quick question. I think Congressman Shimkus talked about
Congress and its prescriptiveness and as it relates to PTAC
recommendations. We will be following that as you probably know
in seeing where CMS is, and if CMS turns out repeatedly and
really doesn't follow, take or follow some of the
recommendations, then we may even need to ask further questions
about that and have more prescriptive legislation involved.
The other thing is, and we mentioned this at Doctors Caucus
a few months or so ago, I would encourage CMS to consider
pausing the meaningful use program implementation and
reassessing how physician practices and hospital systems are
able to comply in a cost effective manner. I hear a lot about
that.
And it is good that you are continuing to work with
stakeholders on what determines quality. I think that is
extremely important as a physician that you continue to do that
and I appreciate that it appears that you are doing a really
fine job doing that.
On the reimbursement, it appears that the Relative Value
Scale Update Committee recommendations on reimbursement have
not been followed very closely over the last few years.
Specifically, more recently in ophthalmology, but historically,
pain management, cardiac surgery and others. And I would
encourage CMS to take a revisit of these recommendations that
have a result--what CMS has done has resulted in significant
payment cuts to providers and the question is, why is that? Why
the Relative Value Scale Update Committee recommendations have
not been followed more closely. That is a question.
Dr. Conway. So on the last one, I will have to look into
that more specifically in the specific codes and
recommendations----
Mr. Bucshon. Yes.
Dr. Conway [continuing]. And we can get back to you, sir.
Mr. Bucshon. Appreciate that. And then a recent study in
health affairs found that physicians spend about $15 billion a
year on quality reporting, hopefully this will be better under
MIPS. Is CMS conducting an assessment of costs and
administrative burdens associated with physician compliance?
That is the first question.
And if not, is this something CMS might embark on
especially as a means to judge MIPS' future success in reducing
this financial burden? So it costs a lot of money to comply, so
are there things that CMS is looking at to try to improve that?
Dr. Conway. Yes, so we are trying to lower the burden of
reporting. We think mechanisms to get there are things like
qualified clinical data registries and other aspects that more
seamlessly integrate with the physician and clinician work
flow. And we do think lowering the burden, increasing
flexibility, simplicity, but still focusing on outcome measures
that are meaningful, are critical to success.
Mr. Bucshon. By the way, I am a big supporter of quality
measures and payment based on value and success. It is just
critical of course that physician groups and other stakeholders
are part of what determines that and also make their ability to
report in a timely and appropriate manner less costly and more
efficient. Those are really important.
The last question I have is, are large hospital systems
pushing for CMS for so-called single check payment from CMS for
provider services? Do you know what I mean by that?
Dr. Conway. Do you mean global budget?
Mr. Bucshon. Yes.
Dr. Conway. So we have some states that have asked us with
their hospitals to think about global budgets in those states
for a subset of interested hospitals.
Mr. Bucshon. OK, because the orthopedic things you talked
about are starting to lean towards that. Look, I am all for
efficient coordination of care, decreasing costs and improving
patient outcomes. The question is, is whether or not a global
budget like that, a so-called single check to a hospital system
for all services provided, from a physician's perspective, will
be something that could be successful because it all depends on
a lot of internal negotiations amongst the hospital and their
provider network, providers themselves. And it almost continues
to help eliminate the independent practice model from a
physician perspective. Do you have any comments on that?
Dr. Conway. Yes. We think the independent practice model of
physicians and clinicians is important and important to
delivery system reform. Two, in some of our bundle payment
mechanisms we specifically enable gain sharing and other
mechanisms to try to make sure that physician engagement is
deep. And lastly, the entities that are successful generally
have a deeply engaged physician and clinician workforce.
Mr. Bucshon. OK. Again, I would like to interact with you
on a couple issues, the pause in the meaningful use and what
your thoughts are on that at some time outside of a committee
hearing, and also the RUC recommendations and why it appears
over the last number of years that those haven't really been
taken into serious account when reimbursement decisions are
being made at CMS.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Dr. Murphy, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. Good morning, Dr. Conway.
Dr. Conway. Good morning.
Mr. Murphy. Just to be clear, the models we are talking
about here for payments on things, they are there to
incentivize doctors to do the most effective and efficient care
and reward them for good decisions.
Now one of the areas that what I get concerned about this
is CMS policies restrict doctors from making decisions. And so
I want to lay out a couple things that I hope CMS reviews,
because it is great if we empower doctors to do the best thing,
it is a problem if we say, please do the best thing, by the way
we aren't going to let you do it, particularly for people on
Medicare and Medicaid.
We have had hearings before on the issue, for example,
protected class of drugs. My understanding is there is still a
move in CMS to eliminate psychiatric drugs as part of this
protected class, but you may be aware that with protected class
of psychotropic drugs antidepressants may all be
antidepressants, but because of side effects some people will
stop taking them. And yet, if that drug, the new drug is not
covered that it doesn't do any good, so the physician is trying
to make a decision but his hands are tied.
There is also an issue with--and I know, look, we did what
we needed to do with SGR and we have this, with this act which
is now a month ago we passed this bill and we have about 73
billion in offsets, and net costs may be 141 billion and we are
hoping to find all the money for that but still, we recognize
the value of that.
But I have been working on mental health reform now for a
couple of years. This committee has been dealing with this, but
there still is an IMD exclusion in this with CMS. We used to
have 500,000 psych beds in this country in the 1950s and now we
have less than 40,000. We need 100,000, because people with an
acute phase of psychotic break need a place to go besides a
five-point tie down in an emergency room or being put in jail
or being sent to the county morgue. But people with serious
mental illness not in treatment are at a high risk for suicide,
violence, et cetera.
Now the consequence not treating mental illness according
to NIMH, even back in 2010, was pretty staggering. Fifty
percent of individuals with a serious mental illness have a
chronic illness, at least two, and 40 percent of them don't
receive any treatment in any given year.
Additionally, Medicaid reports show that the extraordinary
role of mental illness in multi-morbid illnesses that five
percent of people in a Medicaid population account for 55
percent of the costs of Medicaid, and virtually all of those
have a mental illness.
And so, and also with people with delusions and
hallucinations, the longer they go without treatment the worse
it gets. The longer a person waits for treatment for a
psychotic episode the longer it takes to get the illness under
control. For bipolar disorders, the sooner a person gets on
lithium or other treatments the better their treatment goes.
So, but what happens here is we have this wide range of
people with serious mental illness who are SSI and SSD
recipients and the cost of untreated mental illness is pretty
amazing. I mean, the cost of untreated diabetes, which many of
them have particularly if they are taking second generation
antipsychotics, costs of untreated diabetes is $245 billion per
year in this country, $176 billion in direct medical costs. And
that is why it is so important for many people with serious
mental illness to get treatment early on.
I want to make sure that as we are approaching this that
whether it is Medicare or Medicaid, anything within CMS' realm,
let doctors treat patients. But when we come up with rules that
say you can't prescribe what is most effective, you can't let
them stay in the hospital more than 16 days, 16 beds, and you
can't see two doctors on the same day, this is without CMS not
certainly Medicare, but it is all our money.
So I look here with the high numbers we have for
cardiovascular disease, pulmonary disease, infectious disease,
all which have a higher mortality rate, higher morbidity rate,
we have to change this. So although I am pleased this committee
worked to get doctors paid more, we have to make sure that
policies associated with this do not tie their hands with CMS
policies that prevent them from getting them into acute care,
making sure we address that quickly, making sure we have the
medications available for them.
So along those lines, when we saw that CBO actually scored
this they said that we don't know how to score this. They
simply came up with the numbers and said, well, let's just
multiply the number of hospital beds in this country, psych
beds 147 million, whatever that is, times the cost and they
came up with this staggering number, but saying we really don't
know how to do this.
I know CMS is also looking at other avenues for this, for
example, in managed care programs to do something like a 15-day
length of stay. If we made it an average length of stay, that
would help. But I am just asking you, take that information
back, work this out.
Missouri actually did a study that says when you lift that
16-bed rule you actually save about 40 percent in the federal
area. It is a huge savings. And I guess I come down to this. If
we have all this money to pay doctors, we ought to be able to
come up with a few billion dollars to treat patients. And so I
want you to take that message back as you work these things
out. Please make sure we allow the mentally ill to be treated.
Please make sure that doctors' hands aren't tied. And as you
are looking at incentives, make sure you are not preventing the
actions from taking place. Thank you.
Dr. Conway. Great.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. I now recognize
the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Bilirakis, 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it
very much. First question is, has CMS done any modeling if
commercial insurance is using value based products and payment
arrangements similar to CMS' proposed alternative payment
models? Do you envision that Medicare Advantage would or could
count towards a provider's alternative payment model
performance threshold?
Dr. Conway. Yes. So we work closely with Medicare Advantage
and other commercial plans. The various plans are implementing
many of the same models CMS is, accountable care organizations,
bundled payment, advanced primary care medical homes. We are
actually now doing work with the health plans. We did quality
measure alignment work, but now through what is called our
Health Care Payment Learning and Action Network we are also
aligning on things like risk adjustment, attribution, data.
Once again we obviously can't force alignment, but we are
having discussions around these various payment models and how
we align.
In terms of Medicare Advantage, as you know, in the statute
there is the multi-payer, all payer provisions starting in the
2021 payment. So that would allow us to look across not just
traditional Medicare, but also payments to providers from other
commercial plans including Medicaid and Medicare Advantage. And
we will have to propose the details of that but the statute is
flexible in its focus across multi-payers.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, next question. One area that is
addressed by MACRA but will require significance guidance by
CMS is physician participation in multiple alternative payment
models. We wanted physicians to be able to experiment with
different approaches to improve their practices while also
recognizing that the many APMs being developed by stakeholders
are narrowly focused on a specific disease or condition.
How might CMS approach the issue of a physician wanting to
participate in multiple APMs while seeking to avoid MIPS'
penalty through noncompliance, and then will CMS consider APM
participation in the aggregate when determining if a physician
reaches the performance threshold?
Dr. Conway. Yes. So we are looking at this issue now and
have heard it from physicians and clinicians as well about
wanting the desire to potentially participate in multiple
eligible APMs. As you know, part of this is driven by there are
percentages for payments and/or patients in the statute, 25
percent initially and then going up over time. So one of the
issues we have heard from physicians and clinicians is they may
want multiple eligible alternative payment models to try to
meet those thresholds.
So we are looking at this now, how would we do this
operationally, how would we allow that to occur. To go back to
principles, our goal is to allow physicians and clinicians to
practice medicine and to practice it the way they choose and to
allow multiple paths to success, so that physicians and
clinicians can select whether it is MIPS or eligible
alternative payment models, the models that are most meaningful
to their clinical practice. So those are a few thoughts on that
sir.
Mr. Bilirakis. Well, thank you very much. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentlelady from Indiana, Mrs. Brooks, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you. An overarching problem with the
current physician quality programs is attribution. And
physicians have communicated to the committee that they get
attributed to patients' costs and outcomes of the physician
have little or nothing to do with. At the same time, other
physicians don't have any patients attributed to them at all.
And so what is CMS doing to fix the attribution problem as it
implements MIPS?
Dr. Conway. So we are doing a number of things to work on
attribution. I think for a number of our payment models we have
dealt with the attribution issue for a longer period of time,
like accountable care organizations where we have things like
plurality of visits, et cetera, and have dealt with some of the
specialty issues on attribution. Similar in primary care, for
bundles we often have a primary attribution mechanism.
Where it becomes challenging and you are alluding to in the
MIPS arena, is in a traditional fee-for-service environment
where patients are seeing very many different physicians and
clinicians how we do attribution. We do think the statute has
some guideposts there that are helpful. You included language,
as you know, on physicians and clinicians being able to
identify their relationship with patients, which we think is
intriguing, and we are looking at how you might implement that
so physicians and clinicians are directly engaging in
attribution.
You also included language on virtual groups, which is
complex but an interesting area of the statute to think about
how you might enable physicians and clinicians to make choices
about virtual groups or enable virtual groups based on the
data.
So I think attribution will continue to evolve. This
actually was in our discussions we have had with other private
payers. But evolve in a way we think it will continue to
improve over time and also enable the ability to physicians and
clinicians to engage in the attribution issue.
Mrs. Brooks. As the law encourages coordination of care and
the growth of medical homes, what is your current thinking then
of how to attribute patients to a primary care practice
specifically in order to determine their health outcomes?
Dr. Conway. So our current methodology is often based on
plurality of visits to a primary care doctor. We are actually
experimenting now in testing new methods. So in our ACO models
now we are testing what is called voluntary attribution, but
essentially the patient says this is my doctor, and then they
are attributed to that doctor. We think that has a lot of
promise. We are still testing how to do that best and how to
make sure patients and physicians understand it, but we think
that idea of voluntary attribution can be helpful.
A number of our models now have prospective attribution so
people know their patient population ahead of time. In our next
generation ACO model which just launched in January they get
prospective attribution of those organizations, many of which
are physician led. They have the ability to do voluntary
attribution so the patient is saying I am in this model, this
is my doctor, this is my provider. They also have things like
telehealth waivers and other things to help them succeed.
But I think you can look at some of our leading edge
models, if you will, to see where we think we can go in
attribution and overall these new payment models.
Mrs. Brooks. What criteria is CMS using to determine the
eligibility of specific medical homes?
Dr. Conway. For eligible APMs you mean?
Mrs. Brooks. Yes.
Dr. Conway. Yes. So, as you know, the statute specifically
called out if a primary care medical home was expanded using
the CMMI authority that that would be an eligible APM. We do
not have any models yet from the innovation center that have
been expanded. We do have Comprehensive Primary Care Initiative
which has shown decreased hospitalizations, decreased ER
visits, positive quality of care results, but has not yet met
the--our actuary would need to certify that model for it to be
expanded. That has not occurred yet because it is still in the
first couple years of the model.
We also could make proposals on primary care medical homes
that could allow new models, whether they are CMS-run or run by
others or brought to us by others like physician groups, to
qualify as an eligible alternative payment model.
Mrs. Brooks. So you are open to having new definitions and
new criteria brought to you with respect to medical homes?
Dr. Conway. Yes, and you could certainly comment on
congressional intent if you want to. It was called out
separately in the statute which we read as, and a number of
members have mentioned today, the focus on primary care. So we
are trying to adhere to both the statute and what we think was
meant. And we know primary care is critical to health system
transformation, so we need robust primary care models that
allow primary care physicians and clinicians to participate and
be a foundation for delivery system reform.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you. I have nothing further, Mr.
Chairman, yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady. That concludes
the first round of questions. We are going to go to one follow-
up per side, and the chair recognizes Dr. Burgess for a follow-
up.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
courtesy. Thank you, Dr. Conway, for staying with us this
morning. Let me just ask you a couple of questions about the
electronic health records side of this.
Underlying legislation kind of envisions clinical data
registries and certified electronic health records serving as
the reporting mechanism for providers to interact with the
Medicare program. Could you give us an idea about your agency's
work in ensuring that these systems are able to serve the
reporting functions envisioned by the legislation?
Dr. Conway. Yes. Thank you, Doctor, for the question.
A few things that we are doing, I think, one, working on
the electronic health record space first. As I mentioned, we
think MIPS and the MACRA legislation allows us additional
flexibility to focus on interoperability, simplicity, outcomes.
We are working with the Office of the National Coordinator, as
I know you know Dr. DeSalvo, on a few areas. One, standards and
really having common standards that are used. Two, making sure
that the program increasingly focuses on this interoperability
issue which is a critical function. Three, ONC did just come
out with a rule around their ability to oversee electronic
health record vendors, et cetera. Four, you put in the MACRA
statute around data blocking, which we agree with you can be a
major issue, and the ability for providers to need to attest
that there is not data blocking going on as well.
We think some of the changes like application program
interfaces, not to get too technical, but some of the new
standards that may allow application developers and apps and
others to build on top of electronic health records including
registries, be able to pull data and then report that
information, we think has serious potential.
And a number--sorry for the long answer--a number of the
specialties that I mentioned, like GI and ophthalmology and
others that have effective registries, often can pull
information from electronic health record, maybe combine that
with other information and then use it to report, which we
think is a viable, exciting pathway.
Mr. Burgess. Very well. A statement was made earlier in the
hearing that this was a bill passed so the doctors could be
paid more. I just respectfully would disagree with that
philosophically. There were bills that were required to pay
doctors more. Those were called doc fixes, and we passed one
every year that I was here for 13 years. It cost a tremendous
amount of money, did nothing about the underlying payment
system. Well, did a few things around the margins and perhaps
made things a little more onerous without really trying to take
a global approach to improving the payment structure.
And as I outlined in my opening statement this was a
disruptive action, I recognize that and I have heard from a lot
of my peers that they are nervous about some of the things we
are doing, but I do believe it was in the best interest of
continuing to be able to provide Medicare services. So really,
this bill was not a bill aimed at paying doctors more, this was
a bill aimed at maintaining access for Medicare patients to
their physicians, hence the name, Medicare access.
So I appreciate while people are concerned and I get a
number of people pushing back on the overall cost, and once
again I would just ensure people, the cost of doing nothing,
the no-billed scenario, if you will, was about a billion
dollars more over 10 years than what we are doing today, and we
do have the opportunity to try to put some of the building
blocks in place that allows for the sustainability of the
program in the years to come.
Look, if I had just been able to do this the way I would
have wanted, I would have simply directed CMS to pay whatever
bills come in over the transom and stop bothering everybody.
But we all know that wasn't a realistic approach. And I promise
you, I hear from a lot of my cohort that that is where we
should have been on this.
But I do respect the work that you are doing, and I hope
that--I mean, I know that we are going to see you back here in
the subcommittee and I look forward to that. I look forward to
learning how you are making the process better for everyone
involved.
Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the ranking member, Mr. Green, for a follow-up.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And following up on my
colleague from Texas, and I agree, it was Medicare access. And
granted, whatever Medicare rate may not even pay the cost of
the physician, but it is part of a physician's practice. In
every doctor I have ever met, I just want to practice, they
tell me, I just want to practice medicine. I don't need to get
rich, I just want to practice medicine and heal people.
Let me ask a follow-up also on as we transition to value
based payments it is clear that technology must play the
increasing large role. Recently, Acting Administrator Slavitt
has admitted some limitations in the current meaningful use
program and stated it will now be effectively over and replaced
with something better.
Dr. Conway, given that meaningful use of certified EHR
technology will remain part of the MIPS score, what broad
parameters does CMS intend to use to guide its future approach
to the use of health IT?
Dr. Conway. Yes, so the broad parameters and principles
that both Acting Administrator Slavitt and I and others have
discussed from CMS are few. Number one, and we do think the
MACRA statute allows us to evolve the electronic health record
program for physicians and clinicians in a very positive
direction.
The principles are, one, flexibility so that the electronic
health record can be used for the diversity of physician and
clinician practice. Two, simplicity so that it really focuses
on the aspects that matter most. Three, interoperability so
that the information is truly flowing across systems.
And then four, what I will call, what we call user design
and interface. That the technology is increasingly usable,
integrated into the work flow of a physician or clinician in a
seamless fashion, which we think there is still opportunities
and this is shared between CMS and the Office of the National
Coordinator and obviously vendors working with physicians and
clinicians so that user interface is as easy to use as
possible.
Mr. Green. Well, I am glad you mentioned that. And my next
question was MACRA gives CMS the flexibility to reform the
program because that is one of the concerns. And again, we will
be visiting over the next number of months in following what
CMS says. I appreciate your perspective and hope the committee
will continue a collaborative relationship with CMS to advance
the health IT infrastructure in moving forward.
So Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. That concludes
the questions of members present. We will have follow-up
questions. We will send them to you in writing. We ask that you
please respond promptly. A reminder, that members have ten
business days to submit questions for the record, so they
should submit their questions by the close of business on
Thursday, March the 31st.
Dr. Conway, thank you very much. Very good hearing. Very
important issue. We will continue to monitor this, and thank
you. We look forward to working with you.
Dr. Conway. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, the subcommittee hearing is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:53 a.m., the subcommittee adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[The attachments to this document can be found at: http://
docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF14/20160317/104683/HHRG-114-IF14-
20160317-SD008.pdf.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
