- EPA'S PROPOSED OZONE RULE: POTENTIAL IMPACTS ON MANUFACTURING

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EPA'S PROPOSED OZONE RULE: POTENTIAL IMPACTS ON MANUFACTURING

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

AND THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, MANUFACTURING, AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 16, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-56

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

97-678                        WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Missouri               JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                     Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               JERRY McNERNEY, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        PAUL TONKO, New York
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREGG HARPER, Vice Chairman          GENE GREEN, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     LOIS CAPPS, California
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             KATHY CASTOR, Florida
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   PETER WELCH, Vermont
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILL FLORES, Texas                   FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma               officio)
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)
------

Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade

MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
Chairman
JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey              Ranking Member
Vice Chairman                      YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi                Massachusetts
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              TONY CARDENAS, California
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             PETER WELCH, Vermont
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana                 officio)
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Janice D. Schakowsky, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Illinois, opening statement...........................     3
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     6
Hon. Marsha Blackburn, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Tennessee, opening statement..........................     7
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     8
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................   124

Witnesses

Ross E. Eisenberg, Vice President, Energy and Resources Policy,
National Association of Manufacturers..........................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Answers to submitted questions...............................
Erin Monroe Wesley, Executive Vice President and Chief Operating
Officer, Baton Rouge Area Chamber..............................    33
Prepared statement...........................................    35
Answers to submitted questions...............................
Robert L. Glicksman, J.B. And Maurice C. Shapiro Professor of
Environmental Law, George Washington University School of Law..    42
Prepared statement...........................................    44
Answers to submitted questions...............................
Gregory B. Diette, M.D., Professor of Medicine, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, on Behalf of the American
Thoracic Society...............................................    60
Prepared statement...........................................    62
Answers to submitted questions...............................
Louis Anthony Cox, Jr., Ph.D., President, Cox Associates.........    66
Prepared statement...........................................    68
Answers to submitted questions...............................
Stacey-Ann Taylor, Director, Product Stewardship, Henry Company..    82
Prepared statement...........................................    84
Answers to submitted questions...............................
Michael Freeman, Division President, The Americas WD-40 Company..    89
Prepared statement...........................................    91
Answers to submitted questions...............................

Submitted material

Letter of March 9, 2015, from Dr. Keet to the Hon. Barbara Boxer,
submitted by Mr. Rush..........................................   126
Letters to EPA Administrator McCarthy, submitted by Mr. Whitfield   128
Statement of the American Chemistry Council, submitted by Mr.
Whitfield......................................................   156
Statement of the American Forest & Paper Association.............   160
List of selected stakeholders supporting retention of the
existing ozone standard........................................   162

EPA'S PROPOSED OZONE RULE: POTENTIAL IMPACTS ON MANUFACTURING

----------

TUESDAY, JUNE 16, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
joint with the
Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade,
Committee on Energy and Commerce
Washington, DC.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 10:15 a.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed
Whitfield (chairman of the subcommittee on Energy and Power)
presiding.
Members present: Representatives Whitfield, Shimkus,
Burgess, Blackburn, Latta, Harper, Lance, Guthrie, Olson,
McKinley, Kinzinger, Griffith, Bilirakis, Johnson, Ellmers,
Flores, Mullin, Hudson, Rush, Schakowsky, Butterfield,
Sarbanes, Welch, Yarmuth, Clarke, Loebsack, Kennedy, Cardenas,
and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Clay Alspach, Chief Counsel; Will Batson,
Legislative Clerk; Leighton Brown, Press Assistant; Allison
Busbee, Policy Coordinator, Energy and Power; James Decker,
Policy Coordinator, Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade; Melissa
Froelich, Counsel, Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade; Tom
Hassenboehler, Chief Counsel, Energy and Power; Kirby Howard,
Legislative Clerk; A.T. Johnston, Senior Policy Advisor; Peter
Kielty, Deputy General Counsel; Paul Nagle, Chief Counsel,
Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade; Mary Neumayr, Senior Energy
Counsel; Dan Schneider, Press Secretary; Lisa Goldman,
Democratic Counsel; Michael Goo, Democratic Chief Counsel,
Energy and Environment; Tiffany Guarascio, Democratic Deputy
Staff Director and Chief Health Advisor; Caitlin Haberman,
Democratic Professional Staff Member; Ashley Jones, Democratic
Director of Communications, Member Services and Outreach; Adam
Lowenstein, Democratic Policy Analyst; John Marshall,
Democratic Policy Coordinator; and Alexander Ratner, Democratic
Policy Analyst.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Mr. Whitfield. I would like to call the hearing to order
this morning and certainly want to thank our panel of
witnesses. We appreciate your being here with us this morning
to discuss the proposed ozone rule. As you know, we have had a
number of hearings on this subject matter, and today we are
doing a joint hearing with the Subcommittee on Commerce,
Manufacturing, and Trade. And each one of us that will be
giving opening statements will be given 3 minutes, and then I
am going to introduce each one of you individually right before
you give your opening statement, and you will be give 5
minutes. We get 3, you get 5. But then we will have the
opportunity to question you as well. So thanks for being with
us. And at this time I would like to recognize myself for an
opening statement.
We have watched the Obama Administration propose and
finalize a litany of rules for more than 6 years now, and I
can't tell you now how many hearings we have held. I and many
others have come to the conclusion that EPA is no longer an
independent and impartial arbiter of our environmental laws but
has become a politicized extension of the White House to
implement the President's Clean Energy Plan.
When EPA testifies, they always refer to the EPA's
Scientific Advisory Committee. Now this is a body appointed by
EPA. The public does not really have any idea who is on this
Advisory Committee, and truthfully, we all understand the
importance of science but whether or not they are independent
and impartial or have they also become a politicized arm of the
White House.
Now, the reason given for adopting a more stringent ozone
rule relates to healthcare which is vitally important. To quote
Ms. McCabe, a 70 parts per billion standard would prevent an
estimated 330,000 missed school days, 320,000 asthma attacks,
and 710 to 1,400 premature deaths. Now, that is an important
statistic, all of those are, and one that we all would applaud.
But today it is a lot different when this Clean Air Act was
first administered, and it is important that we understand that
cost.
We have listened to many experts over the past 6 years who
have pointed out that there is a direct correlation between
poverty and healthy living. That also is important because EPA
in its Scientific Advisory Committee do not consider the impact
of these regulations on jobs. In April of this year, the Global
Market Institute, an arm of Goldman Sachs, concluded a study
that found for example that the number of small businesses
which has been the backbone of America prosperity, the number
of small businesses between 2009 and 2014 declined by 600,000.
Usually after an economic crisis there is a slow increase. But
that is not the case in small business. There are 600,000 less
today than 2009 and 6 million fewer jobs. In fact, small
business jobs have been declining at roughly 700 per month the
last 3 years for which statistics are available. And this
report goes on to say the reason for this is one, the
availability of credit and the high interest cost, the high
cost of capital because of banking regulations that came out of
the crisis. In addition, it specifically lists other
regulations relating to healthcare, relating to the
environmental issues throughout our government.
And so the point is this. Yes, there is a benefit in
healthcare with new regulations on ozone, but we have to also
consider the impact of people and their families who have lost
jobs and the impact on their healthcare. There has got to be
some discussion about that as well.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Ed Whitfield

This morning, I am pleased to be partnering with the
Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade in our
review of EPA's proposed new ozone standard. The focus of
today's hearing is the impact of the proposed rule on America's
manufacturing sector.
We have watched the Obama EPA propose and finalize rules
for more than 6 years now, and a familiar pattern has emerged.
The agency is inclined to overstate both the extent and the
certainty of the benefits, while downplaying the costs. At the
same time, the concerns of state and local governments tend to
be ignored, as do the issues raised by affected manufacturers.
The proposed ozone rule has all of these flaws, plus one
more--the agency already has a stringent rule on the books that
it has barely begun to enforce. The ozone rule was strengthened
in 2008, but the Obama EPA delayed taking action to implement
this rule until quite recently. In fact, EPA did not publish
its implementing regulations until last March. As a result,
states are only in the initial stages of formulating their
implementation plans for this standard.
Now, with the ink barely dry on implementing regulations
for the existing standard, EPA is proposing an entirely new
one. Back in 2011, the President explained his decision not to
move ahead with a new ozone standard by explaining that ``I
have continued to underscore the importance of reducing
regulatory burdens and uncertainty, particularly as our economy
continues to recover.'' Well, our economy still continues to
recover, and this proposed rule certainly won't help.
Most of the compliance burden would fall on manufacturers
and energy producers. Indeed, much of Americas' manufacturing
capacity will be in counties likely to be designated as
nonattainment under the proposed rule. A nonattainment
designation makes it very difficult to permit a new or expanded
facility, and may impose significant costs on existing
manufacturers. A study from the National Association of
Manufacturers estimates costs of $140 billion dollars annually
and 1.4 million job losses as a result of this rule.
As we will learn today, many manufacturers have already
reduced their emissions of ozone-forming compounds, and
continue to do so. But by pushing too far and too fast, the new
rule could jeopardize jobs and affect the quality and price of
several everyday items that consumers need. I look forward to
learning more about this proposed rule from the manufacturers
who would be on the front lines of compliance.

Mr. Whitfield. At this time I would like to recognize the
gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Rush, for his 3-minute opening
statement. I am sorry. At this time I would like to recognize
the gentlelady from Illinois, Ms. Schakowsky, for 3 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Chairman Whitfield and Chairman
Burgess, for holding this hearing, and despite my great
affection for Chairman Whitfield, I have to say that I don't
agree at all that the EPA is operating in a political manner.
And let's make it clear: The EPA is responsible for setting
ozone standards based on what is considered safe from a public
health perspective. The compliance costs to business are not to
be considered in its rule-making.
Health experts, epidemiologists, numerous medical
organizations have clearly stated that the current ozone
standard of 75 parts per billion is not adequate to protect
public health, particularly for vulnerable populations such as
children, the elderly, outdoor workers, those with chronic
medical conditions like asthma. The EPA has indicated its final
rule due in October will likely land somewhere between 65 and
70 parts per billion. I strongly support EPA action on this
issue, although I believe a 60 part per billion standard would
be more effective to protect the public health.
The existing standards are not doing enough to protect
public health. In my home State of Illinois, 13 percent of
children, 13 percent, suffer from smog-related asthma, well
above the national average. In response to mounting medical
evidence and Clean Air Act requirements, the federal courts
rightly directed the EPA to reconsider existing inadequate
health protections against smog last year. Let me repeat. This
rule-making is court mandated. Federal law requires the EPA to
maintain clean air standards, and the courts have said it must
do more to meet that requirement.
While anticipated business compliance costs have no place
in determining ozone standards, industry concerns about the
impacts of rule-making are overblown. We will hear from some of
our witnesses that proposed ozone standards would stifle
manufacturing, investment, and expansion. That argument is not
new but it is flawed. Since the Clean Air Act was enacted into
law more than 40 years ago, we have seen tremendous progress in
cleaning up our air and in protecting thousands of communities
around the country. That has been done in concert with
technological innovation and a growing economy.
Doomsday predictions about the impact of EPA regulations on
American businesses have never been borne out by the facts.
From 1990 to 2010 emissions of the most common air pollutants
have declined by more than 40 percent while Gross Domestic
Product has increased by more than 65 percent. These standards
will save and improve American lives.
I look forward to the EPA finalizing the rule and to the
manufacturing sector to continuing its long record of success
and expanding while at the same time complying with EPA
regulations. Again, I look forward to hearing from our
witnesses, to gain from their perspectives on this important
rule-making, and I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentlelady yields back the balance of
her time. At this time I would like to recognize the gentleman
from Texas, the Chairman of the Commerce, Manufacturing, and
Trade Subcommittee that we are having the hearing with, Mr.
Burgess. You are recognized for 3 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Chairman Whitfield, and thank you
for agreeing to have this joint hearing with the Subcommittee
on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade along with the Energy
Subcommittee. So the Environmental Protection Agency's proposal
to further reduce the National Ambient Air Quality Standard for
ozone represents perhaps one of the most costly regulations the
agency has ever imposed upon the United States' economy, and it
is a recurring theme with the administration, an unprecedented
and overly burdensome regulatory proposal while there is still
ongoing debate about the science and the public health benefits
of enacting such a rule.
So again, I want to thank my counterpart on the Energy and
Power Subcommittee, Chairman Whitfield, and I want to thank our
panel of witnesses for joining us today to talk about both of
our subcommittees' work on the impact of EPA's proposed ozone
rule on manufacturing.
The simple fact remains that this type of regulatory
overreach may be injurious to America's families and jobs. As a
physician, the health of all of our citizens is of significant
importance to me as well as everyone on the committee, and we
know from other conversations occurring throughout this
committee, the cost of health care is a real concern for
Americans. However, I have reservations about the science and
the analysis utilized by the Environmental Protection Agency to
support the proposed rule and whether it would be effective.
The 43,000 comments filed with the Environmental Protection
Agency about the proposed rule demonstrate that there is a lot
of interest, there is a lot of activity, and there may not be a
lot of certainty. There is important debate that needs to occur
to identify the actual benefits to justify the effect on job
creation.
I have written to the Environmental Protection Agency on
several occasions over the past few years on issues relating to
the rule, most recently regarding the Clean Air Scientific
Advisory Committee's evaluation of the risks and the tradeoffs
of the ozone proposal. I remain concerned about the scientific
process utilized by the Environmental Protection Agency to draw
a causal inference about the impact of lowering the National
Ambient Air Quality Standard from 75 parts per billion by as
much as 5, 10, or 15 parts per billion.
Given that the implementation for the regulations for the
2008 standard of 75 parts per billion were only finalized
earlier this year, what will be the proposed rule's impact on
states and localities that are already dealing with non-
attainment including counties around the Washington
Metropolitan Area and counties in the North Texas area?
The National Association of Manufacturers estimates that
for Texas this rule could result in 300,000 lost jobs and
almost a $1,500 drop in annual household consumption. When
there are disincentives to investment in a local economy,
either from businesses looking to build and expand or from
families trying to make ends meet, we have to pay attention. We
have to ask the tough questions. There are going to be a lot of
questions for the EPA and for our witnesses today. I am focused
on learning about the expected impacts of the EPA's proposed
rule and the effect on public health.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back the time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Burgess follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Michael C. Burgess

Today we are again faced with a troubling theme we have
seen time and time again from this Administration: an
unprecedented and overly burdensome regulatory proposal when
there is significant ongoing debate and little science around
the public health benefits of such a rule. The EPA's proposal
to further reduce the National Ambient Air Quality Standard for
ozone represents one of the most costly regulations the agency
has ever attempted to impose on the U.S. economy.
I join Energy and Power Subcommittee Chairman Whitfield in
thanking the panel of witnesses for joining us today to talk to
both of our subcommittees about the impact of EPA's proposed
ozone rule on manufacturing. The simple fact remains that this
type of regulatory overreach is unsustainable for American jobs
and families.
As a physician, the health of all of our citizens is of the
utmost importance to me, and as we know from all of the other
conversations occurring throughout this Committee, the cost of
health care is a real concern for Americans. However, I have
serious reservations about the science and analysis utilized by
the EPA to support this proposed rule and whether it would be
effective. The 43,000 comments filed with the EPA about the
proposed rule demonstrate that there is no certainty here.
There is a lot of important debate that needs to occur to
identify actual benefits to justify stifling job creation.
I have written to the EPA on several occasions over the
last few years on issues relating to the rule, most recently
regarding the Clean Air Scientific Advisory Committee's
evaluation of the risks and risk tradeoffs in the ozone
proposal. I remain concerned about the scientific process
utilized by EPA to draw causal inferences about the impact of
lowering the NAAQS from 75 parts per billion to 70, 65, or even
60 parts per billion.
Given that the implementation regulations for the 2008
standard of 75 ppb were only finalized earlier this year, what
will be the proposed rule's impact on states and localities
that are already dealing with nonattainment, including counties
in my district around the Dallas-Fort Worth area?
The National Association of Manufacturers estimates that
for Texas this rule will result in over 300,000 lost jobs and a
$1,430 drop in annual average household consumption. When there
are disincentives to investment in a local economy, either from
businesses looking to build and expand or from families trying
to make ends meet, we have to pay attention and ask the tough
questions. These are the types of scenarios that can decimate
entire towns.
It is a well-known fact that there are several states that
are in non-attainment status today and are on an extended
schedule to come into compliance. However, estimates show
hundreds of additional counties that will be forced into non-
attainment when this proposed rule is finalized in October. By
the EPA's own estimates, we are talking about a minimum of
about 350 to 600 counties that would go from compliant status
to non-attainment.
I applaud my colleagues on Energy and Power for their
oversight and scrutiny of this proposal. I am very interested
to hear from the witnesses for WD-40 and the Henry Company
about the impact of this proposed rule on their businesses. All
the Members need to understand the potential for this rule to
freeze economic growth in their districts.
While there are lots of questions for the EPA to answer
about these issues, today I am focused on learning about known
or expected impacts of the EPA's proposed rule on
manufacturing.

Mr. Whitfield. At this time the chair recognizes the
gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Rush, for 3 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this important joint hearing on EPA's proposed ozone rule and
its potential impact on the manufacturing sector.
Mr. Chairman, last week we heard from EPA's Acting
Assistant Administrator for air and radiation, Janet McCabe,
that lowering the ozone standard from 75 ppb would literally
save lives while also preventing hundreds of thousands of
missed school days and missed work days and preventing hundreds
of thousands of asthma attacks.
Today, Mr. Chairman, we will hear from industry groups that
lower the ozone standard will cause great job loss, will damage
our economy, and will lead to unprecedented costs. Well, Mr.
Chairman, as policymakers, we are always searching to find the
right balance between protecting our air and water through
regulations without unnecessarily saddling industry with
unreasonable burdens that might stifle growth. And today, Mr.
Chairman, we will hear about competing studies with conflicting
results on everything from potential health benefits to
economic growth to the impacts on employment. However, I think
it is instructive to look at how these types of regulations
have played out in our most recent past, and if our most recent
past is any indication, Mr. Chairman, then I am not fully
convinced that this is an either/or proposition that we are
confronted with, that Americans must choose between either
economic strength or clean air. As Ms. McCabe noted in the
hearing last week, Mr. Chairman, and I quote her, the history
of the Clean Air Act actually shows us and all of those who are
willing to take a look at it that the two things go together,
two things go together. We have reduced air pollution
dramatically in this country, and the economy has blossomed. It
has grown.
Mr. Chairman, this country and the businesses in this
country have come up with pollution control technologies that
employ American workers, and these new technologies have made
us leaders in the world through selling this kind of
technology.
So I look forward to engaging the panelists so that we can
both protect the public health by reducing ozone in our
atmosphere, and we can also create most needed jobs and
economic opportunities for American businesses and their
families.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back. At this time the
Chair would recognize the Vice Chairman of the Full Committee,
Mrs. Blackburn, of Tennessee for 3 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank all of
our witnesses for the hearing today. This is indeed something
that we want to drill down a little deeper on and look at these
regulations. Everybody is for clean air and clean water, and
there is no argument about that. What we have tremendous
concerns about is when you get to the point of diminishing
return. And that is something you will be able to help us with
today. What we have found is if the EPA is not given to doing
cost-benefit analysis, and Dr. Burgess referenced that and the
injurious nature of some of these regulations at times and the
harm that it does to business, the cost that is there, and the
outcome that ends up not being delivered. And you are not, if
you will, getting the bang for your buck when you look at these
regulations.
So I think that we will want to look at this cost. A
trillion dollars? A trillion dollars is what the compliance
cost is for this, for industry? What does that do to families?
What does it do to jobs? What does it do to local communities?
And those are questions that we are going to want to ask in
addition to what does it mean to the environment. If you don't
have jobs and if you don't have local, vibrant communities, you
are not going to see people who are investing the time and the
energy to clean up the environment or to innovate to find a
better way.
So we thank you for your participation. We look forward to
your questions today. Yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentlelady yields back. At this time I
recognize the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Pallone, for 3
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairmen Whitfield and Burgess and
our Ranking Members Rush and Schakowsky, for holding this
hearing. I also wanted to welcome all of our panelists.
We heard some great things about the importance of the
proposed ozone rule last week from EPA Acting Assistant
Administrator Janet McCabe. Under the proposed standard, we
would see tremendous public health benefits. EPA's new standard
will avoid nearly 1 million asthma attacks, millions of missed
school days, and thousands of premature deaths.
EPA estimates these benefits would range from $13 to $38
billion annually, outweighing the cost by approximately 3 to 1.
In addition, it is consistent with the law and scientific
evidence.
The proposed ozone standard is part of a set of health-
based air-quality standards which make up the foundation of the
Clean Air Act. These standards are based on scientific evidence
alone and have been extremely effective in cleaning the air and
protecting public health.
The current 75 parts-per-billion standard is weaker than
the facts would allow. So EPA has proposed based on a complete
review of the scientific evidence to revise the standard to
fall within 65 to 70 parts per billion as recommended. I am
sure today we will hear more about the cost than the benefits,
yet a unanimous Supreme Court opinion written by Justice Scalia
made it clear that EPA's approach for determining a safe level
of air pollution is correct and costs may not be considered.
During today's hearing I urge everyone to keep in mind that
the grossly inflated estimate of the rule's projected costs
failed to consider any of the benefits associated with reducing
ozone pollution. This ignores the real cost of poor air quality
that are borne by those who breathe, especially children.
We will also be told that EPA's proposed standard will have
dire consequences for economic growth, but the history of the
Clean Air Act is one of exaggerated claims by industry that
have never come true. In reality, the act has produced public
health benefits while supporting economic growth.
As I said last week, EPA's ozone standard is long overdue,
and this rule will help put us on the path to reaching the goal
of the Clean Air Act, clean air for all Americans. Thank you,
and I yield back my time.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back, and that
concludes the opening statements. And at this time we will get
to our panel of witnesses.
And our first witness this morning is Mr. Ross Eisenberg
who is Vice President for Energy and Resource Policy at the
National Association of Manufacturers. And Mr. Eisenberg, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF ROSS E. EISENBERG, VICE PRESIDENT, ENERGY AND
RESOURCES POLICY, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF MANUFACTURERS; ERIN
MONROE WESLEY, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT AND CHIEF OPERATING
OFFICER, BATON ROUGE AREA CHAMBER; ROBERT L. GLICKSMAN, J.B.
AND MAURICE C. SHAPIRO PROFESSOR OF ENVIRONMENTAL LAW, GEORGE
WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF LAW; GREGORY B. DIETTE, M.D.,
PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE, JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF
MEDICINE, ON BEHALF OF THE AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY; LOUIS
ANTHONY COX, JR., PH.D., PRESIDENT, COX ASSOCIATES; STACEY-ANN
TAYLOR, DIRECTOR, PRODUCT STEWARDSHIP, HENRY COMPANY; AND
MICHAEL FREEMAN, DIVISION PRESIDENT, THE AMERICAS WD-40 COMPANY

STATEMENT OF ROSS EISENBERG

Mr. Eisenberg. Thank you. Good morning, Chairmen, Ranking
Members, members of the subcommittees. I am pleased to
represent the NAM, the world's largest industrial trade
association here at today's hearing.
Manufacturing is building communities and fueling growth
all over America. The factory that our grandfathers worked in
is really not what you see today. It has been transformed into
a sleek, modern, technology-driven facility that strengthens
communities and creates jobs for us and for our children. We
are building cleaner and more efficient automobiles. We are
using cleaner fuels, and we are operating better, more
efficient factories. Since 1990, our NO
x
emissions
have decreased 52 percent and VOC emissions by 70 percent. As a
country, ozone levels have fallen nearly 25 percent since 1990,
and the air is unequivocally better. This fact really has not
escaped the public, either. Tomorrow, the NAM will release a
poll showing that over \2/3\ of Americans rate their local air
quality as excellent or good.
Manufacturers support reducing ozone, and we believe in the
mission of the EPA. But we come before Congress and this
committee today seeking help. The EPA has proposed a regulation
that pushes beyond the limits of what may be technologically
feasible resulting in what could be the most expensive
regulation ever. EPA has proposed new ozone standards for which
you can only identify about 35 percent of the necessary
technologies to achieve that new standard while relying on so-
called unknown controls for nearly 65 percent of the path to
compliance. This is not a balanced policy, and it is not an
achievable rule.
We surveyed our members recently, and over 66 percent of
manufacturers are concerned with how new ozone standards will
impact their business. More than half of them, 53.5 percent,
said they are not likely to move forward with projects in ozone
non-attainment areas. But don't just take it from us. Take it
from the hundreds of governors, lieutenant governors,
environmental agencies, air directors, attorneys general,
mayors, counties, cities, highway officials, state
representatives, Democrats, Republicans, unions, industry
groups, and chambers of commerce who have sent letters to the
EPA or the White House asking for the current standard to
remain in place.
We recently asked the experts at NERA Economic Consulting
to quantify the cost of this new standard set at 65 parts per
billion. They found in fact that it would be the most expensive
regulation ever: $140 billion annually in lost GDP, $1.7
trillion overall, the equivalent of 1.4 million jobs in
jeopardy, and $830 in annual cost to the average household.
Now I am sure you will have questions about the study at
the hearing, so let me try to answer some of them now. First
off, NERA and EPA's assumptions in their studies are more or
less identical. They both assume that the same final
regulations will be in place going forward. They both assign
the same cost to the known controls. They both assume in the
base line that a certain amount of power plants will be retired
due to market conditions, and they both assume that a large
percentage of the technologies and strategies needed to attain
the stricter standard will come from what EPA calls unknown
controls. The primary difference between the two studies really
is the cost of those unknown controls. EPA assumed a single,
flat cost for those controls, $15,000 per ton. It is an
assumption that we know based on experience and logic just
isn't true. As a society, as we invest in controls to reduce
emissions and get closer and closer to zero, the cost per ton
of those reductions will necessarily increase.
So what NERA did is they relied on evidence to drive a cost
curve to estimate that steep incline as we start to get rid of
the technologies that we know about. And if they can't figure
out what those technologies are, then the cost to scrap,
modify, or shut down certain equipment. Near the bottom of the
cost curve is what we know the cost per ton for coal-fired
power plants retiring. At the top then is the cost per ton for
vehicle scrappage, sometimes referred to as cash for clunkers.
My colleague at the GW University claims that no one ever
really thought of vehicle scrappage as a pollution control
technology until we came along with our study. I am very
flattered by that, but it is also dead wrong.
California has had a vehicle scrappage program in place
since the 1990s. It is included in their SIP, their state
implementation plan, for ozone. Texas also uses a vehicle
scrappage program for its ozone compliance tool. It is called
the Air Texas Drive a Clean Machine Program.
As Professor Glicksman notes, as a pollution compliance
strategy, vehicle scrappage is highly inefficient. But that is
kind of our point. We have been so successful in reducing ozone
levels that not only is the low-hanging fruit gone, the high-
hanging fruit is gone, too. We are playing in the margins now.
All that is left are the controls that are not as cost-
efficient, and if we can't develop new controls in time, we
will have to deal with the severe consequences of ozone non-
attainment that you are going to hear about today.
So this is not a sensible regulation. It is especially
frustrating when you consider that the implementation of the
current standard has just barely begun, that EPA's proposed
standard is approaching background ozone levels in many areas,
and that the dozens of other laws and regulations on the books
that limit NO
x
and VOCs will drive ozone levels down
25 percent more in just the next 3 years. This doesn't have to
be a choice between the environment and the economy.
Two weeks ago the Energy and Commerce Committee worked
together to unanimously approve a bill to modernize TSCA. It
was a wonderful day. We ask that you work to find similar
middle ground on ozone. Manufacturers cannot cope with the most
expensive regulation in history, and we really hope that you
will work together to help us find a solution to this problem.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Eisenberg follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Eisenberg. I want you all to
know that I am working the clock. I am introducing the
witnesses. The next witness is Ms. Erin Monroe Wesley who is
Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer of the
Baton Rouge Area Chamber. Thanks for being with us, and you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ERIN MONROE WESLEY

Ms. Wesley. Thank you. Good morning. Good Morning Chairman
Whitfield, Chairman Burgess, and members of the joint
subcommittees. Again, my name is Erin Monroe Wesley. I serve as
the Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer of the
Baton Rouge Area Chamber. On behalf of BRAC's 1,400 investors
and the region's business community, we stand before you today
to express our significant concern regarding the proposed NAAQS
rule issued by the EPA on November 25, 2014.
The Baton Rouge Area Chamber adamantly opposes the proposed
reductions in ambient air quality standards from the current
level of 75 parts per billion. Our opposition is based on three
main points: Number one, the proposed standards have already
cost our region thousands of jobs and billions of dollars in
capital investment. Two, the standards would drive 18 of the
Nation's 20 top performing metropolitan economies into non-
attainment and damage U.S. competitiveness for business
investment, especially foreign direct investment. And number
three, the vast majority of U.S. counties will meet the EPA's
proposed standards by 2025 with practices already in place.
BRAC believes in and stands for cleaner air and
environmental stewardship. For roughly 10 years, BRAC has
supported and hosted the Baton Rouge Clean Air Coalition. On
April 4, 2014, thanks in large part to the Coalition's efforts,
the Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality announced
that the EPA determined that the Baton Rouge Area attained the
2008 8-hour ozone standard. The region has decreased ground-
level ozone, improving air quality and human health for its
800,000 plus residents.
Our successes and progress environmentally make the
negative effects of the proposed standards even more painful.
In 2014, BRAC worked with four chemical manufacturers that were
investigating major investments in the region, including two
companies that executed purchase agreements on large industrial
sites with the intent to develop. Since the EPA first proposed
lowering the ozone NAAQS, all four of these companies indicated
that the proposed new standards influenced their decisions to
look elsewhere or to otherwise not proceed.
In other words, the proposed standards have cost this
region at least 2,000 direct and indirect jobs and caused more
than $7 billion in capital investment to be put on hold or
moved elsewhere. Let me be very clear: These projects were put
on hold or lost at the mere prospect of lowering ozone air
quality standards to the 65 to 70 parts per billion range.
Should these proposed standards be adopted, the Baton Rouge
Area will be thrust into non-attainment status. Economic
development professionals have projected that under this
scenario, the Baton Rouge Area will not even be approached for
these types of projects, much less compete for them.
Baton Rouge would not be alone in suffering economically
should the proposed standards be adopted. If the EPA were to
lower the ozone standard to 65 parts per billion, all but two
of the Nation's top 20 metropolitan area economies, as ranked
by the Brookings Institution, would be relegated to non-
attainment status. These proposed standards would stifle the
growth and investments in U.S. manufacturing, exports, and
development taking place in metropolitan areas that have been
the most successful in helping the country get back its footing
economically.
The proposed actions to lower the ozone NAAQS rule run
counter to the U.S. Government's interest to grow the national
economy, attract foreign direct investment, and increase U.S.
exports.
Clean air is a priority for the Baton Rouge Area's business
community. Economic development and environmental stewardship
do not have to be mutually exclusive goals. This region's
businesses are committed to both, as evidenced by the efforts
put forth to gain attainment status. Policies that have a
significant adverse effect on local economies, as the proposed
NAAQS rule does, should be enacted sparingly, only when
absolutely necessary. Unfortunately, the rule at hand spares
nothing, and is unnecessary.
Despite the EPA's own assertion that a vast majority of the
country will be in compliance with the regulations by 2025
under the current regulatory scheme, the Agency seeks to enact
rules that will immediately bring the punitive status of non-
attainment to areas around the country. We cannot stand by and
allow our economy to be collateral damage.
It is therefore the strong recommendation of the Baton
Rouge Area Chamber that the National Ambient Air Quality
Standards for ozone rule not be reduced from 75 parts per
billion. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Wesley follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Ms. Wesley. At this time I
recognize the gentleman, Mr. Robert Glicksman, who is the
Shapiro Professor of Environmental Law at George Washington
University Law School. We appreciate your being with us this
morning, and Mr. Glicksman, you are recognized for 5 minutes
for your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT L. GLICKSMAN

Mr. Glicksman. Chairmen Burgess and Whitfield, Ranking
Members Schakowsky and Rush and members of the subcommittees, I
appreciate the opportunity to testify today on why strong
standards to reduce ozone air pollution are both necessary to
fulfill the Clean Air Act's congressionally-mandated public
health goals and consistent with a strong economy in which
manufacturers can prosper and thrive.
My written statement makes 4 key points. First, a strong
national ozone pollution standard that fulfills the public
health goals of the Clean Air Act will deliver significant
health and environmental benefits.
Second, regulations such as EPA's pending ozone standard
can and do provide important economic benefits for U.S.
businesses, including those in the manufacturing sector.
Three, a frequently cited study purporting to find
catastrophic economic effects from a strong ozone standard
fails to provide a reliable accounting of the rule's potential
impacts.
And finally, to the contrary, the available evidence
confirms that strong national standards for ozone pollution are
not an impediment to economic growth.
I will start with the first point. EPA's National Ambient
Air Quality Standards have provided enormous benefits, but the
need for more protective standards is clear. Ozone pollution
adversely affects people of all ages including pregnant women,
children, healthy young adults, and the elderly. EPA's rules
reduce the incidence of impaired lung function and other health
problems for all these populations.
Ozone pollution control rules also strengthen the U.S.
economy by preventing billions of dollars of damage to
agricultural crops and forest products and through rubber
textiles and paints. Controls and ozone precursor emissions
also increase the productivity of America's current and future
workforces by cutting the number of missed work and school days
resulting from health problems linked to ozone exposure.
Despite the air quality improvements achieved under EPA's
current ozone standards, more than 140 million Americans
continue to live in areas with harmful levels of ozone
pollution. In a recent study of the National Center for
Atmospheric Research projected that warming temperatures could
cause the number of unhealthy ozone pollution days to increase
70 percent by the year 2050. As a result, the Clean Air Act
requires EPA to adopt more protective air quality standards
that would produce air quality that is safe to breathe.
Specifically EPA must set the standards at levels sufficient to
protect the public health with an adequate margin of safety as
well as protect the public welfare which includes effects on
property and economic values. The current standards do not meet
that requirement and therefore need to be strengthened.
It is important to recognize that EPA's proposed standard
is not the product of whimsy or executive overreach. EPA's
proposals are a response to demands placed on it by the Clean
Air Act itself. That law and the specific duties it imposes on
the EPA was adopted in 1970 with overwhelming bipartisan
support and was strengthened in 1990 through amendments
supported and signed into law by President George H. W. Bush.
In the 45 years since the Act's adoption, EPA's critics
have repeatedly argued that EPA must consider the cost of
controlling pollution under the National Ambient Air Quality
Standards. The courts have repeatedly and resoundingly rejected
that claim, most notably, the unanimous Supreme Court opinion
written by Justice Scalia. The court ruled that the Clean Air
Act prohibits EPA from considering cost when it adopts these
standards.
Now, it is critically important not to misunderstand these
rulings. They don't mean that compliance costs and economic
impact are irrelevant to the statute's operation. Instead, the
courts have recognized that the statute empowers the states to
take costs into account in designing and implementing plans to
achieve the national standards by adopting adequate control
strategies that meet their own economic and social needs. The
statute therefore accommodates public health concerns and
economic needs through a process that respects state
sovereignty and discretion.
The economic benefits of air pollution controls are
significant, even if they tend to be overlooked. They provide a
productivity dividend by reducing work and school days lost to
illness-related air pollution exposure. EPA estimates that its
Clean Air Act regulations prevented 13 million lost work days
in 2010 alone. These regulations also can create new markets
and opportunities for entrepreneurs as federal and state energy
efficiency regulations have done. Environmental regulation can
spur businesses to revolutionize their production processes in
ways that lead to greater productivity and profitability as
numerous examples under the statute and other laws have shown.
I will be happy to answer any questions the committee may
have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Glicksman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Glicksman.
And at this time I would like to recognize Dr. Gregory Diette
who is the Professor of Medicine at Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, and he is testifying on behalf of the
American Thoracic Society. Thanks for being with us today, and
Dr. Diette, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF GREGORY B. DIETTE

Dr. Diette. Thank you, Mr. Whitfield, and thank you to the
other chairman and the ranking members and all the members at
these important subcommittees. I really appreciate the
opportunity to talk to you today. As you said, my name is Dr.
Gregory Diette, and I practice at Johns Hopkins University in
Baltimore, Maryland. I am a pulmonologist there which means I
take care of sick people with lung diseases, especially people
that are very sick with lung diseases. These are people that
have trouble breathing.
You have my written testimony in front of you, and I just
wanted to try to elaborate on a couple of points that I wanted
to clarify. One is and the first thing is that ozone is bad for
people with lung disease. That is not news. That is not news to
anybody on these subcommittees, but it is an irritant that
bothers the lungs. Multiple research studies in different parts
of the country, different parts of the world, have shown that
people with diseases like asthma, COPD, and other lung
diseases, when they are exposed to ozone, they get sick.
What sick means is--sometimes it means you might need to
increase the amount of medicine you are taking. Sometimes it
means you are going to go to your doctor's office. Sometimes it
means staying in the hospital overnight, and sometimes it means
dying from an attack of COPD or from asthma.
The second point that I want to make is that ozone
pollution is bad for otherwise healthy people, too. That's
really important. We use different ways in order to try to
irritate the lungs to prove if somebody has asthma. Ozone does
that in normal, healthy people. It is scary.
Third, it doesn't matter if ozone is from the next city,
the next county, or from a neighboring state. Ozone is ozone,
and it bothers the lungs whether or not it started where you
live or it started somewhere else.
The fourth point I want to make is about public health, and
I think public health sometimes gets sort of lost. We talk
about a lot of numbers, millions of people with this, hundreds
of thousands with that. I think what is important about public
health is it is actually a collection of stories from all over
America about people who have illnesses and suffer from them
sometimes. What it can mean, for example, is it can mean a mom
that is in the emergency department with her kid hoping that he
survives that asthma attack, and in the back of her mind
wondering, is she going to be able to take off another day from
work. And that is an important point. She might not be able to
go to work, to her job, because her son is sick.
The issue that she will face also is how she pays for the
care that she gets there. You have to understand what an asthma
attack is, too. It is terrifying. People say they can't get
enough air. Some people say they can't breathe. Other people
say it feels like there is an elephant on my chest. They think
they are going to die. People feel panic. They can't stop
coughing. Sometimes they can't walk, and their medications
sometimes work and sometimes they don't.
I asked a patient of mine by e-mail if she could help
describe for these subcommittees what the role is of ozone in
her particular life, and she is a 29-year-old woman who is
fully employed, college-educated, and she has lung damage from
being born prematurely and now has asthma. And she says things
like I am very sensitive to air quality, specifically areas
with large amounts of pollution on code red and code orange
days. She talks about those days that she is unable to work,
right? She is unable to work. She can't go outside to do her
normal-life activities. These are her words. She said even
stepping on the balcony of her condo can cause her to have a
severe flare-up of her asthma. She can't do simple errands,
like going to the grocery store. She can't make it sometimes
from the door to her car without difficulty. She is very
dependent on her rescue inhaler on those particular days.
She said that she is very dependent on the forecasts that
are available for when there is going to be high ozone days
because she needs to remember to take her inhaler with her, and
she said unfortunately, sometimes she has to change plans with
her friends and her family due to the air quality.
The final point I want to leave you with is that the
science is strong and compelling. Since 2006 when the Bush
Administration EPA looked at the ozone standard, the American
Thoracic Society recommended a more protective standard of 60
parts per billion. We are confident of our recommendation then.
We are more confident now. There are additional studies that
have come out since that time period which have strengthened
our understanding of the science.
The EPA is not basing their proposed protective ozone
standard on 1 study. It is not ten studies. It is literally
hundreds of studies that have helped to inform this rule. It
includes multiple scientific methods including animal studies,
mechanistic studies, human population studies, natural
experiment studies, and meta-analyses. What these studies show
is that the current ozone standard is not protective of public
health and that the EPA must issue a more protective standard.
Thank you very much for inviting me here, and I appreciate
any questions you might have.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Diette follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you, Dr. Diette. And at this
time I would like to recognize our next witness, Dr. Louis
Anthony Cox who is the president of Cox Associates and the
Chief Science Officer for NextHealth Technologies. Dr. Cox, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LOUIS ANTHONY COX, JR.

Mr. Cox. Chairman Burgess, Chairman Whitfield, and members
of the subcommittees, thank you for inviting me to discuss the
human health aspects of EPA's proposed ozone rule. I am
testifying on my own behalf today, understanding that well-
informed policy making must consider the likely and foreseeable
impacts of the proposed rule on human health, as well as on
economic end points. I have lived in Denver since 1987, so I
care a lot about air pollution personally. But today I want to
focus on what science and data tell us about how changes in
ozone affect public health.
I have provided the committee members with a detailed CV
describing my academic, publishing, professional, and
consulting affiliations and my service as a member of the
National Academy of Engineering and as clinical professor of
Vital Statistics and Informatics at the University of Colorado,
School of Public Health.
In evaluating whether costly proposed regulations are in
the public interest, we should ask first, how well will a
regulation really work? That is, will it actually cause the
desired benefits that motivate it which we have been hearing
about? Second, how sure can we be? For how sure we can be,
EPA's Health Affects Risk Assessment Report for Ozone clearly
warns that their estimation of health impacts uses inaccurate
models with significant uncertainties that they have not been
able to quantify. Unfortunately this leaves policymakers and
the public uninformed about how likely it is that the proposed
ozone rule will really cause the substantial public health
benefits that EPA estimates and how likely it is to instead
produce other outcomes, such as no public health benefits.
We can summarize EPA's uncertainty analysis very simply, by
saying that no one can tell from their published risk
assessment documents what the true effects of the proposed rule
on public health would be. Fortunately, despite this important
gap, it is quite easy to find out the correct answer. For
decades EPA and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
have kept data on the ozone levels and public health,
mortality, and morbidity rates at hundreds of locations across
the United States. It is straightforward to examine what has
happened to ozone and what has happened to health risks in
hundreds of counties. It is also easy to apply objective,
statistical methods for causal analysis to these data to
determine how, if at all, ozone levels and mortality and
morbidity rates are causally related.
Such analyses revealed the following key points: First, as
reported in hundreds of studies, there are positive,
statistical associations between ozone levels and mortality and
morbidity rates in many locations. Both tend to be higher in
some places and at some times than others. For example, both
ozone levels and cardiovascular mortality rates used to be
higher decades ago than they are now.
EPA interprets such repeated findings of positive
associations as evidence of causation, but in fact, they are
only evidence for correlation. Dr. Diette says that ozone
bothers the lungs, but they are not bothered less at lower
concentrations.
Second, mortality and morbidity rates have fallen just the
same where ozone levels have increased as where they have
decreased. Both short-run and long-run studies that have
rigorously examined changes in ozone levels and changes in
public health risks pray possible causal relation between them
have not found one. How ozone changes does not help to predict
or explain how mortality rates will change. This means that the
statistical association between them is coincidental, not
causal.
These facts answer the question that EPA's Health Risk
Assessment for Ozone left unanswered. The human health benefits
that EPA and others predict from the proposed ozone rule will
not materialize. We know this because they have not
materialized in the past. Reductions in ozone much larger than
those now being proposed have already occurred without causing
any detectible improvements in public health. To predict they
will do so in the future is simply wishful thinking and bad
statistics based mainly on using uncertain and inaccurate
models and are confusing historical correlation with future
causation.
Current ozone levels are already low enough so the further
reductions should not be expected to cause improvements in
public health.
EPA's conclusions about the causal impacts of ozone
reductions on public health run against these empirical
findings, but their conclusions are based on unreliable,
subjective judgments of selected experts on models that they
concede are inaccurate and have large but unquantified
uncertainties and unmistakenly treating correlation as
causality. None of these methods produces trustworthy
conclusions.
In summary, we know from extensive real-world experience
that EPA's predicted health benefits from the proposed rule are
only artifacts of inaccurate modeling assumptions. Assuming
that smaller future reductions in ozone will accomplish
benefits the previous larger reductions have not is
unwarranted. There is no need to repeat the costly effort to
obtain better public health by further reducing ozone levels.
We already know from abundant historical experience that doing
so does not work.
Thank you for your attention.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cox follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

. And our next
witness is Ms. Stacey-Ann Taylor who is the Director for
Product Stewardship at Henry Company, and thanks for being with
us, Ms. Taylor. And you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF STACEY-ANN TAYLOR

Ms. Taylor. Good morning. Thank you Chairman Whitfield,
Chairman Burgess, Ranking Members Rush and Schakowsky, and
members of the subcommittees for the invitation to testify
regarding the EPA's proposed ozone rule and the potential
impacts on manufacturing.
My name is Stacey-Ann Taylor, and I am Director of Product
Stewardship at Henry Company. Henry Company is a privately
owned building products manufacturer based in El Segundo,
California, right next to LAX airport. Henry Company has
manufacturing facilities in 6 states and employs about 450
people. We manufacture roof coatings, roofing adhesives and
sealants, driveway sealers, air and vapor barriers, and a
number of other residential and commercial building products.
Henry Company is a very active member of the Roof Coatings
Manufacturers Association, RCMA, and I am also pleased to
represent RCMA with my testimony as well. RCMA is the national
trade association representing manufacturers of asphaltic and
solar reflective coatings and their raw material suppliers.
Typically, legislative and regulatory discussions on the
impact of lowering the EPA's NAAQS for ozone focus on a few key
industries, especially oil and gas production, utilities, and
motor vehicle manufacturing. However, these discussions rarely
include an explanation of how lowering the NAAQS for ozone will
have an impact on everyday consumer and commercial products.
In November 2014, EPA issued a proposed rule to lower the
NAAQS for ozone from the current 75 parts per billion to 70
parts per billion or possibly lower. When the EPA lowers the
NAAQS for ozone, this requires the states to update their State
Implementation Plans to try and meet the EPA's new regulatory
requirements. These State Implementation Plans have to be
approved by EPA. Understandably, the states will have to
include a variety of air quality management methods in their
State Implementation Plans to meet the lower standard. One of
these air quality management methods is the regulation of
Volatile Organic Compounds, VOCs, in consumer and commercial
products.
VOCs are gases emitted from certain chemicals found in
consumer and commercial products. VOCs are also emitted from
natural sources, such as plants and trees. VOCs react with
nitrogen oxides and sunlight to form ground-level ozone. As we
all know, breathing in ground-level ozone can result in adverse
health effects, especially for sensitive populations.
Therefore, it is appropriate for EPA and the states to
regulate VOCs. However, VOC regulation of consumer and
commercial products in certain air quality management districts
around the country are approaching the point of diminishing
returns in terms of actually contributing significantly to air
quality improvement.
EPA and the states should carefully consider whether
requiring manufacturers to achieve further drastic reductions
in VOC content in consumer and commercial products is
technically feasible at this time and also worth the time and
resources spent by manufacturers to comply for a low return on
investment in terms of improved air quality.
In addition, it should be noted that if manufacturers can't
find reasonably priced technology to achieve these further VOC
reductions, there will certainly be fewer consumer and
commercial products available in the marketplace for purchase.
Manufacturers will have to restrict non-compliant products from
sale, and if replacement products can't be manufactured and
sold at prices the market will bear, then the result will be
fewer products available for people to purchase.
In closing, I hope that I have provided a clear explanation
of how EPA's lowering of the NAAQS for ozone will eventually
result in further regulation of VOCs in consumer and commercial
products that may not significantly help air quality management
districts achieve attainment status and may actually result in
less product choice in the marketplace. As manufacturers of
consumer and commercial building products, Henry Company and
its representative trade association RCMA believe that EPA
should not be allowed to further lower the NAAQS for ozone
until the vast majority of the air quality management districts
across the country have reached attainment status under the
current level of 75 parts per billion.
The primary focus of the EPA should be to provide
additional support to those air quality management districts
currently in non-attainment status to help them reach
attainment status under the current level, before making the
goal of reaching attainment status even more difficult for the
states to obtain.
Thank you very much for your time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Taylor follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Ms. Taylor, and our next witness
is Mr. Michael Freeman who is the Division President of The
Americas for WD-40 Company. Thanks for being with us, and you
are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL FREEMAN

Mr. Freeman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, ranking members, and
members of the subcommittees. It is an honor and a privilege to
be sharing the views of WD-40 Company and its partner trade
associations, the National Aerosol Association, or the NAA, and
the Consumer Specialty Products Association, CSPA, with you
today.
I join you as the President of the Americas for the WD-40
Company. We have our global headquarters in San Diego,
California. Our products are found under the sink, in the
garage and in the toolboxes of loyal fans in over 176 countries
around the world. In the United States, WD-40 is in over 80
percent of U.S.A. households. We are also in over 80 percent of
U.S. businesses. That makes us appear a lot larger than we
really are. My dentist was horrified the other day when I told
him in the USA more people use WD-40 every day than use dental
floss. He didn't like that, but it is a true story and really,
really testifies to our brand power and uses for all of our
brands: WD-40, Lava, 3-IN-ONE, Spot Shot, and the other brands.
Which brings me to the national ozone standard.
We know from experience that lowering the national ozone
standard has resulted in lower VOC state regulations that drive
us to reformulate many of our products, and we are not alone.
This happens with other consumer products also.
What are consumer products? Well, if you go look underneath
your kitchen sink, your bathroom sink, you go to your pantry,
your laundry room, you can go out to the garage. All those
products there that make your life better, that is us. Now, it
makes us a bigger industry, and that makes us also a target for
VOC emissions, even though we are one of the smallest sources
of VOC emissions nationally.
So in our opinion, reducing the standard right now can have
a serious impact on consumer products. Household products like
WD-40 could become much less effective and/or much more
expensive for a consumer to buy, and that has been our
experience with past regulations.
Reducing the standard now could also create a confusing
patchwork of compliance regulations across and within states.
And that has been our experience now, too.
The current regulation is not being implemented anywhere
close to the same way across all 50 states, and even in the
great State of California, which has over 35 air districts, we
now have air districts doing something different than the State
of California. So you can imagine how complex and confusing
this is for everybody involved.
Reducing the standard now would also add significant costs
that can adversely impact the entire aerosol industry and
others because it is not just your R&D product development
cost, it is also the marketing cost. You are constantly
changing labels where you can put label claims on for your
product, changing labels out due to the evolving nature of the
regulations. It also moves into your supply chain.
In California there are certain plastic bottles that we
like to use of a certain size, and if we use them, we have to
make sure they have 25 percent recycled content. So you have a
compounding of different regulations, and unfortunately, I
don't have the impression that all the regulators talk to each
other. And so the combined impact on business is rather
amazing.
All these costs can become embedded into our business going
forward. Sometimes we can pass them on, sometimes we can't. But
the tip of the spear is the R&D, and we know from experience
that it takes years of diligent research and millions of
dollars for the WD-40 company to develop products that meet the
statutory regulations.
Let me give you an example. WD-40 company has lowered the
VOC content of its flagship brand, WD-40, from 65 percent VOC
to 50 percent VOC to the current 25 percent VOC standard in
California in the last 15 years. By the end of 2018, California
presently requires that we get the VOC content down to 10
percent. Now, we have been working on this for years, and we
have not yet discovered the way to do it that is
technologically or commercially feasible. But we will keep
working on it. We still have time. And all this is being done
underneath the current regulation. What do you think happens if
you dogpile another regulation on top of that as far as
confusion and complexity?
The NAA, the CSPA, the WD-40 Company, and many other
consumer product companies have a long and successful history
of working with the California Air Resource Board, the Ozone
Transport Commission, the EPA, and several individual air
districts.
So our recommendations are essentially this. First off, can
we celebrate the success that we have had? We have cleaned a
lot of air over the last several years working together. I grew
up in smoggy Southern California in the '50s, '60s, and '70s,
and at the end of a lot of days I couldn't do that without
having a smoker's hack. And I wasn't smoking. I was just doing
water polo and swimming. So we would like to celebrate. We
would like to make sure that many of the regulations that have
been developed have not yet been fully implemented with known
results. And we just ask, can we finish one job before we start
with another? I would rather go into a regulation with actual
results and facts and reality than modeling.
Our final recommendation is for Congress to keep the
current standard unchanged at 75 parts per billion until states
have been able to fully implement that standard and learn from
those regulations and results so that we can all move forward
in the fact-based, more aligned and successful way to achieve
our common clean air goals. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Freeman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you, Mr. Freeman, and thank all
of you for your testimony and for taking time to give us your
insights and thoughts on this important topic. At this time I
recognize myself for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Freeman, you touched on trying to come in compliance
with these regulations, and there has been a litany of
regulations, I mean, more so in this administration than at any
other administration in recent memory. And you mentioned this
also, Mr. Eisenberg, about the fact that unknown technology or
controls--to me, unknown controls means that it is simply not
there yet to meet the standard. Is that what your understanding
is, Mr. Freeman?
Mr. Freeman. Yes.
Mr. Whitfield. Now, some people would say and many people
make the argument that, well, we are so innovative in America
that we come up with new solutions, and I think that is true.
And you have indicated yourself that you have gone from 65 down
to 25 percent of VOCs, and California by 2018 wants you to go
down to 10. So more than likely you will be able to do that I
assume, right?
Mr. Freeman. Right now we don't really know. Life is full
of ambiguity, whether it is personal life or business. But
because we work together well with the California Air Resource
Board, that 2018 date was actually supposed to be in effect at
the end of this year, and we were able to go back to them and
say do you know we have been working hard on this? And they
actually delayed it for 3 years. So we have 3 more years. But
that is an example of people working together.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, another frustrating thing about this
is EPA came up with this standard in 2008 and only a few months
ago did they provide the implementing guidelines to the states.
And so now the states are just getting this, and they are
already moving onto a new standard.
Now, we heard a lot of comments about this is good for the
economy, and there is no question that since the first Clean
Air Act that was adopted in '70 and the major changes in '90,
the economy has grown. But I don't think we can just throw
under the rug this report that came out in April from the
Global Market Institute of Goldman Sachs that point-blank says,
in small businesses 500 employees and less, for the first time
ever after an economic crisis, as we try to come out of there,
the number of small businesses has decreased by over 600,000,
600,000 less.
So if you are a small businessman with this cumulative
impact--and they say that the cause is banking regulations
because capital is not available and costs are higher, and then
other regulations, like healthcare and so forth, that
cumulative impact has been responsible for 6 million fewer
jobs.
And so I think it is one thing to say, well, this is good
for the economy, but for the first time ever, that is not
proving to be the case. And so a lot of the arguments being
made today, we all recognize the great success of the Clean Air
Act. But at some point, you do get to diminishing returns,
particularly when ozone is affected by what is going on in
China, India, elsewhere. And I think you folks from
California--I guess you are from California, Ms. Taylor. Los
Angeles has never been in compliance. San Joaquin Valley has
never been in compliance, and there are other parts of the
country that have never been in compliance, and they are not
going to be in compliance now, either.
So let me just ask you, Mr. Eisenberg, when Ms. McCabe
comes here, every time she says our rules promote economic
growth. Do you agree with that?
Mr. Eisenberg. Well, in the case of ozone, we actually did
address that in the study. The 1.4 million jobs number and the
$140 billion that the study has concluded, that is actually net
jobs. So they took into account the comment regulations create
jobs. They create, people and so on, pollution control
technologies and things like that. The study actually has that
in it, and we still come out as negative as it does at 1.4
million jobs lost.
So, you know, yes, they do, but they are so far outweighed
with this regulation from all of the jobs that would be lost
overall.
Mr. Whitfield. And you know, this whole issue raises
another question. The Clean Air Act has been sort of
sacrosanct, and rightfully so, because healthcare is vitally
important, and we have made great strides because of what is
going on with our physicians and our healthcare delivery
system.
But the truth of the matter is EPA cannot look at costs
when setting the standard. States can look at costs when
implementing under the State Implementation Plans, but maybe we
should consider cost particularly when you have 6 million fewer
jobs in small businesses. Isn't that a relevant factor? What is
the impact on the healthcare of those families who may not have
health insurance? Is that a valid point to consider?
Mr. Eisenberg. We would certainly agree with that. We would
add that a couple of weeks ago the GAO put out a report that
EPA actually does have a duty to at least look at the cost
through CASAC, its panel, and CASAC has never done it because
EPA has never asked them to.
So while it is legally correct that they are not to
consider cost while considering the actual number, they should
be informed and CASAC should be informed, and they didn't do it
this time. We think they should go back and do it again.
Mr. Whitfield. My time is expired. At this time, I
recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Rush, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Glicksman,
currently the Clean Air Act requires the EPA to issue standards
based solely on consideration of the public health, and these
rules must ``accurately reflect the latest scientific
technology.'' What would be the impact on public health if, as
the chairman has suggested, that the majority party would
rewrite the Clean Air Act to make cost to industry rather than
the benefits of public health the primary driver of EPA rules?
And Dr. Diette, you can chime in on that. I want to ask Mr.
Glicksman first. What would be the impact, in your opinion?
Mr. Glicksman. Yes. The statute has been in effect for 45
years, and throughout that time cost has been a factor that has
been irrelevant to the establishment of the national standards,
as I indicated in my statement. Cost is highly relevant in the
implementation phase, and it appears to me at least in my study
of the statute that that has provided a good balance of
attempts to achieve public health protection with cognizance of
the economic impact of regulation.
I think if EPA were required to consider cost at the
standard promulgation stage, you would inevitably find weaker
protection of the public health because cost considerations
would, I think in many cases, wind up trumping public health
considerations.
Mr. Rush. Dr. Diette?
Dr. Diette. Thank you. I think it is a great point and a
great question to ask. I think one of the issues here is to
consider, since there is so much focus on employment and jobs
and so forth which I think is highly appropriate, that we need
a well-educated healthy workforce in order to go to work,
right? And so one of the benefits, and it doesn't stop at 70 or
65 parts per billion, is more work days for people who actually
breathe in ozone and more children going to school, right? And
so there is evidence that children who miss many school days
because of asthma score worse on standardized tests.
So I just want to point out if the entire focus, which it
is not, was on the workforce, there is a really good argument
to be made that you need to keep your workforce healthy and
well-educated, and you are fighting against that when people
are in the emergency department or in the hospital or otherwise
not able to go to work or school.
Mr. Rush. Thank you. Professor Glicksman, for the past 2
years we have constantly been debating the impact that
regulations have on employment, and we have continuously heard
from industry groups that any and all regulation will stifle
economic growth and lead to job losses. However, in your
testimony, you cite an ETI study that reported that few jobs
are lost because of regulation. In fact, the EPA study you
cited notes that extreme weather events have caused more
extended mass layoffs than regulations. Additionally, the
report states that the number of workers who lost their jobs
because of government regulation ``pales in comparison to any
accounting of the jobs lost in this period due to regulatory
failures that contributed to the economy's financial crisis.''
Does federal regulation always lead to economic decline and
job loss or is it possible to both regulate our air and water
and also grow our economy and provide jobs?
Mr. Glicksman. Environmental regulation does not inevitably
lead to job losses, and it is indeed possible to accommodate
both public health and economic growth concerns.
There have been many examples of situations in which the
regulate community has predicted massive job losses and other
adverse economic effects as a result of proposed environmental
regulations. And rarely if ever have those predictions come
true.
One good example is the adoption in 1990 of the Clean Air
Act provisions that phased out the use of ozone-depleting
chemicals. At the time that the phase-out was first proposed,
the manufacturers of chlorofluorocarbons predicted that there
were no available substitutes, there could not be available
substitutes in the foreseeable future, and that even if
available substitutes became feasible, they would cost many
times the cost of the products being replaced. Well, none of
those predictions panned out. It turned out that when the
handwriting on the wall became clear to companies like DuPont,
they engaged in an intense effort to develop new technologies
that would allow them to manufacture products that serve the
same functions as CFC-containing products did, and not only
were they able to make that shift much quicker than the statute
required, they did so at a much lower cost than had been
predicted, even by EPA. And finally, companies like DuPont
found themselves as market leaders. They had developed these
substitutes far earlier than any of the competing companies in
countries abroad. They were also subject to Montreal Protocol
phase-out.
So the U.S. industry had a competitive advantage over
foreign producers because of their response to the phase-out
adopted in 1990.
Mr. Rush. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time has expired. At this
time I will recognize the gentleman from Texas, Dr. Burgess,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burgess. And thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Wesley, let
me ask you something. Mr. Freeman actually touched on it, but I
rather suspect the Greater Baton Rouge Area is very similar to
the area that I represent just north of the DFW airport. And a
recent report showed in our area the 8-hour ozone levels have
improved 21 percent in the last 15 years during which time our
population has increased by 29 percent. I think that speaks to
some success, in our area, I suspect your area as well. And in
controlling this issue at--had nothing been done 15 years ago,
had no activity been undertaken to try to improve things with a
29 percent increase in population, I don't know. I suspect we
would be in deep trouble in the North Texas area, and yet, we
are not.
Most of the ozone in our area actually does come from
mobile sources, and I will just tell you that mobile sources
have not diminished. Drive on our roads in North Texas, and
that becomes painfully obvious. Mobile sources continue to be
one of the main drivers, no pun intended, of air quality
issues. But I wonder if you would speak to that in the Baton
Rouge Area?
Ms. Wesley. Certainly. We have done a lot of work over the
last several years with the Baton Rouge Clean Air Coalition,
working with other partners to really get ourselves up to the
75 parts-per-billion standard. I am looking a little bit at the
Brookings Institute study and talking specifically about Texas.
If you look at that study in terms of the top-performing
economies, Austin, Houston, San Antonio, Dallas, and others,
they are similarly faced with this ozone attainment issue.
And so for us, it is about looking at our partners,
learning how we can do better in terms of reaching that
standard and not shooting that standard down the road. Right
now we are at 75 parts per billion. We know that the EPA is
shifting that standard, you know, on its own will. And so why,
one, are we shifting the standard when we are still trying to
get there, not only for the Baton Rouge area but certainly
areas across our state? And so we are working toward that
standard. We are working with partners across states who work
toward that standard. But in the meantime, we are certainly
opposed to what is being proposed right now by the EPA because
of the costs associated with it.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you. Dr. Diette and Dr. Cox, I want to
ask each of you a question, and it is probably not fair. And as
a consequence, I am prepared to also offer the question in
writing and would look forward to your responses on this.
But Dr. Diette, you say in your testimony, in sum, there is
accumulating evidence that ozone pollution at levels permitted
by the current standard is damaging to human lungs and
contributes to disease. And then Dr. Cox, in your statements,
you say the EPA's conclusions rely on unreliably subjective
judgments of selected experts on models that they concede are
inaccurate and have large but unquantified uncertainties and on
mistakenly treating association correlation as causality.
So we seem to have a scientific standoff, if you will, as
to these two competing hypotheses. And let me let each of you
just take a few minutes and talk about that. But I actually
would ask you to respond to that discrepancy in written form as
well. Dr. Diette, you are first.
Dr. Diette. Sure. Thank you for the question. I think it is
a great one, right? I would first of all like to point out that
just because there are 2 of us here representing different
points of view, it doesn't mean that there is a 50/50 balance.
I think the scientific community is strongly behind the
evidence being strongly supportive of lowering the standard. So
I don't think it is a 50/50 issue.
What I would say is that the issue about associations I
think can be overblown. There are association studies, but when
you look at how people put together evidence to decide that
there is causality, you can go back to Sir Bradford Hill. There
are many criteria that fit together for assigning causality.
Part of it includes the strength of association or not, but
other things such as experimentation which has been available
here----
Mr. Burgess. Let me stop you there to give Dr. Cox a chance
to respond.
Dr. Diette. Thank you.
Mr. Cox. I think we are on substantially the same page
which is that many people use many criteria to make decisions
about causality. But there are better, more objective methods
that don't require subjective decisions. They actually get at
causality from the data. Those methods unambiguously show that
there is no causal relation detected between changes in ozone
and in changes in public health. Subjective decisions do
overwhelmingly support the converse proposition.
Mr. Burgess. Again, I would actually look forward to each
of you expounding upon that a little bit in written form, and I
will submit the question in writing. But Mr. Chairman, I
learned something this morning from Dr. Diette. I had no
earthly idea that ozone was used as a provocative test for
asthma. It seems a little dicey to me as an asthma patient and
as a physician.
Dr. Diette. I either misspoke or you misheard. I am not
sure which, but my point was we use other agents as a
provocative test, not ozone. But what is so powerful a message
to me is where we have to try to provoke the airways in an
asthmatic with other chemicals, ozone does it in a normal
person. So you don't even have to be asthmatic to see an
asthma-like response in a normal person. That is powerful
stuff.
Mr. Burgess. If I can interrupt you there just to briefly
interject that I Googled that, and indeed, some people have
used ozone as a provocative test for asthma. But it is actually
in the parts-per-million range, not the parts-per-billion
range. So there is a significant quantitative difference. Mr.
Chairman, thank you. I will yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back. At this time I
would like to recognize the gentlelady from Illinois, Ms.
Schakowsky for 5 minutes.
Ms. Schakowsky. So this discussion about whether ozone is
involved at all in public health is interesting. I am just
wondering if either one of you want to go further in talking
about why this regulation is so important and the costs of
health, et cetera.
Dr. Diette. Sure. It is a great question, right? So why is
it important in order to think about a lower threshold, right?
And a lower threshold is meant to protect human health. And the
issue is that this is a potent, oxidizing agent, right? There
is no question about it. This isn't something that is in
debate, right? We know that it bothers the airways of people,
whether or not they have a lung disease. But when you have a
lung disease, you are especially bothered by it. So what you
are trying to prevent is the catastrophic chain of events which
leads to somebody being in the emergency department or in the
hospital, not able to work, not able to go to school, those
sorts of things, and in the worst case, dying.
The evidence base is expanded so that we have evidence
beyond just respiratory diseases, and there is emerging
evidence about whether there are neurologic conditions that may
be attributable to ozone exposure. There is also other
evidence, too, that goes beyond just short-term effects but
looking at long-term effects, and that is starting to emerge as
well.
So there are a lot of reasons to worry about it from a
human health standpoint. If you are a human, you should care
about it.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you. I wanted to follow up on the
track that my colleague, Mr. Rush, was going down in terms of
cost because it seems that in general, those who focus on costs
are not talking about the costs from exposure to unsafe air,
they are talking about the costs to polluters of actually
cleaning up the air.
So I would like to ask our witnesses about the real costs
associated with this rule, the costs of health impacts
associated with unsafe air that affect the lives of millions of
Americans.
So Dr. Diette, during the current 75 parts per billion
ozone standard, have we seen those adverse effects on public
health?
Dr. Diette. Yes, that is one of the points I think, right?
I mean, at least in my written testimony especially I was
trying to highlight the fact that since 2008 when the standard
was considered to be changed then that the studies that have
been done since then are done in an era when the 75 parts-per-
billion standard exists.
So we continue to see adverse effects in the current era,
even after the implementation of the 75 parts per billion. And
the range goes down quite low. So 60 is comfortably within the
range of where we see adverse health effects.
Ms. Schakowsky. So you are saying that 60 even is----
Dr. Diette. Sixty parts per billion, yes.
Ms. Schakowsky. Yes. Dr. Glicksman, would you like to add
to that?
Mr. Glicksman. I just want to actually respond to the last
two questions, in particular why it is important to adopt this
standard. The Clean Air Act is a precautionary statute, as the
courts have interpreted it. It is a preventive statute. In
other words, the statute demands that EPA err on the side of
over-protection of the public health. Congress was aware when
it adopted the statute that there inevitably will always be
scientific uncertainty about the causes and effects of public
health consequences, and it mandated that EPA resolve doubts in
favor of protection. And I will give you a good example of why
it did that.
In 1978, EPA adopted National Ambient Air Quality Standards
for lead. Over the years, it has amended that standard, and
science now tells us that the standard that EPA thought was
safe in 1978 was 10 times too high. Many think that even the
current standard is not sufficiently protective.
So history shows us that over time science is able to
detect adverse effects in public health, that it was not able
to detect previously and that the statute mandates EPAs
overprotection in order to mitigate that tendency.
Ms. Schakowsky. Going back to the issue of cost for just
the minute that I have, you have already talked about the lost
school days, et cetera, but I am wondering--and if you have
already answered this, I really apologize for having been gone.
There are multiple hearings going on at the same time.
How many emergency room visits, if we have any calculation
on that, are expected to be avoided with the strengthened ozone
standard? Does anybody have that kind of data?
Dr. Diette. Yes. Thank you. I mean, there are different
estimates of it. I think that one of the papers that I have
sort of thought was very valuable was there is one by Jesse
Berman, which is in Environmental Health Perspectives, and it
talks about what the estimates would be if we achieved the
current 75 parts per billion standard and then also what would
happen at lower thresholds including 70 and 60 and so forth.
And so when you mentioned school, for example, at 70 parts per
billion, the estimate is approximately 2 million school days
saved. If it is at 60 parts per billion, it would be closer to
4 million as well.
And so there is an incremental advantage at each one of
those thresholds for the types of things that you are talking
about.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you and I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentlelady yields back. At this time I
recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Olson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the chair. Welcome to all seven
witnesses. My first question is for you, Ms. Wesley. Last week
EPA's ozone guru, Ms. McCabe, told me that many Americans will
meet this rule by 2025. In essence she says our concerns are
much ado about nothing. EPA has made some big assumptions to
get America to that point in a decade.
For example, they say that technology that hasn't been
identified will show up and make meeting these rules
affordable. They also say that their 111(d) carbon rule will
come off without a hitch and cut some pollution, too.
People back home have their doubts. I share them. But let's
imagine they are right for a moment. Even if some counties
can't comply in a decade, won't there be dramatic changes and
negative impacts in every sector of the American economy from
day one?
Ms. Wesley. Well, I think the biggest concern on behalf of
the Baton Rouge Area Chamber and other economic development
organizations across the state is if you change that standard
today, we are then placed into non-attainment status. And so
what does that mean, as we have an economic development
toolkit. We look at rules and regulations and laws, and we are
trying to attract jobs and companies to Baton Rouge and to the
State of Louisiana.
And so if we are placed in non-attainment status, that
would be detrimental harm done not only to BRAC but other areas
across our State. So even though looking toward 2015 that may
be one solution, the biggest concern for us is right now and
what that impact means if that standard is changed today.
Mr. Olson. Yes, ma'am. Mr. Eisenberg, I was about to shoot
to you, my friend. Will impacts happen automatically, day one,
if this new rule goes into effect?
Mr. Eisenberg. They absolutely will. If this thing goes
live on October 1 and October 1 you have to get a new--if you
are in the middle of a permitting process for your facility and
you are not at the very, very, very, very, very end, then yes,
you have got to comply with the new standard. And remember what
our poll said, over half of our members believe that it is very
unlikely that they are going move forward with a project if
they get stuck in non-attainment.
Mr. Olson. Another question, Mr. Eisenberg. As we proved at
last week's hearing with Ms. McCabe, we can never fully
eliminate ozone in America. God gave us natural ozone. Half or
more of the ozone in America is beyond our control. That means
that at a certain point we can't go lower. This is why so much
of this compliance technology EPA expects to make this rule
work is unknown. And yet EPA can't even consider whether these
rules are achievable.
My question is, do you think this is sound law, that EPA
doesn't even consider whether its rules are achievable?
Mr. Eisenberg. We absolutely do not. It is actually written
in our policy statements that our members put in place every 4
years. We believe EPA should be considering costs in this
process and especially feasibility given that that is such a
big challenge here. It is a big reason why we support your bill
because it would actually inject cost and feasibility into this
decision-making process.
Mr. Olson. A balance between health and actual costs. It is
bipartisan, bicameral, myself, Mr. Latta, Mr. Cuellar on this
side of the Hill, and Mr. Thune and Mr. Manchin on the other
side of the Hill support this bill. So thank you for the little
plug there, my friend.
My next question is for Mr. Freeman and WD-40 and Ms.
Taylor from the Henry Company. Driven by the Port of Houston,
my district is in the middle of a manufacturing petrochemical
boom. Many people at home are worried about what this rule
would do, whether it can hurt their jobs along the Gulf Coast.
But it seems clear to me that the impact will hit average
consumers even far away from the Port of Houston. Mr. Freeman,
WD-40 is a staple of American life. I have it in my garage, my
Jeep parked down in the garage here. I am going to have my
daughter take it to school, college next year. My question is,
is it fair to say that these products that every American
family has to make their home a home, how would that be
impacted by these new rules? Will my grandkids have WD-40 like
I have had, like I want my kid to have? What do you think?
Mr. Freeman. Well, I would say based on our experience
already with the existing regulations and the state regulations
that come out of that, that we have had to reformulate WD-40.
Now, we have kept the secret juice, the concentrate, the same,
but the solvents that we have to mix into it which do affect
the formula and also could affect performance and also can
affect cost, with this 2018 standard right now, my honest
answer would be to you I don't know what WD-40 your grandkids
would have because we have to clear that hurdle first.
And so we are dealing with that ambiguity and trying to get
there with a lot of great hard work, and I think we are not
alone in that. I think a lot of consumer product companies are
concerned that maybe we are at that point in diminishing return
at least for consumer product goods which is one of the things
we want to look at. And then the other part of it is we are
still working underneath the current standard and trying to
make sense out of that.
Mr. Olson. Let's not move the goal posts before you achieve
those current standards. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentleman from
New Jersey, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. During our hearing
last week we heard some of my colleagues argue that EPA's
proposed ozone standard will hurt the economy and that
Americans have to choose between clean air and economic growth.
But history tells us that reducing pollution can benefit the
economy as well as human health and the environment.
Since its enactment in 1970, the Clean Air Act provides a
perfect example of how we can make steady progress in cleaning
up the air while growing the economy. In fact, over the past 45
years, we have been able to cut air pollution by 70 percent
while our GDP has tripled.
So I am going to ask Mr. Glicksman some questions. What
does the history of the Clean Air Act tell us about the
relationship between environmental health and safety
regulations and a strong economy?
Mr. Glicksman. I think the history tells us it is possible
to achieve environmental protection goals without sacrificing
economic growth and productivity and that the major statutes,
like the Clean Air Act, the Clean Water Act, Resource
Conservation Recovery Act demonstrate consistently that
American businesses are innovative enough and creative enough
to figure out ways to comply in a cost-effective manner that
achieve the public health goals of those statutes without
resulting in adverse effects on economic growth.
Mr. Pallone. But Mr. Glicksman, yet almost every time the
EPA proposes a significant new requirement, we hear a litany of
arguments for why it can't be done. These arguments rely on
exaggerated claims about implementation cost, job losses,
minimal health benefits. But we have heard all of these
doomsday claims before, and throughout the history of the Clean
Air Act, industry has made claims that cleaning up air
pollution would impose huge costs and harm our economy. Over
and over again these claims have turned out to be simply wrong.
One of the exaggerated claims being circulated about the
new ozone rule is that estimating the costs would be $140
billion annually, making it the most expensive rule-making in
history. However, as we heard last week, EPA's cost estimate
approved by OMB was much lower. So again, my question. EPA
estimates that implementation would cost approximately $3.9
billion for a 70 parts-per-million standard and $15 billion for
a 65 parts-per-million standard. Those numbers are a far cry
from the $140 billion. So based on your experience with the
environmental regulations, does the $140 billion price tag seem
reasonable to you?
Mr. Glicksman. I am skeptical of the $140 billion price
tag. There was a similar apocalyptic prediction made when
Congress was considering adopting the acid rain control
provisions of the 1990 amendments. National Association of
Manufacturers at that time predicted serious and lasting damage
to the economy as a result of the acid rain provisions that
would make the United States a second-class industrial power by
the year 2000. Obviously that hasn't happened. What instead
happened was that the cost per ton of controlling
SO
2
was about a tenth of the amount that the
industry predicted at the time those controls were being
considered.
Mr. Pallone. So what is going on here? How have the
opponents of the ozone rule landed on such a large estimate?
You venture a guess?
Mr. Glicksman. I am not an economist. I can't parse the
numbers in any knowledgeable way, but it is clear in the
interest of industry to over-predict cost so that it will wind
up with less protective regulations that are less costly to
comply with.
Mr. Pallone. Well, I thank you. No matter how high the cost
estimate may be, in my opinion there is no reason to oppose the
new ozone rule.
I might have time for one more question. Dr. Diette, the
Clean Air Act requires the ozone standard to be based solely on
consideration of public health establishing the level of
pollution that is safe to breathe. Why is it so important to
separate considerations of cost from setting the standard?
Dr. Diette. Well, there are many reasons. I didn't write
the law, right? But I think it has worked out pretty well since
1970 that it has provided us with very clean air compared to
some of the countries that I have visited around the world
which have horrible air quality. And I think the reason to do
that is because the public health is good for people, right?
People have a right to breathe clean air. They have a right to
not become sick by the air that they breathe, and I think that
we have a more productive and a more functional population when
people are not sick and they are not running to the emergency
department. So I think that is the reason to do it.
The other is that there is a cost-shifting thing here,
right? I haven't heard a lot of talk about the people who
inhaled the ozone and missed work. I have only heard about the
people that produced the ozone and could theoretically miss
work. So there is an imbalance there in terms of the thinking I
think.
Mr. Pallone. I appreciate that. I will just say again that,
since the beginning of the Clean Air Act, polluters have cried
wolf every time EPA has passed a new rule to protect public
health, and the truth is we can have a strong economy while
cutting pollution and cleaning the air. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentleman from
New Jersey, Mr. Lance, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lance. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I certainly
understand the position of all of the distinguished members of
the panel, and of course, from my perspective, this is part of
the larger debate on the state of the American economy, the
better health of the Nation. It could even tangentially affect
the debate we are having in Congress at the moment regarding
trade.
To Professor Glicksman, does the Clean Air Act require the
establishment of the Clean Air Science Advisory Committee?
Mr. Glicksman. The statute created the Clean Air Act
Scientific Advisory Committee, and it mandates that EPA consult
with the committee prior to adoption or revision of national
standards.
Mr. Lance. And that is a committee whose members are
appointed by the EPA or----
Mr. Glicksman. Yes.
Mr. Lance [continuing]. By Congress or both?
Mr. Glicksman. EPA.
Mr. Lance. By EPA? In your written testimony you state
that, ``Scientists have known for a long time that the current
national standard for ozone of 75 parts per billion set in 2008
is far too weak.'' And then I believe you go onto recommend the
60 parts per billion. Is that accurate, Professor? And then a
little less than a year ago, in November, the EPA announced it
was proposing to revise the standard to within 65 to 70 parts
per billion. Am I reading that testimony accurately?
Mr. Glicksman. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Lance. And you believe that that revision is ``much
weaker and appears to be inconsistent with the clear statutory
language adopted by Congress and interpreted by the Supreme
Court decision.''
So from your perspective, would 65 to 70 be illegal?
Mr. Glicksman. I think it would be an improvement over 75,
but I don't think----
Mr. Lance. Yes. Yes, I can count.
Mr. Glicksman. I don't think it would fully comply with the
mandate to protect the public health with an adequate margin of
safety.
Mr. Lance. And would it be illegal?
Mr. Glicksman. If not supported by substantial scientific
evidence it would be arbitrative of the EPA to set the standard
between 65 and 70.
Mr. Lance. And would there be a legal remedy for those who
thought it illegal?
Mr. Glicksman. Regulations issued by EPA are routinely
challenged in the courts, in the Courts of Appeals, and the
Courts of Appeals have the authority to invalidate and remand
or send back to the agency regulations that don't comply with
the statute.
Mr. Lance. And has that occurred regarding ozone?
Mr. Glicksman. It has occurred in the past regarding ozone.
Mr. Lance. And the standard has had to be changed as a
result of that?
Mr. Glicksman. Yes.
Mr. Lance. And therefore there would likely be a suit if
the EPA were to decide this should be 70 or 65 or somewhere----
Mr. Glicksman. My experience is that there is going to be a
lawsuit no matter where EPA sets the standard. It is going to
be challenged by those who think it is overly protective and
those who think it doesn't go far enough.
Mr. Lance. Mr. Eisenberg, your opinion on what I have just
asked.
Mr. Eisenberg. So first of all, there is a certain irony to
the folks that are pushing for a standard of 60 are the same
ones that say that we should only be considering science. And
60 is something that EPA dismissed on science grounds. I mean,
they said the science doesn't support 60. So I always find that
a little odd.
That being said, so the current standard, 75, was
challenged, and as Professor Glicksman says, by both sides. And
the court upheld that standard.
Mr. Lance. Yes, that is my understanding. The court has
upheld the 75 standard. And then Mr. Eisenberg, I have an
industry in my district that manufactures critical water
infrastructure components. This is in Phillipsburg in Warren
County, and I believe that this could be very damaging to that
for the reasons you have suggested. Mr. Eisenberg, could you
comment on the cost of non-existing pollution control methods
and how that adds to this debate?
Mr. Eisenberg. Sure, and the term, EPA's term, is actually
unknown controls. I mean, non-existing--they basically just
haven't told us what they are. We don't know if they exist or
not. We are pretty sure they don't exist because they didn't
tell us. But they call them unknown controls. That is sort of
their term of art.
And modeling the unknown is the chief difference between
our two studies, to answer the question from before. That is
kind of the issue here. What do you consider the unknown? And
we took an evidence-based approach. EPA just kind of
arbitrarily picked a number and assigned a flat line. That is
about the same cost as a lot of the known controls. So we think
it is a lot steeper. We hope we invent a better mousetrap, but
if we don't you got to start shutting down, and that gets
expensive.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. My time has expired. I respect all
the members of the panel. I think this is a very challenging
and difficult situation, but we should move forward for the
economy of the Nation and the better health of the Nation.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentleman from
Kentucky, Mr. Yarmuth, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Yarmuth. Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thanks to all the witnesses. Mr. Cox, I listened carefully to
your testimony. I want to be very clear. It is my understanding
that you said that there is no evidence that reducing ozone has
resulted in any public health benefit. Is that correct?
Mr. Cox. Yes, or to be very precise, studies that have
looked objectively at causality have failed to find evidence of
a causal impact of changes on ozone on changes in public
health.
Mr. Yarmuth. Well, I represent Louisville, Kentucky. We are
a non-attainment community making progress. We have an area of
town called rubber town that has I think 32 chemical companies
operating in it. Historically we have had tracking. You can see
the cases of asthma and other respiratory ailments where they
have been admitted from the hospital, where they come from.
There is no doubt that there has been a disproportionate amount
of those cases surrounding rubber town, and as we have made
progress in ozone, those cases have gone down.
Now, obviously they haven't done pathological studies I
think or analyses of that. But Dr. Diette, would you like to
respond to that because I think that is the fundamental
question we have to deal with. If there is no benefit to
reducing ozone, no health benefit to reducing ozone, then
obviously, none of these rules would make sense. But in terms
of your clinical experience and knowledge, how would you
respond to that?
Dr. Diette. It is a great question, and I think but for Dr.
Cox who I respect his opinion, we wouldn't be talking about
this. I think the world has mostly moved beyond this question.
So this isn't really something that in 2015 we should be
talking about, about whether ozone affects human health. We are
way beyond that. And I saw in your written testimony, I saw
some interesting things. I think one was that this idea that
there might be a statistical test which you could assess
causality. That is not the way we assess causality. Statistics
are part of it. They are supportive of it. But causality is a
judgment. It is a judgment. And you know, I know you would like
a statistical test, but that isn't the way it works.
The other thing is is that you cited my friend, Francesca
Dominici, for one of her articles where she talked about the
need to advance the science past just observational studies and
to consider things like natural experiments. And I think that
is a good idea. I mean, I endorse that as well. And I think the
idea of a natural experiment is when these things happen,
right, because we can't do a randomized control trial the way
we can with a new drug. But when these changes occur, we can
study what happened as a result of them. And MIT did I thought
a great study, looking at the effect of the NO
x

trading and with the NO
x
going down and the ozone
level going down by several points showing an improvement in
healthcare costs among other things.
So I think we have got that sort of evidence as well.
Mr. Yarmuth. Thank you for that. Mr. Eisenberg, I am
interested in your survey of members because among the many
fine companies that operate in my district, I have two Ford
plants, major Ford plants, one major appliance manufacturer,
General Electric. I haven't heard from any of them about these
ozone rules. As a matter of fact, I was with the manager of the
Ford plant, the Ford truck plant, over the weekend, and he
suggested that there were expansion plans on the way, new jobs
being contemplated. We already have over the last 5 years 4,000
more employees at Ford in my district.
And we quite frankly haven't heard from any of those 32
chemical companies about the ozone rules. We haven't heard from
anybody. So I am curious as to whether--Louisville is a very
special place where people just don't complain or whether--and
there is probably some of that there--or whether you know, the
responses that you got in your survey were kind of the natural
inclination of people to say yes, regulation is bad. I would
resist that.
Mr. Eisenberg. So I think it is a legitimate question. You
know, I can certainly say that a lot of those companies in your
district are talking to us. So you know, we will urge them to
also talk to you about it. You know, certainly a lot of the
more energy-intensive industries are extremely concerned about
this. Auto Alliance who represents the auto industry joined our
comments I believe and came down on the same place we did.
So you know, the voices are out there. I think we probably
could do a little bit more to amplify them. But that being
said, we are hearing it. We were a little surprised by the
results in our study, too, in our poll, too. We kind of didn't
know what we were going to get. We tried to be as unbiased as
possible. We were very surprised, number one, that the folks
really understood this issue because it is a technical issue.
And number two, we are pretty adamant about the fact that it
was going to be a real barrier to doing their business.
Mr. Yarmuth. Right. I would suggest just in closing that
with corporate earnings being at very, very high levels--even
WD-40's earnings, I saw they had a nice earnings report in
April. And it is kind of hard to say that this regulation is
having a very significant adverse effect on American business.
I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back. At this time I
recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I am sorry. Like
many people, I have been bouncing back and forth to the hearing
below. But I am sure many of you saw the beginning of this
hearing of last week when I was talking about really--and I am
glad my friend from Kentucky is still here because although
this is about the ozone, but for many of us, this is about the
cumulative effects of regulation and the cost and challenges of
responding by either the producers of energy or the
manufacturing sector.
And we weave the story about changing the rules midway
through a baseball game. If you change the strike zone, you
change the outs per inning. You bring in the fences. You take
the fences out. You change the foul lines. How can business
keep up with those changes? And then I talked about utility
MACT, boiler MACT, cement rule, cross-state air pollution,
111(d), 111(b), particulate matter, tier 3, and ozone. That is
a lot. I believe that is a lot for manufacturers to respond to.
And so when we have these hearings, right, like we did last
week, we have it on one emission standard with the EPA saying
there are health benefits. But we never have this full debate
about--there are health benefits of being poor. There are
health disadvantages of being poor, when people are dislocated
by job and they lose their employment, they lose their health
benefits.
So the cumulative effects of these regulations--and they
are going on at the same time. This ozone PM is a perfect
example. We don't even have states complying with 75 parts per
billion, and the EPA wants to ratchet it down to 65 or 60,
while we are doing the other, 111(d) and 111(b) and all these
other rules and regs that is very difficult for people to get
their hands on.
So in my time, if Mr. Eisenberg, Ms. Wesley, Mr. Freeman,
and Ms. Taylor would--the basic question is do you think the
EPA adequately evaluates the cumulative effects of the
regulations?
Mr. Eisenberg. So I think they--I mean, they are supposed
to by executive order, by 13563.
Mr. Shimkus. Which is a recent permutation. This is a
recent executive order.
Mr. Eisenberg. They don't seem to be doing it here. They
really don't seem to be doing it here, and in particular, when
you look at the conflict between this and some of the other
regulations, I mean, first things first. There are dozens of
regulations already on the books that take out the same
pollutants that we are talking about here, NO
x
and
VOCs. I mean dozens on almost every industry, which is why we
are getting the reductions we are getting in addition to the
ozone standard.
But at the same time you start to think about, OK, so we
had a truck manufacturer come in the other day. And they are
dealing with a new fuel economy rule. And one of the challenges
they have got is they are also dealing with, in expectation of
the new ozone standard, a stricter NO
x
standard.
Mr. Shimkus. Right.
Mr. Eisenberg. Well, the controls that go on in an engine
to deal with NO
x
use fuel. So it is another piece of
equipment. And so you kind of can't have the two together. So
as they are trying to ratchet one, they can't ratchet the
other. They are really struggling with it. Hopefully they will
figure it out, but it is a real challenge.
Mr. Shimkus. I had an industry come in and say we can get
to the NO
x
standards, but by doing so we increase
the greenhouse gas standards. We just can't meet the same
standards. Anybody else of the four that I offered want to
respond?
Ms. Wesley. I had----
Mr. Shimkus. Just echo him?
Ms. Wesley. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. You want to add? OK. Then we had also Mr.
Freeman and Ms. Taylor. Did you have any?
Ms. Taylor. I definitely agree that I don't think at this
time the cumulative effects of regulation are carefully being
considered. That is very obvious. I can tell you from my
standpoint. I am an environmental regulatory attorney by
training. I mean, this is my bread and butter, and even with
the subject matter expertise, it is just an enormous amount of
information to manage. And quite frankly, compliance execution
is very challenging. But that is nothing new.
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. Freeman?
Mr. Freeman. I am not aware that a lot of agencies if any
of them do the cumulative overview. I haven't personally
experienced that, but I do think that it is getting more and
more complex and that is one of the challenges we have had. We
have actually had an instance where we had a can of WD-40 that
was under 100 percent California Air Resource Board
regulations. Get another regulation. So we had regulatory
overlap on the same product against two agencies that did not
agree how they measured VOCs, let alone what the metric for
success was.
So we have actually gone beyond it just being complex to
now they are getting into conflict at times.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. And I will just end on this. I
chair another subcommittee, and we deal with the NRC and we had
a great hearing on the NRC. And the NRC evaluated this
standard, it costs this much, and the next standard costs this
much and the next standard costs this much. But it was not just
additive. The true cost was multiplicative, and that is the
challenge that we have with these multiple regulations. I yield
back. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back. At this time I
recognize the gentleman from West Virginia, Mr. McKinley, for 5
minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am just trying to
absorb all this information. I don't come from a medical
background. Mine is an engineering background. So I am trying
to understand a little bit, except some of the discussion about
the health risks. But I have heard fairly consistently here the
inclusion of asthma included. My son has asthma, so I have been
sensitive to that from the day he was born.
But I am curious that we seem to be attacking our
industries as part of a solution. I am just going to deal with
asthma, if we could. And those of you with a medical
background, I want to accept that, that there could be
something there. But I am also, since we have been talking
about this the last couple of years have done additional
research. And I find that there are other factors that are
seemingly far more reasonably the cause of asthma attacks.
Genetics, ethnicity, why we have more asthma attacks in our
Afro-American community and in our Puerto Rican/Hispanic
communities. He deals with poverty, poor diet, stress,
overweight, and lack of exercise in our children, exposure to
cigarette smoke, smokers. You have a greater likelihood of
having an asthma attack if you also have dermatitis or hay
fever allergies. Indoor air quality are all of these factors.
Indoor air quality. We have dust mites, cockroach and mouse
allergens, mold, animal dander, formaldehyde, dust. I could go
on with all--but we are not addressing that at all. We are
going to say let's go after manufacturing and have them lower
from 75 down to perhaps 60. But we are not addressing what
other reports are saying are far more causational than others.
In fact, this report, Dr. Diette, from your Johns Hopkins
institution, they have come out with a report themselves just
recently and said that they can't find a connection. They say
there is no statistical difference between the rate of asthma
attacks in high-pollution areas than in non-pollution areas. I
thought, that is interesting because I thought all the studies
said there is directly a tie. Yet Johns Hopkins came out in
opposition to that. So did the----
Dr. Diette. Is that the Keets study?
Mr. McKinley [continuing]. University of Utah at Los
Angeles study. I could go on with that but----
Dr. Diette. Is that the Keets study?
Mr. McKinley. That was a study performed by Keets----
Dr. Diette. Yes.
Mr. McKinley [continuing]. McCormick, Pollack and----
Dr. Diette. Just so it is clear, the conclusion of that
study is not what you said it was, right? So the conclusion of
that study has to do with the asthma prevalence, right, so not
the asthma attack rate.
Mr. McKinley. Asthma prevalence.
Dr. Diette. Asthma prevalence.
Mr. McKinley. Yes.
Dr. Diette. And what that determined was that race and
poverty were strong determinants but urban dwelling was not a
strong determinant of the prevalence of asthma.
Mr. McKinley. So I want to go to----
Dr. Diette. There is no--well, excuse me. There is no
indication----
Mr. McKinley. I reclaim my time. I want to learn more from
this but----
Dr. Diette. I appreciate it.
Mr. McKinley [continuing]. I also want to figure out a
little bit about Hawaii. Hawaii operates right now from what I
understand in their attainment counties, are operating at about
right now currently at around 50 parts per billion, and they
have been lower. But yet the rate of asthma, whether it is
prevalence, attacks or what, is 42 percent higher than the
national average here on the continent. I am puzzled with the
disconnect.
So I want to go back to yours, Dr. Cox, if we could because
I was fascinated with one remark that you made and that was
just--I heard and maybe you can clear it up--is that the
concentration ozone may not be the issue. Ozone in and of
itself, someone exposed to ozone, even at a lesser level, is
going to have a triggered attack. Did I misinterpret that?
Mr. Cox. No. I think that indeed people who have asthma may
be triggered even at lower concentrations of ozone. I think you
have hit the key point which is that ozone has many causes. I
think the key policy question is what happens to asthma attacks
and other health effects when there is a change in ozone level?
And the discussion that Dr. Diette and I will put in writing
has to do with the difference between statistical associations
between levels of pollutants, pet dander, and other factors and
what happens when you remove or reduce one of them. I think the
most important scientific fact for us today is that decades of
reduction in ozone levels have not produced the predicted
health benefit.
Mr. McKinley. My time is out, but I just was hoping that
you might have been able to help clarify this. There are other
issues that are far more prevalent in causing an asthma attack,
and that is what I was looking for.
Dr. Diette. I would interject, though. I would tend to
ask----
Mr. McKinley. We don't seem to be addressing that.
Dr. Diette. Well, I think you should direct your question
to me, though, and not a biostatistician. It is honestly not
the statistician's job to determine what causes asthma, and I
think you have done a wonderful job of laying out many of the
different causes of asthma, and what you have highlighted is
how generally complex it is as you must know from your son,
right? And one of the principles of treatment of asthma is that
you have to do environmental control on everything at once that
you can identify that matters. So it is not sufficient to just
take care of the mice or the cockroaches or the dust mites that
you mentioned, nor is it enough to get rid of cigarette smoke.
You have to do all of those things simultaneously for the
asthmatic airways to be in the best state of inflammation and
therefore not have an attack.
So that is why it sounds complicated, and that is why it is
complicated because all those factors coalesce together and
form the syndrome of asthma.
Mr. McKinley. But these reports say that is the biggest
cause.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time has expired. At this
time I will recognize the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Johnson, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Cox, would you
like to respond to what you just heard?
Mr. Cox. Certainly. I fully agree and emphasize that there
are multiple causes of asthma. I think the idea that we should
expect benefits from removing or reducing one of them without
reducing the rest, as Dr. Diette describes, leads directly to
the empirical question, does it work? Does reducing ozone
reduce the desired health benefits?
Mr. Johnson. Right.
Mr. Cox. For that question, for the question of how do
changes in exposure change health effects, there is ample
evidence, there is evidence from decades of measurements on
ozone levels and measurements on hospitalization and indeed
death rates, and it is I think very much the job of the
biostatistician to say opinion aside, subjective judgment
aside, political motivation aside, what do the data tell us
about what has actually happened when ozone has been reduced?
And the answer from the few studies that do not take a
correlational approach or a judgment-based approach but take an
empirical data-driven approach, give the perhaps disappointing
but clear answer that there is no detectable health benefit or
health effect from reducing ozone.
Therefore, the belief that if we pour more energy and
effort into further reducing ozone, we should expect fewer
asthma attacks, better attendance at school, fewer mortalities,
and the other benefits that we have heard about. That
expectation is inconsistent with decades of empirical results
to show that it just ain't so.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Thank you very much. I have got 4
children. I have got 6 grandchildren. I am very concerned about
making sure that our air is clean, that our water is clean,
that my children are drinking and eating and breathing the
right kinds of things.
But I think when we throw out and in most cases make
secondary and oftentimes ignore the economic implications of
some of the things that we are doing, take an area like mine
where I represent 18 rural Appalachian counties. You rule out
the economic implications of these rules, and you shut down
companies and you eliminate opportunities, even if the health
implications--and I am not a doctor--even if the health
implications are bona fide, and I am not saying they are not,
people don't have the money to buy insurance. They don't have
the money to go to a doctor. Doctors aren't going to come to
those areas to treat those patients. We can't ignore the
economic implications.
Mr. Eisenberg, your organization released two studies over
the past year looking at the economic impacts from a lower
ozone standard, and I have found the analysis by NERA Economic
Consulting both informative and concerning. I looked at how
many of my 18 counties would be out of attainment with the
standard set to 65 parts per billion, and to my dismay, I
learned that all 18 of those counties would be in non-
attainment.
In my district we are seeing signs of life due to increased
production of oil and gas, thanks to advances in fracking and
horizontal drilling technologies. But the regulations that
accompany this new ozone rule standard will most certainly slow
and ultimately shackle the growth that we have seen in our
communities as I pointed out to Ms. McCabe at our last hearing
last week.
In fact, let me read for the committee's benefit what NERA
said about the new ozone rule and its impact on oil and gas
production. A tightened ozone standard has the potential to
cause non-attainment areas to expand into relatively rural
areas. Where there are few or no existing emission sources that
could be controlled to offset increased emissions from new
activity. If non-attainment expands into rural areas that are
active in U.S. oil and gas extraction, a shortage of potential
offsets may translate into a significant barrier to obtaining
permits for the new wells and the pipelines needed to expand or
even maintain our domestic oil and gas production levels.
Equally concerning is the EPA's Clean Power Plan which
envisions a major shift nationwide from coal-fired power to
natural gas, but with the rollout of these ozone regulations, I
am afraid that our manufacturing industry will not have a
source of reliable and affordable energy. This is really,
really bad news for my constituents, for my state. I have spent
all of my time talking and asking somebody else's question, and
I don't get a chance to ask my own. So I think I have made my
point. We can't throw out the economic concerns. Throwing out
the baby with the bath water doesn't solve the problems. If we
don't have an economy that can attack these problems with
confidence and resources, we are never going to solve them.
So with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time has expired. At this
time I will recognize the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Latta, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, thanks very much, Mr. Chairman, and thanks
for holding today's hearing. And thanks to all of our witnesses
for being here. I really appreciate your time and your
patience.
Ms. Taylor, if I could start with a question to you, in
your testimony you say that the EPA and states should carefully
consider whether requiring manufacturers to achieve further
drastic reductions in VOC content in consumer commercial
products is technically feasible at this time and also worth
the time and resources spent by manufacturers to comply for a
low return on investment in terms of improved air quality.
Would you like to comment on lowering the VOC content at
the Henry Company's types of products that you have? And how
long does it take to reformulate the products for roofing
material out there to achieve those VOC content and then have
to bring that to market?
Ms. Taylor. Sure. Well, first let me say that my comment
was specifically related to the State Implementation Plan
phase. So not at the statutory level where we have already
heard that cost is not considered, but really at the
implementation plan phase where EPA and the states really work
together to design the appropriate plan for the individual
state.
In terms of the impact on a company like Henry--and this is
my job. That is what Director of Product Stewardship means. I
mean I basically manager our SKUs. So I am the person
responsible for restricting a specific SKU that, you know, for
whatever reason can't comply with a VOC content limit in a
certain jurisdiction.
In terms of what we initially tried to do, when we receive
new regulatory guidelines, and of course we make every attempt
to comply because we are responsible corporate citizens, we go
through our SKUs. We sort out our products in terms of what
currently complies and what does not. That process alone
probably takes a few months. Then after that process is over,
we then look at the products that do not comply because those
are the products obviously that we are concerned about in terms
of the regulation. And we see if any of those are fairly easy
to reformulate. Fairly easy, by the way, means like probably a
year--fairly easy to reformulate and would go about making
those changes.
Then we take a look at the products that are not easy to
reformulate, and by not easy, I mean the reformulation process
could take 3 to 6 years. And that is not an exaggeration. We
have a number of products where that has been the case.
Mr. Latta. May I ask you, how many at the company would be
working on that?
Ms. Taylor. Oh, great question. Several. That would
probably involve--in an approximately 450-person company like
Henry, I would say probably between 15 and 20 would be involved
in that, and quite frankly, we may even bring in outside
consultants to assist us.
Mr. Latta. So really not developing a new product, just
making sure that the one or those products are compliant?
Nothing to advance a new product?
Ms. Taylor. That's correct.
Mr. Latta. OK.
Ms. Taylor. That's correct.
Mr. Latta. Let me ask you another follow-up if I could
because I thought what you said was kind of interesting,
really, your closing line in your testimony. You said that the
primary focus of the EPA should be to provide additional
support to those air quality management districts that are
currently in non-attainment status to help them reach
attainment status under the current level before making the
goal of reaching attainment status even more difficult for
those states to obtain.
And I think that maybe what you just said kind of answers
that when you are looking at the amount of time that you are
putting in for products that are already--I am going to assume
we are going to meet those attainment where you were. But would
you just want to elaborate just a little bit on that? What
would you like to see the EPA out there doing?
Ms. Taylor. Well, I think in terms of working with--so
still working under State Implementation Plans because
obviously they would have to be revised with any new statutory,
regulatory changes. But really, taking a look at what are the
main sources. For example as we are talking about VOCs and
ozone, what are the main sources? And we know and Mr. Freeman
has echoed this as well that consumer products are one of the
smaller sources. And so from our perspective, we quite frankly
often feel as though we have been given perhaps more attention
than we deserve based upon the amount of pollutants that are
coming from our particular industry. So in terms of what EPA
could do, I would respectfully suggest that they work with the
states to look at the larger sources of pollution and perhaps
review available technology at the time, perhaps you know, just
have even better--quite frankly, even something like better
communication would help this entire process.
As we have alluded to, Mr. Freeman and myself before, just
in terms of EPA working with the individual state air
districts, there are a number of challenges with that. So that
would be quite frankly a good start.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I see
my time has expired, and I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time has expired. At this
time I recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Flores, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I would
like to follow up on one of the comments that the Assistant
Administrator said last week when she testified. I asked her
the question about why has the EPA cost calculation gone down
from $90 billion to take ozone requirements from 84 down to--
why the 2010 estimate was $90 billion and why their 2014
estimate was $40 billion, and she said that it was because the
2010 estimate was taking the ozone estimate from 84 parts per
billion down to 65 parts per billion. That turned out to be a
slightly disingenuous answer because she knew full well that
the cost embedded to take it from 84 to 75 was 8.8 billion
which means that 81 billion was left to take it from 75 down to
the 65 estimate. So I will be sending her a letter to ask her
to explain why the difference, the $39 billion difference in
the estimate from $81 billion down to $42 billion in their 2014
estimate so that we can try to get that cleared up for the
benefit of the committee.
Mr. Eisenberg, you had mentioned in your testimony that the
EPA is proposing a new standard--and we have talked about this
before, that we only can identify 35 percent of the necessary
technologies to get to a 65 parts per billion standard and that
therefore the unknown controls were 65 percent in terms of a
path to compliance.
So this being essentially that the EPA is proposing a
standard where the majority of the control technology does not
even exist. Is that correct?
Mr. Eisenberg. They certainly haven't identified it. So
that is our view.
Mr. Flores. OK. And so that is obviously an area of
concern. So one of the questions I have raised to the
administrator last week was how should that be priced? And they
relied on past calculations which were the easier ozone
reductions to achieve than the one we are getting now because
we are getting to the point of diminishing returns.
So I would ask you a two-part question. As you get to the
part of diminishing returns on control technology, how should
the pricing work? Because you are getting diminishing returns,
should it be higher or lower? And also, if it is unknown,
therefore there is a higher risk that that technology doesn't
exist, how should that be priced?
Mr. Eisenberg. So that is an excellent question, and that
is one of the real challenges in looking to the past, including
the immediate recent past as a predictor of the future on this
issue.
NO
x
was controlled by CARE and a lot of other
statutes, but that is why it is more expensive now because
those technologies are now gone. And so the low-hanging fruit
is gone. The high-hanging fruit is gone. Things are getting a
lot more expensive. And in fact, you just run out pretty
quickly when you start to do this.
The question of modeling unknown controls, we continue to
be surprised that EPA just draws this flat line at $15,000 per
ton. I don't want to say they don't explain it. They do explain
it. We just don't necessarily agree with where they are coming
from. But the real issue is, they are essentially modeling
hope, right? You are modeling the hope that we will figure this
out.
Mr. Flores. Yes, and that takes me to sort of the real
world. My question to her was if the cost by an offset today is
$170,000 a ton in the gulf coast area of Texas, wouldn't you
price the offset technology at some premium over that versus
coming up with the price of hope at $15,000 a ton. So shouldn't
it be priced more at $300,000 a ton or something more
reasonable? What is your comment on that?
Mr. Eisenberg. So, the current offset prices in Houston are
$175,000 per ton of NO
x
and $275,000 per ton of
VOCs. In Southern California, they are $125,000 per ton of
NO
x
. So there is definitely a disconnect there.
Mr. Flores. So theoretically, the price of an unknown
technology, since you have got the risk that it may never
develop, should be higher in coming up with the----
Mr. Eisenberg. We certainly expect it to be higher than
$15,000 per ton.
Mr. Flores. Ms. Taylor, I appreciate your prior testimony
because you give a real-world perspective on these issues. And
I don't think you answered this in your last--this is kind of a
modification on the questions asked to you before, and this is
more specific. Does the roof coating industry currently have
the technology to achieve further significant reductions in the
VOC content of their products?
Ms. Taylor. That is an excellent question. It really
depends upon the product. If you are talking about roof
coatings, you can make an argument on both sides that perhaps
the technology is currently available where we could achieve
further significant reductions. If you are talking about
roofing adhesives and sealants, which have different
performance characteristics obviously than a traditional paint
coating, then I would say no. We currently don't have the
technology. We have been researching the technology for the
past 2 \1/2\, 3 years, and we will have to do some--I don't
know, we will have to get fairy dust or something. We will have
to sort it out if further drastic reductions are required.
Mr. Flores. OK. Thank you for your answers. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time has expired. At this
time I will recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Bilirakis, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it
very much. Mr. Freeman, you indicate cost to your company and
industry to meet existing volatile, organic compounds to
regulations have been very significant. Could you elaborate on
the costs to date for your industry?
Mr. Freeman. I am over here.
Mr. Bilirakis. Oh, OK. Very good. Thank you.
Mr. Freeman. Cost per day?
Mr. Bilirakis. Yes, per day.
Mr. Freeman. That is not a measure that----
Mr. Bilirakis. No, cost to date for your industry.
Mr. Freeman. If I look at our R&D effort alone, it would be
several million dollars. Not included in that would be our
ongoing supply chain costs I talked about a little bit earlier
that can be a result of regulatory compliance, our ongoing
marketing costs and our ongoing people costs. I have not added
it all up. I am almost a little afraid to, but they are not
easy costs to track necessarily, completely, and accurately.
But we know that it has been significant----
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you----
Mr. Freeman [continuing]. The view that we do have.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you. Ms. Taylor, have the costs of
compliance so far been substantial for your company and the
roof coatings industry?
Ms. Taylor. Yes. The cost--for us especially at Henry in
particular, I think the most adequate measure would just be in
the number of products that we have had, already have had to
restrict from sale in certain air quality management districts.
As I said, we have over 1,200 SKUs. There are certain parts of
this country where we sell, you know, less than 50 or 60
individual SKUs.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you. Ms. Wesley, for the Baton Rouge
Area, have the costs to meet ozone regulations in the past been
significant? Do you believe that EPA's estimate to implement
the proposed ozone rule are accurate or do you believe it will
be more costly than expected?
Ms. Wesley. I certainly believe it will be more costly than
expected. We are hearing from our companies in the Baton Rouge
Area and across the State of Louisiana the costs are excessive.
I don't have an exact number for you, but we are hearing from
our companies that it is significant.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK. Very good. Thank you. Just this past
week a survey was released indicating that 26 states have
raised concerns about the role of background ozone, including
both naturally occurring and internationally transported
contributions to ground-level ozone as an achievability or
implementation challenge. Mr. Eisenberg, what happens to
permitting for new and expanding businesses when ozone
standards are set close to background levels?
Mr. Eisenberg. Thanks for the question. It makes it
extremely hard. You can't get out of it. Think of the San
Joaquin Valley for a minute. So in the San Joaquin Valley the
air regulators there--and they are in really bad non-
attainment, probably the worst in the country. The air
regulators there have said to meet the 70 or 75 parts-per-
billion standard, it is going to require--and this is the
regulators saying this--it would require zeroing out emissions
from all stationary sources, all off-road vehicles, all farm
equipment, and all passenger vehicles. That is how you get
there to account for the ozone. So we have got a real problem.
Mr. Bilirakis. Yes. Do you believe EPA's proposal to bring
down levels lower than the current levels which many are still
in the process of being compliant will have a positive or
negative impact on the manufacturing sector?
Mr. Eisenberg. So we believe it will have a--the numbers
show that it will have a manufacturing-wide negative impact. No
sector is really spared here. Everybody gets hit.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you very much. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back. At this time I
will recognize the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Griffith, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
members of the panel for being here today. I apologize I have
not been here for the whole hearing because I have been at
another hearing downstairs, a very important hearing as well.
So I do apologize for that.
Mr. Eisenberg, I want you to go over that again because it
is staggering. You just indicated to Mr. Bilirakis that in
order to comply based on background or foreign ozone levels you
were talking about the San Joaquin Valley in California. I
don't represent anything close to that, but I think it might be
important to hear that again because it was staggering. Could
you tell us again?
Mr. Eisenberg. Yes. And this comes from their regulators.
Because of geographic factors, because of ozone that is wafting
in from Southeast Asia and just because of naturally occurring
background, they have got a real problem. And so you could
literally zero out all the industry there and you still
couldn't make it.
That is obviously an extreme case, but the problem is we
are getting to levels that this is becoming a more normal
problem. I don't think it is ever going to be quite that bad
for anybody in Virginia. I hope it won't. But it is a real
challenge, and this is why our members, the manufacturers in
this country, are on edge because it means that we can't grow
if we are in a place like that.
Mr. Griffith. I think you told Mr. Bilirakis you would have
to eliminate, what did you say, all the farm equipment?
Mr. Eisenberg. All stationary sources, so all plants, all
off-road vehicles, all farm equipment, and all passenger
vehicles. Period.
Mr. Griffith. Wow. And so what we are in essence doing is
that we are shipping our jobs to other countries, say in Asia,
and they are shipping us back the pollution that then causes
this level to be so high that we would have to eliminate all
passenger vehicles?
Mr. Eisenberg. Well, in that area you would.
Mr. Griffith. In that area, right, in the San Joaquin
Valley. Been a long day already. Ms. Taylor, let's talk about
something that you said in your written testimony. You
indicated that the volatile organic compound regulation of
consumer and commercial products in certain air quality
management districts around the country are approaching the
point of diminishing returns in terms of actually contributing
significantly to air quality improvement.
Ms. Taylor. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. So what you're saying is is that you are
really not going to have much impact if they go further on your
industry? Am I interpreting that correctly?
Ms. Taylor. That is correct, yes.
Mr. Griffith. So they are really not going to have much
accomplishment----
Ms. Taylor. Well, the greatest gains which is not
uncommon--the greatest gains in terms of VOC reduction were
made over a decade ago, maybe more than two decades ago. And so
now what we are working with, especially for certain categories
of consumer products--I would imagine for these regulatory
agencies, the goal is to get to zero grams per liter of VOC.
And so we now have products that have very honestly gone from
200 grams per liter down to 100, down to 75, down to 50, down
to 25. There is just not much further for those products to go
in terms of being able to sell a product at a price point that
consumers will accept and that has performance characteristics
that accurately reflect what we market the product for. So that
is where we are.
Mr. Griffith. And Dr. Cox, I know others have hit on this,
but I thought that it was interesting in your testimony that
there is a real question, and you testified, and I am quoting,
``EPA's insistence that further reducing ozone is necessary to
protect improved human health contrasts with decades of
experience revealing no such benefits actually occur.'' Can you
explain that?
Mr. Cox. Yes. The current usual approach to assessing
causation and to predicting whether benefits will occur is to
ask selected scientists to form a judgment in light of the
evidence that they consider to be relevant, and the scientists
that EPA invited to form such judgments have made a judgment
that because ozone is deleterious to the lung, reducing its
level will have benefits. It is a very common-sense
proposition. However, there is an alternative approach to
looking at what will happen which is to adopt the natural
experiment. The natural experiment says in hundreds of counties
across the United States, ozone has gone down in some cases and
has gone up in others. Let's look and see what difference those
different histories have made to the corresponding histories of
health defects. When that analysis is done, not based on
judgment but based on data, no health benefit from reduction of
ozone is seen. That doesn't mean that no reductions in health
risks have occurred, but they have occurred just as much where
ozone has gone up as where it has gone down.
So based on empirical analysis for causation, the science
would say there is no evidence of a causal impact of further
changes.
Mr. Griffith. Let me see if I can translate that because I
only have a few seconds left.
Mr. Cox. Thank you.
Mr. Griffith. So what you are saying is if you take a look
at the country as a whole, you don't see any health benefits
gained where the ozone level has gone down. You might see that
in individual patients but you don't see it across the board
when you are looking at the entire population.
Mr. Cox. That is correct.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back. At this time we
have just a couple more questions, and then we will conclude
this hearing. But I will recognize the gentleman from Illinois,
Mr. Rush, for 3 minutes.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Diette, I wanted to
give you a chance to respond to anything that you have heard
here but particularly the Keets study that was the subject of
controversy and how the study was mischaracterized. I want you
just to respond to the mischaracterization of the study and any
other thing you might want to add.
Dr. Diette. Sure. Thanks very much. So it is being
misrepresented, right? So first of all what we heard from the
member was not even the facts from the study, but the study was
simply one that looked at a few different factors and whether
or not somebody actually has asthma, so not whether they have
asthma attacks. It was not a study of air pollution. So it
wasn't a study of air pollution, right? So we can't reach a
judgment about ozone from the study. And what it showed was
that being African-American and being poor were independent
risk factors of having asthma and that living in a city was
not.
It can't even potentially have anything to do with the
ozone question because ozone isn't concentrated in cities. It
is in valleys. It is in suburbs. It is in rural areas and so
forth. So it doesn't inform that question whatsoever. So that
is why it is being misrepresented.
But other things that I have heard that I think are
unusual, right, so one, there are a whole bunch of issues here
we have been talking about. One is I heard earlier in the day
that somehow that the parts per billion is going to get down
from 75 to 70 on its own with the current regulations, and then
I am also hearing at the same time that there is no way to get
below 75. So I think there is an inconsistency with what we are
expecting to already happen and then what we are saying we
can't do.
And I would also just say, too, just probably the last
comment I will have with Dr. Cox here, but what he is
describing about there not being any benefit is not a
mainstream view, right, that there a strong consensus among
people who actually take care of sick patients with asthma and
other lung diseases that ozone is harmful. It causes illnesses.
It causes them to die. It is in our guidelines to tell people
to avoid the outside when there are high ozone days. It is not
made up stuff. This is based on science. So I just want to
clarify that as well.
Mr. Rush. Let me just ask you this. Is there any
correlation between diet and ozone as was indicated or lack of
exercise? Diet and asthma and lack of exercise and asthma? Are
those some preconditions for asthma?
Dr. Diette. So like a lot of things, it is very
complicated, right? So the relationship between exercise is
that for people that exercise outdoors, there is some evidence
that somebody who exercises around the time when ozone is high,
that that can affect their lung function among other things. So
that is an issue. Diet, I don't think we know yet, right? Diet
has the potential to be very helpful to us, and so to the
extent that people have things that help fend off pollutants,
there may be an issue with the American diet that we and others
are working on about whether or not modifying that would be
protective. But that is not a settled issue.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you so very much
for your giving me this time. I really appreciate it. Thank
you.
Mr. Whitfield. You are welcome. At this time I would also
recognize--did you want to enter into the record----
Mr. Rush. Yes, I want to enter into the record a letter,
Mr. Chairman, from the Johns Hopkins University. This letter is
Ms. Corinne A. Keet's response, Dr. Keet's response to a letter
of inquiry from Senator Barbara Boxer. I want to enter it into
the record.
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Whitfield. And at this time, I am going to give 3
minutes to Dr. Burgess of Texas for additional questions.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, but in the interest
of full disclosure, I don't have a question but I would like to
deliver a soliloquy on the Montreal Protocol, and we are here
today talking about things we can do to reduce the number of
asthma episodes. But I just got to tell you as someone who has
suffered with asthma his entire life, the withdrawal of an
over-the-counter remedy for an acute asthma attack has been
more injurious than anything else that I have seen in some
time. And we can talk about whether or not we are reducing by
1,000, 2,000, 3,000 the number of attacks that may occur across
the country if we lower the makeup of ozone by an additional
part per billion. But regardless of how the asthma attack
starts, when it starts, for people who have reactive airway
disease who are not on constant chronic treatment, it is
generally 2:00 in the morning or weather changes, somebody
brings a dog in the house, some trigger mechanism that you may
not even know. But when it happens, there used to be a remedy,
and the remedy was drive down to your all-night pharmacy and
buy a Primatene mist inhaler. You can't do that anymore, and
you can't do that because of the Montreal Protocol enforced by
the Environmental Protection Agency. People tell me that the
EPA or I am sorry, the FDA withdrew my asthma inhaler from the
market, but that is actually not true. It was the EPA under the
Montreal Protocol.
Now, we had a great discussion about this a Congress or two
ago, and I attempted to prevail or to get Congress to allow the
continued sale of over-the-counter asthma medications. Let me
just stress. There is no over-the-counter asthma rescue inhaler
available now. There was one for a brief period of time that
the gentlelady from Florida's district produced, but then that
was taken off the market. So there is nothing out there for the
person who has an asthma attack in the middle of the night. But
no less than our former Chairman Emeritus, Mr. John Dingell,
who had been on this committee for a long time, in precise,
quantitative terms, said that the amount of chlorofluorocarbon
in an asthma inhaler was, and I am quoting him directly, ``only
a piddling amount.'' It seems nonsensical to have removed that
from the market, and we have only done a disservice to
asthmatics across the country. And it was the EPA that
delivered that disservice.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you both, and I might say that
that illustrates one of the concerns that we do have because
when that was taken off the market, the price increase for
people suffering from asthma as a replacement was significant,
which raises the issue Ms. Taylor I think touched on this and
Mr. Freeman. We do live in an innovative country. We have
innovative people in business, and they are able to come within
the guidelines with a lot of money and effort and time. But
frequently, and not unusual, it does affect the performance of
the product. And so eventually you sometimes reach the point
where the product is not what it was, and so the market goes
away.
So this has been an informative hearing, and we genuinely
thank all of you. Many of you came from long distances, and
some of you just came from down the street. But we do
appreciate your taking time to be with us and giving us your
perspective on this important issue. And we look forward to
containing to work with you as we continue to address this
issue. And I am also going to ask unanimous consent to entering
the following documents into the record: We have a March 17,
2015, letter to EPA Administrator McCarthy from the Baton Rouge
Area Chamber and 15 other chambers regarding EPA's proposed
ozone rule. And we have about 10 letters here to EPA
Administrator McCarthy from Louisiana chambers outside the
Baton Rouge Area. We have a statement of the American Chemistry
Council and a statement of the American Forest and Paper
Association requesting retention of the current ozone standard.
Without objection, I will enter that into the record.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Whitfield. We will keep the record open for 10 days,
and once again, we look forward to the reply of Dr. Diette and
Dr. Cox from--someone asked you all a question. You said you
would get back with them. I appreciate that, and with that, we
will conclude today's hearing.
[Whereupon, at 12:40 p.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Today we continue our work examining EPA's proposed new
National Ambient Air Quality Standard for ground-level ozone,
and in particular its impact on jobs and the manufacturers who
will bear much of the compliance burden.
At the beginning of his second term, President Obama set a
goal of creating one million new manufacturing jobs.
Unfortunately, President Obama's rhetoric has failed to match
up with the economic realities of the policies coming out of
the EPA. The new rules have been wide ranging, and each one on
their own, like the Clean Power Plan, will harm our economy.
Taken collectively, the results could be disastrous.
This proposed rule is a tough pill for the manufacturing
industry to swallow. An ozone nonattainment designation would
make it significantly more difficult for industries to invest
and create businesses in communities across the United States.
Even existing factories would face higher operating costs and
red tape. EPA estimates that hundreds of counties across the
country would not meet the proposed standards, including many
in Michigan. In southwest Michigan, in Allegan County, you
could remove all of the human activity and the region would
still be in non-attainment because of ozone generated in
Chicago, Milwaukee, and Gary, Indiana.
The economic consequences of this proposed rule are very
real. I recently received a letter from Southwest Michigan
First, an economic development organization in Kalamazoo,
Michigan. The CEO Ron Kitchens wrote to me yesterday voicing
their concerns with the EPA's proposal.
In the letter, Ron wrote, ``The addition of red tape and
more severe requirements in these non-attainment areas would
stifle economic development and job growth including much
needed highway funding in our region and state.''
Any proposal must take into account economic growth and job
creation--and the ozone revisions do not. I strongly support
efforts to reduce smog and I supported the ozone standard
finalized in 2008. We have seen significant progress and I
endorse reasonable measures to ensure that air quality
continues to improve. I believe that we don't need a new ozone
standard--we need EPA to implement the existing one. Thank you.
----------

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
