- UPDATE ON THE CURRENT STATE OF NUCLEAR WASTE MANAGEMENT POLICY

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

UPDATE ON THE CURRENT STATE OF NUCLEAR WASTE MANAGEMENT POLICY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND THE ECONOMY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 15, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-42

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

96-988                         WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                     Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

Subcommittee on Environment and the Economy

JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
Chairman
GREGG HARPER, Vice Chairman          PAUL TONKO, New York
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                LOIS CAPPS, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JERRY McNERNEY, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TONY CARDENAS, California
BILL FLORES, Texas                   FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina           officio)
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. John Shimkus, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Illinois, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Paul Tonko, a Representative in Congress from the State of
New York, opening statement....................................     3
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     5
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................    90

Witnesses

Andrew Fitz, Senior Counsel, Office of the Attorney General,
State of Washington............................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     9
Answers to submitted questions...............................    92
Josephine Piccone, Director, Yucca Mountain Directorate, Nuclear
Regulatory Commission..........................................    17
Prepared statement...........................................    19
Answers to submitted questions...............................    99
Greg R. White, Commissioner, Michigan Public Service Commission,
on behalf of the National Association of Regulatory Utility
Commissioners, Chairman, Subcommittee on Nuclear Issues, Waste
Disposal.......................................................    25
Prepared statement...........................................    27
Answers to submitted questions...............................   105
Stephen Kuczynski, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive
Officer, Southern Nuclear Operating Company....................    36
Prepared statement...........................................    38
Answers to submitted questions...............................   112
Geoffrey H. Fettus, Senior Attorney, Natural Resources Defense
Council........................................................    56
Prepared statement...........................................    58
Einar Ronningen, Manager Rancho Seco Assets, Decommissioning
Plant Coalition................................................    75
Prepared statement...........................................    77
Answers to submitted questions...............................   119

UPDATE ON THE CURRENT STATE OF NUCLEAR WASTE MANAGEMENT POLICY

----------

FRIDAY, MAY 15, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment and the Economy,
Committee on Energy and Commerce
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:00 a.m., in
room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John Shimkus,
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Shimkus, Harper, Whitfield, Pitts,
Murphy, Latta, Johnson, Hudson, Cramer, Tonko, Green, McNerney,
and Pallone (ex officio).
Also Present: Representative Newhouse.
Staff Present: Charlotte Baker, Deputy Communications
Director; Will Batson, Legislative Clerk; Leighton Brown, Press
Assistant; David McCarthy, Chief Counsel, Environment/Economy;
Chris Sarley, Policy Coordinator, Environment & Economy; Peter
Spencer, Professional Staff Member, Oversight; Andy Zack,
Professional Staff Member; Christine Brennan, Minority Press
Secretary; Caitlin Haberman, Minority Professional Staff
Member; and Rick Kessler, Minority Senior Advisor and Staff
Director, Energy and Environment.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN SHIMKUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Shimkus. It is 9:00. We want to start promptly. There
is going to be votes sometime early this morning, and we want
to get the opening statements through and encourage members to
get back afterwards to follow up with questions. I will
recognize myself for 5 minutes for an opening statement.
Thank you all for coming to this morning's hearing to
receive an update on the status of and outlook for progress on
America's nuclear waste management policy. Let me state at the
outset that issue of the Nation's nuclear waste management
policy is not a partisan issue. The House of Representatives
has repeatedly supported Yucca Mountain in an overwhelming and
bipartisan manner. Last summer, efforts to abandoned Yucca
Mountain were defeated on the House floor with the body voting
4 to 1 in favor of Yucca Mountain. This includes nearly two-
thirds of the Chamber's Democrats.
In April, I once again led a bipartisan group of members to
see Yucca Mountain site firsthand. The site is an invaluable
national asset isolated in the Nevada desert, removed from all
population centers, and co-located with the Nevada National
Security Site.
Since my previous visit in 2011, the landscape has notably
advanced to support the development of a permanent repository.
In 2013, the D.C. Court of Appeals ruled that Nuclear
Regulatory Commission must continue its review of the Yucca
Mountain license application. The court issued a writ of
mandamus, a very consequential legal action, and declared it
was illegal for the NRC to stop consideration of the license.
As a result of this decision, the NRC resumed the scientific
and technical evaluation of the license known as the Safety and
Evaluation Report, or SER. The SER looked at a plethora of
potential natural and manmade scenarios which could affect the
performance of the facility. In January of this year, the NRC
released the fifth and final volume of the SER. The NRC staff
determined the facility could meet all safety regulations
including that it could safely serve as a repository for up to
a million years. Meanwhile, the costs of inaction and delay
continue to mount. The courts ruled the Department of Energy's
dismantling of the Yucca Mountain project no longer constitute
a permanent disposal program. Therefore, the Federal Government
could no longer collect the nuclear waste fee, a surcharge paid
by consumers of nuclear-generated electricity.
While the fee is no longer being actively collected, the
Treasury Department still maintains a balance of nearly $33
billion in ratepayer money to license, construct, and operate
Yucca Mountain. But it isn't just ratepayers who are paying for
the consequences of the delay. All American taxpayers,
regardless of whether they benefit from commercial nuclear
power, are footing the legal bill, and the bill isn't cheap.
Last year, the Department of Justice account that pays damages
on behalf of the Federal Government, known as the Judgment
Fund, paid out over $900 million in settlements as a
consequence of our inability to move forward with Yucca. This
accounted for nearly a third of all Federal Government legal
fees.
We in the Federal Government have an obligation to uphold
the law, to dispose of commercial spent nuclear fuel, as well
as honor the commitment made to states who host sites to
support our nuclear defense activities, including South
Carolina, Idaho, and Washington State. Congress needs a willing
partner to host a nuclear disposal facility as we currently
have with the sites that contributed to the Manhattan Project.
I am committed to working with the State and local stakeholders
in Nevada, who will engage in a constructive conversation to
resolve the current impasse.
Just saying no is not an option. As part of this process,
we will look for areas of agreement such as facilitating a
benefits package for communities to provide long-term budget
stability, strengthen the State's education fund, and identify
associated transportation infrastructure benefits. As a host
state of a Nevada National Security Site, however, Nevada
already is a constructive partner with the Federal Government
to protect our National interests. This, by the way, includes
storing radioactive waste onsite today.
I look forward to hearing from a broad group of
stakeholders today who will highlight the need to finish a
repository, as the House Representative supports, as the courts
direct, and as the American people deserve.
Thank you, and I now recognize the ranking member, Mr.
Tonko, for his opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shimkus follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. John Shimkus

Thank you all for coming to this morning's hearing to
receive an update on the status of, and outlook for progress
on, America's nuclear waste management policy.
Let me state at the outset that the issue of the nation's
nuclear waste management policy is not a partisan issue. The
House of Representatives has repeatedly supported Yucca
Mountain in an overwhelming and bipartisan manner. Last summer,
efforts to abandon Yucca Mountain were defeated on the House
floor with the body voting four to one in favor of Yucca
Mountain. This includes nearly \2/3\ of the Chamber's
Democrats.
In April, I once again led a bipartisan group of members to
see the Yucca Mountain site firsthand. The site is an
invaluable national asset isolated in the Nevada desert,
removed from all population centers, and co-located with the
Nevada National Security Site. Since my previous visit in 2011,
the landscape has notably advanced to support the development
of a permanent repository.
In 2013, the D.C. Court of Appeals ruled the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission must continue its review of the Yucca
Mountain license application. The Court issued a writ of
mandamus, a very consequential legal action, and declared it
was illegal for the NRC to stop consideration of the license.
As a result of this decision, NRC resumed the scientific and
technical evaluation of the license, known as the Safety
Evaluation Report (SER).
The SER looked at a plethora of potential natural and
manmade scenarios which could affect the performance of the
facility. In January of this year, NRC released the fifth and
final volume of the SER. The NRC Staff determined the facility
could meet all safety regulations, including that it could
safely serve as a repository for up to a million years.
Meanwhile, the costs of inaction and delay continue to
mount. The Courts ruled the Department of Energy's
dismantlement of the Yucca Mountain Project no longer
constituted a permanent disposal program. Therefore, the
Federal Government could no longer collect the Nuclear Waste
fee, a surcharge paid by consumers of nuclear-generated
electricity. While the fee is no longer being actively
collected, the Treasury Department still maintains a balance of
nearly $33 billion in ratepayer money to license, construct and
operate Yucca Mountain.
But it isn't just ratepayers who are paying for the
consequences of the delay. All American taxpayers, regardless
of whether they benefit from commercial nuclear power, are
footing the legal bill. And the bill isn't cheap. Last year,
the Department of Justice account that pays damages on behalf
of the Federal Government, known as the Judgement Fund, paid
out over $900 million in settlements as a consequence of our
inability to move forward with Yucca. This accounted for nearly
a third of all Federal Government legal settlements.
We in the Federal Government have an obligation to uphold
the law to dispose of commercial spent nuclear fuel, as well as
honor the commitment made to States who host sites to support
our nuclear defense activities, including South Carolina, Idaho
and Washington State. Congress needs a willing partner to host
a nuclear disposal facility, as we currently have with the
sites that contributed to the Manhattan Project.
I am committed to working with state and local stakeholders
in Nevada who will engage in a constructive conversation to
resolve the current impasse. Just saying no is not an option.
As part of this process, we will look for areas of agreement,
such as facilitating a benefits package for communities to
provide longterm budget stability, strengthen the State's
education fund, and identify associated transportation
infrastructure benefits.
As the host state of the Nevada National Security Site,
however, Nevada already is a constructive partner with the
Federal Government to protect our national interests. This, by
the way, includes storing radioactive waste on site.
I look forward to hearing from a broad group of
stakeholders today who will highlight the need to finish a
repository, as the House of Representatives supports, as the
Courts direct, and as the American people deserve.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TONKO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. We are here this morning
to hear from a fine panel of witnesses about the current state
of nuclear waste policy. There are some things that I do not
expect will have changed much from the time of our last hearing
on this issue. Nuclear facilities across the country continue
to generate waste that has yet to be secured in a long-term
storage facility. Research and development on waste
technologies continues. The law designating a storage facility
is unchanged, and today we add to the many oversight hearings
the subcommittee has held over the years.
But we still have no real solution, even an interim one, to
offer to the witnesses at the table today and the
constituencies that they do, indeed, represent. There have been
reports by the National Academy of Sciences, the Government
Accountability Office, industry and nongovernmental groups, and
the President's Blue Ribbon Commission. Ironically, we have a
long-term storage facility, and yet we do not. And we do not
have interim storage facilities or a policy of establishing
them, and yet we do. Essentially the storage facilities at each
of the powerplant sites around the country now serve as de
facto interim storage facilities.
We need a solution to this situation. It will not be easy,
and it will be expensive. But the alternative is also expensive
and provides less safety, less security than a functioning,
ordered process for dealing with spent fuel. And Mr. Fitz
reminds us that we also have to deal with legacy waste from our
defense programs.
I know the chair and others on this committee are resolved
to complete the process of opening the Yucca Mountain facility,
but the Yucca Mountain facility is not open at this time, and
it does not appear it will be open in the near future. In the
meantime, spent fuel continues to accumulate, and penalty fees
continue to accrue. I continue to believe that it is worth
examining additional options for dealing with this waste.
The administration's strategy, based on the work done by
the Blue Ribbon Commission in 2012, has challenges and
unknowns. Should we pursue a system that includes both interim
and long-term storage of waste? If so, how do we proceed? If
there are to be interim sites, how many will be needed? How
much waste can or should be stored at them, and what time
period qualifies as interim? What are the costs, and can we
access the necessary funds to the fund established to deal with
this problem?
I do not expect to hear definitive answers to these
questions this morning, but I do think it is time that we
examined all options for moving forward. I think the future for
nuclear power is in question if we do not find a way to deal
with this issue.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for appearing before
the subcommittee today. I look forward to your testimony and to
your suggestions on options to move forward on what is a very
critical and important issue.
And, with that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. Anyone
seeking time on the majority side?
Seeing none, the chair recognizes the ranking member of the
full committee, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank you and Ranking Member Tonko for holding
this hearing today.
Much has changed since the Nuclear Waste Policy Act became
law in 1982, which allowed the Secretary of Energy to remove
spent nuclear fuel from commercial nuclear power plants in
exchange for fees and transported to a permanent geological
repository. But I think the past three decades of the nuclear
waste program might be best summed up this way: Lots of change
but very little progress.
Unfortunately, the one thing that seems most resistant to
change is the program's ongoing failure to the ratepayers, who
have paid into the fund. That failure also applies to the
taxpayers, who are now having to pay damages through the
Judgment Fund administered by DOJ. In New Jersey, we have
several operating nuclear reactors that provide carbon-free
electricity, and this includes Oyster Creek, the Nation's
oldest operating plant, which will soon stop providing power
but will continue to provide a home to spent nuclear fuel long
into the future unless we can come together on a plan to fix
this program.
My point is this: I am not interested in litigating the
wisdom of the administration's actions with regard to Yucca
Mountain because that won't help move waste out of New Jersey,
Illinois, New York, Michigan, or anywhere else anytime soon. I
am, however, interested in making progress, and I hope this
committee will put the ratepayer and taxpayer first and focus
on efforts that can be enacted into law and that will move us
forward over the next few years. I am encouraged by recent
developments on potential consensus sites for interim storage
in Texas and New Mexico, and we should look closely at the
prospects they offer. That in no way means we should curtail
our push for a permanent repository, but I do believe the best
path forward is to work to identify steps we can take now to
set the stage for real reform on permanent disposal in the
future, regardless of where the disposal facility ends up being
sited.
Again, thank you for holding this hearing. I look forward
to hearing from our witnesses and working with all my
colleagues, stakeholders, and the administration to put our
Nation's nuclear waste program back on track.
And I would yield the balance of my time to the gentleman
from California, Mr. McNerney.
Mr. McNerney. I want to thank the ranking member, and I
thank the chairman of the subcommittee for his work on this
issue. Managing nuclear waste is an engineering and a political
problem. Based on the work I did as a graduate student for the
Nuclear Engineering Department at the University of New Mexico,
I believe the engineering problem can be solved safely and
satisfactorily.
Experience has shown that in order to find a location with
the support of the local community, we are going to need
complete transparency and the involvement of the local
community in order to be accepted by the local community.
More than $10 billion has been spent on the Yucca Mountain
project, and that money may be wasted because there wasn't the
transparency and local involvement that would be required. The
current situation we have invites a Fukushima-style disaster to
happen in this country because there is so much waste stored in
so various locations as we will hear near the Columbia River
and other places. So are we going to need a solution? I thank
the chairman for his work, and I think we need to work together
in a bipartisan way to find a way forward, Mr. Chairman.
And, again, I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
Before we begin with the opening statements of our guests,
I want to just point out that joining us is Congressman Dan
Newhouse, a Member from Washington State, who has the honor and
the challenge of representing the Hanford DOE site, which I
think shows our common interest in moving forward on this.
Thank you for joining us.
I am going to move rapidly so we can get all our process
through and hopefully have people return after they call votes.
So first at the panel and will be recognized for 5 minutes,
Mr. Andrew Fitz, senior counsel, Office of the Attorney
General, State of Washington.
Your full statement has submitted for the record.
You have 5 minutes, sir.
Pull that mic a little bit closer if you can. Move your
name tag and then make sure the button is pressed on.

STATEMENTS OF ANDREW FITZ, SENIOR COUNSEL, OFFICE OF THE
ATTORNEY GENERAL, STATE OF WASHINGTON; JOSEPHINE PICCONE,
DIRECTOR, YUCCA MOUNTAIN DIRECTORATE, NUCLEAR REGULATORY
COMMISSION; THE HONORABLE GREG R. WHITE, COMMISSIONER, MICHIGAN
PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION, ON BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF REGULATORY UTILITY COMMISSIONERS, CHAIRMAN,
SUBCOMMITTEE ON NUCLEAR ISSUES, WASTE DISPOSAL; STEPHEN
KUCZYNSKI, CHAIRMAN, PRESIDENT, AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
SOUTHERN NUCLEAR OPERATING COMPANY; GEOFFREY H. FETTUS, SENIOR
ATTORNEY, NATURAL RESOURCES DEFENSE COUNCIL; AND EINAR
RONNINGEN, MANAGER RANCHO SECO ASSETS, DECOMMISSIONING PLANT
COALITION

STATEMENT OF ANDREW FITZ

Mr. Fitz. There we go. On behalf of the State of
Washington, Office of the Attorney General, I appreciate the
opportunity to be here before you today. Washington State has a
keen interest in the development of a permanent repository for
high-level radioactive waste and spent nuclear fuel. For nearly
eight decades, we have honored our duty to temporarily house
nuclear waste as a byproduct of our Nation's defense at the
Department of Energy's Hanford Nuclear Reservation.
Waste from Hanford accounts for approximately 63 percent of
the defense-generated high-level waste projected for disposal
at Yucca Mountain. I should point out that our near-term
concern is in getting this waste out of failing underground
single-shell tanks and into a glass form. But our long-term
interest is in seeing that all this waste is properly disposed
of in a deep geologic repository. That is what led us into
litigation over the efforts to abandon Yucca Mountain in 2010.
The Federal Government's efforts to abandon Yucca Mountain
have ignored and bypassed the careful process Congress set
forth in the Nuclear Waste Policy Act for developing a national
repository. Washington State has been clear in its legal
arguments that if Yucca Mountain is determined to be
technically unsuitable in the licensing process, it should not
be built. But, absent that determination, the process Congress
set forth in law for establishing the repository should be
respected and upheld.
In passing the Nuclear Waste Policy Act, Congress
recognized that accomplishing the long-term objective of a
national repository requires a stepwise approach and a process
cemented in law. The House bill report that accompanied the
NWPA concluded that, ``The failure of government to provide a
permanent waste disposal facility during more than 30 years of
Federal nuclear activities is unmitigated.'' It criticized
prior Federal agency competence in ``paper analyses and future
plans'' as failing to provide ``adequate assurance that
disposal facilities would be available when needed.''
It noted that two prior attempts to explore potential
repository sites had already failed due to intense political
pressure, and it noted what it called a solid consensus of
special task force and Presidential commission recommendations
on the need for legislation to ``solidify a program and keep it
on track.'' In particular, the report noted ``it is necessary
to provide close congressional control to assure that the
political and programmatic errors of our past experience will
not be repeated.'' If it is to stand any chance of success, the
process for developing a repository has to necessarily stand
and withstand changes to Federal and State administrations and
the political tides that accompany them. If you are going to
complete a process measured in decades, you cannot be
continually second-guessing or switching course partway
through, or you will never accomplish the objective.
The thing that keeps you on course is and must be the law.
This is at the heart of the NWPA's stepwise prescriptive
structure. Critically, Congress reserved for itself the
ultimate decision of approving a potential repository site. In
the case of Yucca Mountain, Congress exercised that authority
when it rejected Nevada's disapproval of the site. And later,
when the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals rejected Nevada's legal
challenge to that recommendation to Congress, the court said:
Congress has settled the matter, and we no less than the
parties are bound by its decision.
Once a repository site is approved under the NWPA, it
triggers a mandate for the Department of Energy to submit a
construction authorization application to the NRC and an
obligation on the NRC to consider Energy's application and
issue a final decision approving or disapproving issuance of a
construction authorization. Energy disregarded these mandates
in 2010. It attempted to withdraw from the licensing proceeding
based not on any claim that Yucca Mountain is technically
unsuitable but on ``the Secretary's judgment that Yucca
Mountain is not a workable option'' and that ``alternatives
will better serve the public interest.''
The NRC's Atomic Safety and Licensing Board agreed with our
argument that the NWPA's plain language and legislative history
did not permit the Secretary to withdraw the application. In
the words of the board ``the NWPA does not give the Secretary
the discretion to substitute his policy for the one established
by Congress in the NWPA, that at this point mandates progress
towards a merits decision by the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission.'' Energy's application thus remains pending before
the NRC today.
As the committee may know, the NRC Chair nevertheless then
initiated his own orderly shutdown of the NRC's license review.
The shutdown included terminating the NRC staff's technical
review, blocking the release of Safety Evaluation Reports and
shutting down the NRC's Web-based licensing support network,
which was a database for all the documentation regarding the
application. Despite having more than $11 million available in
appropriated funds to continue with licensing proceedings, the
NRC cited budgetary considerations for its actions, including
the political prediction that Congress would not further fund
its efforts. It took Washington State and its fellow
petitioners bringing a mandamus action and the court issuing an
order in August 2013 to reverse this unilateral dismantling.
In a clear, blunt order, the Federal Court concluded that
the NRC `` has declined to continue the statutorily-mandated
Yucca Mountain licensing process,'' and that ``as things stand,
the Commission is simply flouting the law.'' It rejected the
NRC's budgetary arguments and cited the bedrock principle of
constitutional law that ``the President and Federal agencies
may not ignore statutory mandates or prohibitions merely
because of policy disagreement with Congress.''
Here is where that leaves us. The NRC has now completed and
released its Safety Evaluation Reports. We have final legal
decisions in place that establish the obligation of both Energy
and the NRC to continue with the Yucca Mountain licensing
process providing the funding is in place to proceed.
I understand there are those who think that Yucca Mountain
is technically unsuitable, but the law provides an opportunity
to prove that case in the pending NRC hearing. I also
understand there are those who think that following the current
scheme in the NWPA is unwise, but the method for pursuing that
disagreement should be through changing the law, not
disregarding it. Ultimately, given the multi-decade, multi-
generational task of developing a nuclear waste repository, we
will never have a repository, whether it is at Yucca Mountain
or any other site, if the legal process for siting and
licensing a repository is disregarded, either now or by those
who follow us. Thank you and I will be happy to take any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fitz follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. I appreciate it. I know you have traveled long
distances and a lot, and I want to make sure you got your full
statement in. But we are trying to keep quick.
I would now like to recognize Ms. Josephine Piccone,
Director of Yucca Mountain Directorate from the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission.
You are welcome, and you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPHINE PICCONE

Ms. Piccone. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Shimkus,
Ranking Member Tonko, and distinguished members of the
subcommittee. I am Josephine Piccone, Director of the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission's Yucca Mountain Directorate, which is
responsible for leading the current review activities
associated with the Yucca Mountain construction authorization
application.
I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today to
discuss the NRC staff's completion of the Yucca Mountain Safety
Evaluation Report. On November 18, 2013, the NRC Commission
approved a memorandum and order setting a course of action for
the Yucca Mountain licensing process, consistent with the
Appeals Court decision on August 2013, and the resources
available from previous unexpended appropriations to the NRC
from the Nuclear Waste Fund. This course of action included the
Commission directing the NRC staff to complete the Safety
Evaluation Report. We completed the Safety Evaluation Report
this past January within our cost estimate. I would like to
acknowledge our talented review team of more than 40 agency
experts in technical fields such as health physics, geology,
seismology, hydrology, material sciences, structural
engineering, and criticality safety, to name but a few. We also
had an excellent legal staff providing valuable support and
assistance from the NRC's federally funded research and
development center, the Center for Nuclear Waste Regulatory
Analyses, in San Antonio, Texas.
The Safety Evaluation Report documents the results of the
staff's technical review of DOE's application. The NRC staff
finds that DOE has met most, but not all, of the applicable
regulatory requirements. Notably, the NRC staff finds that
DOE's design and analysis of the proposed repository complies
with the performance objectives and requirements both before
and after the repository is closed.
These performance objectives and requirements, which are
protective of public health and safety, include the
requirements that the repository be composed of multiple
barriers, requirements for the repository to meet certain
radiation limits for individual protection and human intrusion,
and separate standards for protection of groundwater. The staff
also finds that DOE has addressed most of the general
information, administrative, and programmatic requirements.
There are two specific requirements that DOE has not met
that concern ownership of land and water rights. They are
discussed in detail in Volume 4 of the Safety Evaluation
Report. In addition, a supplement to DOE's environmental impact
statement addressing groundwater issues has not been completed.
Therefore, the NRC staff is not recommending issuance of a
construction authorization at this time.
Publication of the Safety Evaluation Report is only one of
several steps that need to occur before a decision can be made
on the construction authorization application. A decision on
whether to authorize construction can be made only after a
supplement to DOE's Environmental Impact Statement has been
prepared, a hearing has been conducted, and the Commission has
completed its review of contested and uncontested issues. With
regard to the first item, the Commission has directed the NRC
staff to develop a supplement to DOE's Environmental Impact
Statement covering certain groundwater issues.
The largest and most significant of the remaining steps to
be completed before the Commission can reach a decision on
whether to grant the construction authorization is the
adjudicatory hearing, including consideration of approximately
300 pending contentions and any new or amended contentions. The
NRC does not currently have sufficient remaining resources from
the Nuclear Waste Fund to complete the hearing. Recently the
Commission informed the Congress that it estimated that
approximately $330 million would be needed for the NRC to
complete the construction authorization proceeding.
This concludes my formal testimony on the NRC Safety
Evaluation Report. I thank you for the opportunity to appear
before you, and I look forward to continuing to work with you
to advance NRC's important safety and security missions. I
would be pleased to respond to questions you may have. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Piccone follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
Next, we have the Honorable Greg R. White, Commissioner of
Michigan Public Service Commission, on behalf of the National
Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners, Chairman of
the Subcommittee on Nuclear Issues and Waste Disposal. He has
appeared here numerous times.
You are recognized for 5 minutes, and thanks for coming.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE GREG R. WHITE

Mr. White. Thank you very much, Chairman Shimkus, Ranking
Member Tonko, and members of the subcommittee.
I want to thank you for this opportunity to testify on the
status of the U.S. nuclear waste program. I am Greg White. I
serve as commissioner on the Michigan Public Service
Commission. I am testifying today on behalf of NARUC, National
Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners.
NARUC is a nonprofit organization. It has been around for
over 125 years. Members are the public utility commissions in
all 50 States and U.S. territories. We are State economic
regulators, and we are responsible for ensuring the safe,
reliable, and affordable delivery of essential electric utility
service in every state. As a result, the success of this
program is critical to the delivery of essential electric
services.
I would like to raise a few points and then offer some
comments in regards to what we think might be able to be done
going forward. NARUC was at the table when the 1982 law was
passed, and we agreed that it was appropriate for the consumers
to pay for this program. The people who benefit from the
generation of electricity from nuclear power plants
appropriately should pay for it. And the consumers have paid. I
would like to point out that the only milestone in the 1982 act
that was ever on time was the signing of the contracts that
began the collection of money from the consumers. Since then,
more than $40 billion has been collected in direct payments and
in interest that has accrued in the balance. The current status
of the program, the same as it was in 1982; we don't have
anything moving forward. The program is at a dead stop.
A couple of other points. I also serve as the chairman of
an organization called the Nuclear Waste Strategy Coalition
that was formed in 1993. It is a group of State commissions,
utility, nuclear utilities, consumer advocates, local
communities, and we were formed in 1993. I can tell you that,
as somebody who was in the room in 1993, we didn't intend or
ever expect that we would still be an organization working on
this issue in 2015, some 22 years later.
We also proposed way back in 1994, the Nuclear Waste
Strategy Coalition, the creation of a single-purpose entity, a
public-private corporation chartered by the Congress to manage
this program, removing it from the Department of Energy. That
was in 1994. The proposal was rejected pretty much out of hand.
The argument was by moving to that new entity, it could delay
the progress on the program by up to a year.
We have been involved in several lawsuits, as you know.
They have been explained by Mr. Fitz. Chairman Shimkus, I would
like to point out one in particular, the suspension of the
Nuclear Waste Fund, which we argued we needed to do. We
considered that to be a bittersweet win. It was always our
intention to pay for the program, to have the consumers pay for
the program. But when there was no program after 2010, we could
no longer continue to allow hundreds of millions of dollars to
be collected from consumers into a fund that was paying for
nothing.
So the Department of Energy has had some plans, I will say
``schemes,'' perhaps. The problem is, is that they really have
no credibility. There is no budgets. There is no time frames,
other than the proposal that was made in 2013 as a result of
the Blue Ribbon Commission's recommendations suggested that the
Department would make substantial progress towards a national
repository by 2048, some 35 years from that date.
My suggestion is, we seem to have learned nothing in the
previous 32 years that led up to that point.
So, in conclusion, NARUC has thoughtfully considered the
country's viable options. And we think that to move forward on
a nuclear waste program, that we have to see credible
substantial progress toward achieving the goal. The first step
is to complete the licensing review of the Yucca Mountain
license application. We also believe that the Nuclear Waste
Fund must be managed responsibly and used only for its intended
purpose. The management of the Federal responsibilities for
integrated-use fuel management would be more successful if it
was assigned to a new organization, such as the charter of a
new Federal corporation, suggested by the Nuclear Waste
Strategy Coalition back in 1994. And, in addition, we believe
that there is a need for consolidated interim storage although
the amount, basis of need, and duration should be determined.
If implemented in the near term, these steps could create a
solid foundation on which to build a viable spent nuclear
program. I want to thank you for the opportunity to express my
views, and I will be very pleased to take questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. White follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
Next, we will recognize Mr. Stephen Kuczynski, chairman,
president, and chief executive officer of the Southern Nuclear
Operating Company.
You are recognized for 5 minutes, and welcome.

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN KUCZYNSKI

Mr. Kuczynski. Good morning, Chairman Shimkus, Ranking
Member Tonko, and the members of the subcommittee. I also thank
you for the opportunity to appear before you today. As stated,
my name is Steve Kuczynski. I am the chairman, president, and
CEO of the Southern Nuclear Operating Company. We have been in
the nuclear power business for over 50 years. Today our fleet
of six nuclear reactors at three sites, Plant Hatch and Plant
Vogtle in Georgia, and Plant Farley in Alabama, provide
approximately 20 percent of the electricity used in those
States. We are also building two new state-of-the-art nuclear
units at Plant Vogtle.
It is an honor for me to appear before the subcommittee to
discuss nuclear waste policy in general. Essential to this
discussion is, of course, the need for a permanent repository.
It is critical that the Federal Government meet its contractual
obligation to take title to the Nation's spent fuel inventory.
It is appropriate for the subcommittee to explore ways to get
the statutorily mandated spent nuclear fuel disposal program
back on track. I look forward to discussing these and other
issues with you today.
Let me begin with a brief discussion about our company's
spent fuel program. Currently we have 2,300 fuel assemblies and
spent fuel pools at Plant Farley, another 930 assemblies in dry
casks. At Plant Hatch, we have approximately 5,000 assemblies
in the pools with 4,150 in dry casks. At Plant Vogtle, we have
2,600 assemblies in the pools and 480 in dry casks.
First thing I want to emphasize is that we have safe,
reliable, onsite options to store spent fuel at our nuclear
plants for the duration of our plant licenses and the expected
life of the plants. Spent fuel pools and dry cask storage
installations are regulated and approved by the NRC under very
comprehensive safety, security, and environmental regulations.
But these temporary measures should not be viewed as de facto
permanent solutions to the spent fuel disposal issue.
Under both law and contract, disposal of spent fuel is an
obligation of the Federal Government. My written testimony
explains in some more detail how this came to be. I won't
repeat that history here, other than to say that the Nuclear
Waste Policy Act directed the Energy Secretary to enter into
contracts with the Nation's nuclear utilities. Those contracts
provided that, in return for payment of the fees into the
Nuclear Waste Fund, the government will take title to nuclear
powerplant owner spent fuel for permanent storage at the
Nation's repository beginning in 1998.
Industry was effectively mandated to enter into these
contracts. Under these contracts, Alabama Power has paid over
$399 million into the Nuclear Waste Fund for Plant Farley, and
Georgia Power has paid over $400 million for Plant Hatch and
$445 million for plant Vogtle. Those are real dollars obtained
from electricity customers in our States on the basis of spent
fuel contracts with the Federal Government. 1998 came and went.
Seventeen years later, the Federal Government still has not
begun to perform its end of the contracts. My written testimony
explains nuclear powerplant owners have been forced to make
other onsite arrangements to store our spent fuel temporarily
at great expense to our companies.
The industry has mitigated these losses to some degree by
recovering monetary judgments from the Federal Government on
the basis of partial breach of contract claims. These
recoveries have been limited so far to the cost for storage
facilities made necessary by the government's breach. The
Government Accountability Office has estimated that, in total,
across the industry, Federal Government's liability for breach
of the spent fuel contracts will exceed $21 billion by 2071.
That is a brief summary of the current situation, but the
news is not all negative. There is increasing confidence that
the Nation's nuclear waste disposal program is getting back on
track. With recent court rulings requiring further action on
the Yucca license application and the NRC's recent reports
finding Yucca Mountain to be safe. The Nation has come too far
and invested too much to abandon the Yucca Mountain repository
now.
In closing, I applaud the subcommittee for taking keen
interest and tackling this complex and challenging problem. The
good news, it is not an insurmountable issue. Indeed, from a
technical, safety, financial, and legal perspective, the path
forward is manageable and understood. In many respects, the key
challenges are political and the domain of Congress to address.
Let me finish with three final thoughts for you to
consider. First and number one, the Nation should move forward
with the permanent repository at Yucca Mountain. I believe that
is clear. Two, Congress should reform the funding mechanisms
for these programs to ensure access to the Nuclear Waste Fund
for appropriate uses. The key challenge has been the program
relies on appropriations which has been subject to the ebbs and
flows of politics. And, three, Congress needs to protect the
investment of electricity customers around the country who have
collectively paid billions of dollars to the Federal government
to dispose of the Nation's spent fuel inventory.
Thank you, Chairman Shimkus, for allowing me to appear
before you here today and the subcommittee. I look forward to
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kuczynski follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
Next I would like to recognize Mr. Geoffrey Fettus, Senior
Attorney from the Natural Resources Defense Council.
You are recognized for 5 minutes, and welcome.

STATEMENT OF GEOFFREY H. FETTUS

Mr. Fettus. Thank you, Chairman Shimkus and Ranking Member
Tonko, and distinguished members of the subcommittee for having
me today and allowing me to provide the Natural Resources
Defense Council's views on this matter.
Let me get right to two key issues at hand, the proposed
Yucca Mountain repository and interim storage away from reactor
sites. We are concerned Congress is on a trajectory to make two
misguided decisions that run directly counter to the bipartisan
set of recommendations found in President Obama's Blue Ribbon
Commission for America's Nuclear Future.
First, with respect to Yucca--and I will note that Nevada
is not here--it is clear some members believe the proposed
Yucca site is a safe place to bury spent nuclear fuel and that
the project can be revived now that Senator Reid is retiring.
Reasonable people can disagree. Respectfully, those ideas are
not accurate. Efforts to restart the failed process face an
uphill climb of massive technical and institutional challenges,
years of litigation, and a complete lack of meaningful State
consent. Simply, Yucca Mountain leaks profusely. Licensing
depends on, at this point, a fictional set of drip shields. And
the State is joined across party lines to litigate the matter
for as long as it takes.
This is on top of the history where, in an effort to
preserve what turned out to be an unworkable site, in the mid-
1980s, the Energy Department, they abandoned its technical
siting guidelines used to select Yucca. In the early 2000s, EPA
gerrymandered the site boundaries in an effort to ensure that
radiation doses at the edge of the regulated area miles away
would be acceptable. And then DOE proposed that hundreds of
years into the future, the agency would spend billions more to
introduce titanium drip shields to prevent the early corrosion
of the waste containers.
Along the way, Congress worked on the site selection
process by simply selecting Yucca and then demanding EPA's
regulations be consistent with the views of the National
Academy of Sciences. This effort subsequently backfired when a
bipartisan panel of the D.C. Circuit unanimously found that
EPA's rule was not, in fact, consistent with the views of the
National Academy of Sciences.
Restarting the Yucca fight, respectfully, Mr. Chairman, is
not the way to go nor is the right way to proceed with the
current flurry of premature interim storage plants. Here
Congress could be poised to delink interim storage of spent
fuel from the requirement to first establish an acceptable
final geologic site. Wise leaders with a history of reaching
across the aisle, like Jeff Bingaman of New Mexico, who was the
first and last to introduce potentially workable legislation
consistent with the BRC recommendations warned against such
tactics for decades. The American public and each of the
States--and I think this is where we all agree--not just the
industry that has the special deal of the Federal Government
assuming its waste burden, has the right to expect a permanent,
thoughtful solution to our nuclear waste dilemma. Simply
expediting an interim storage site for Texas or for New Mexico
or some other yet-to-be-named State, without doing the work of
crafting a comprehensive bill that can finally get the
repository program off the Yucca treadmill and back on track
will most likely lead to double the transportation risks, even
more extended above-ground storage of highly radioactive waste
with no permanent disposal and deeply misguided efforts to
shift that waste to Yucca or WIPP when the political stars, not
the scientific stars, align. This approach passes the risk to
future generations and is destined to arrive in the same
quagmire we are sitting in now. It simply doesn't solve the
problem.
Instead of proceeding in this fashion, in my written
statement I have outlined an approach that NRDC believes is
workable and can regain the widespread public and, most
important, State support necessary. The elements of this
approach are: One, recognized that repositories must remain the
focus of any legislative effort; two, create a coherent
legislative framework--and this is most important--before
commencing any geologic repository or interim storage site
development processes; three, arrive at a consent-based
approach for nuclear waste storage via a fundamental change in
law; four, address the storage or interim storage in a phased
approach consistent with the careful architecture of former
Senator Bingaman's S. 3469, which was introduced in 2012; and,
five, exclude delaying, proliferation, driving, and polarizing
closed fuel cycle and processing options from this effort.
This is one area where we certainly agree hopefully with
every member of the subcommittee. The history of the Federal
nuclear waste program has been dismal, but decades from now,
others will face the precise predicament we find ourselves in
today unless Congress revamps how nuclear waste is regulated
and allows for meaningful State oversight. Otherwise, we are
doomed to repeat this cycle until a future Congress gets it
right.
Thank you again for this opportunity, and I am happy to
answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fettus follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
Now, last but not least, Mr. Ronningen, manager of Rancho
Seco Assets, Decommissioning Plant Coalition.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF EINAR RONNINGEN

Mr. Ronningen. Good morning. I am Einar Ronningen, manager
of the Rancho Seco Nuclear Facilities for the Sacramento
Municipal Utility District, known as SMUD. And I am here today
on behalf of the Decommissioning Plant Coalition.
The DPC is comprised of companies whose sites have ceased
all commercial nuclear-generating operations. Our members own
10 facilities in the States of California, Connecticut,
Illinois, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, Vermont, and
Wisconsin. We appreciate this opportunity to provide our
perspective on the status of U.S. Nuclear waste management
policy.
SMUD's Rancho Seco nuclear-generating station ceased
commercial operation in 1989, but there remains an 11-acre
independent spent fuel storage installation containing 22 dual-
purpose cannisters licensed for the dry storage and
transportation of used nuclear fuel and greater than Class C
waste ultimately destined for disposal by the DOE. As is the
case with other utilities, SMUD has successfully litigated a
partial breach of contract claim against the DOE to recover the
costs incurred in our management of this material. To date,
SMUD has won judgments in the U.S. Court of Claims totalling
$73 million. These damage awards have been paid by taxpayers
out of a permanent appropriations account in the Treasury
called the Judgment Fund. Industry-wide taxpayer liabilities
for the government's failure to perform under the contracts in
a timely manner are approaching $4.5 billion, and DOE estimates
that its liability will reach almost $13 billion by 2020,
increasing annually by $500 million per year if it does not
find a way to begin satisfying its obligation by 2022.
From the outset, the DPC has been supportive of Yucca
Mountain, and in the early years of our organization, we worked
with Congress in urging DOE to prepare a sound license
application, address the transportation infrastructure
requirements, and otherwise take steps to prepare for the
movement of this material from our sites on a priority basis.
Nonetheless and without repeating the oft-reported
historical details, Mr. Chairman, let me just state the
obvious. Although the spent fuel at all our utility sites is
and will be safely managed for as long as it takes, right now
U.S. nuclear waste management policy is broken.
The DPC sincerely appreciates the efforts you have made,
Mr. Chairman, to reinvigorate the debate over the future of
Yucca Mountain, and we were heartened by the finding of the NRC
staff in their Safety Evaluation Report that the application
demonstrates the ability of the site to meet all post-closure
requirements of that agency. But we note that the staff also
found that it could not yet recommend the issuance of a
construction authorization due to several findings, including
the lack of institutional control of the site and access to
water rights necessary for the construction and operation of
the facility, issues that will require the enactment of further
legislation. The need for further legislation, the continued
opposition by significant leaders in the State of Nevada, the
dismantlement of the Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste
Management at DOE, the technical licensing challenges filed by
opponents of the project, and the track record of DOE in
completing one-of-a-kind facilities on time and within budgets,
combined with the level of financial resources that need to be
appropriated by Congress in a constrained fiscal environment to
license, construct, and operate the proposed repository, lead
us to the uneasy conclusion that the uncertainties of when
Yucca Mountain would be open are not likely to be overcome in
timeframes that meet the equity interests of our host
communities. It is because of our members' commitments to our
host communities to resolve the current stalemate in U.S.
nuclear waste policy as expeditiously as possible that we urge
this committee to support the legislation that would not only
take steps to get the Nation's geologic repository program back
on track but also authorize the establishment of an voluntary
incentive-based siting program that would lead to the licensing
of a consolidated interim storage facility and to initiate a
pilot program to remove the material from our sites on a
priority basis.
We are pleased that two potential storage projects have
been announced by capable private sector companies in the past
four months. These could offer DOE the means to meets its
contractual obligations.
Mr. Chairman, and members of the subcommittee, a pilot
storage program that prioritizes the removal of material from
permanently shutdown sites that is responsive to private sector
initiatives, can be accomplished with reasonable support from
the Nuclear Waste Fund without any impact on the repository
program. The pilot would demonstrate the ability of the Federal
Government to plan and execute their responsibilities for waste
acceptance and transportation under the standard contract,
relieve the taxpayer of the obligation to continue paying
Judgment Fund damages, and allow these sites to be repurposed
for useful purposes.
We applaud your steadfast interest in a vibrant repository
program, and we urge you to look favorably on the passage of
legislation establishing a consolidated interim storage program
that takes advantage of these new opportunities to remove used
fuel and greater than Class C waste from those facilities where
commercial reactor operations have permanently ceased.
Thank you for the opportunity, and we look forward to
questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ronningen follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. You did a great job, so I
appreciate the testimony.
And I will recognize myself 5 minutes for the first round
of questions.
With the finish of the Safety and Evaluation Report, we now
move to the next step, which is the license application. A very
simple question, and as much as possible I would like to get a
yes-or-no answer because it is just based upon the license
application. After 30 years of scientific evaluation and $15
billion spent on the project, we are still waiting for the
final determination about the suitability of Yucca Mountain to
serve as a permanent geological repository. Just going down the
witness table, I would like to ask each one of you if you
believe that the NRC should finish this process and issue a
final decision.
Mr. Fitz. As long as it is legally mandated under the
Nuclear Waste Policy Act, the answer is yes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Ms. Piccone.
Ms. Piccone. It is dependent on congressional action and
appropriations to the Agency.
Mr. Shimkus. But having the appropriated money, the NRC
would finish the application process.
Ms. Piccone. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. White.
Mr. White. Yes, and----
Mr. Shimkus. That is good enough for me.
Mr. Kuczynski.
Mr. Kuczynski. Yes, unanimous.
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. Fettus.
Mr. Fettus. No.
Mr. Shimkus. So you don't believe that if there is
appropriated money, that the Federal Government should not
follow the law? You are testifying right now that we should not
follow the law?
Mr. Fettus. Mr. Chairman, that is----
Mr. Shimkus. I am going to go--Mr. Ronningen. I am
reclaiming my time. Mr. Ronningen.
Mr. Ronningen. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
Mr. Fitz, your testimony provided an excellent description
of the D.C. Court of Appeals ruling on the Aiken County case.
If Congress provides additional funding to DOE and the NRC to
complete the Yucca Mountain license, as the House of
Representatives passed recently, would the writ of mandamus
extend to the new funding and require action on the license?
Mr. Fitz. I think if you take the D.C. Circuit mandamus
decision in concert with the Atomic Safety and Licensing
Board's decision that denied withdrawal to the Department of
Energy, those two together indicate that the proceeding should
move forward, that it is legally mandated, and that both
entities, the Department of Energy and the NRC, are obliged to
complete the process.
Mr. Shimkus. They are obliged to complete the process. That
is what you are testifying?
Mr. Fitz. That is what I am testifying.
Mr. Shimkus. And I think, following the previous testimony,
both then Secretary Chu and Secretary Moniz, have both
testified, given that scenario, they would be mandated to
comply. And we have the records to support that statement.
Mr. Kuczynski, your testimony discusses possible support
for increased incentives for the State of Nevada. Would you
please describe what sort of incentives could be included for a
community?
Mr. Kuczynski. First of all, we support the permanent
repository, but we also support reasonable incentives to help
construct the facility for Nevada. That has been our consistent
testimony. Barney Beasley testified here in 2006 the exact same
point, and our position has not changed.
Mr. Shimkus. What could some of those be?
Mr. Kuczynski. Infrastructure, education, anything that
allows the process to move forward to continue the licensing
process and the actual construction of the facility.
Mr. Shimkus. Commissioner White, do you agree that we
should and could support these types of incentives?
Mr. White. Yes, they make sense. It is entirely appropriate
for a community that may be hosting this facility to receive
some kind of incentive benefits, yes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
Based upon time, I am going to yield back and recognize my
Ranking Member, Mr. Tonko, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And, again, welcome to our panelists. Dr. Piccone, the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission has a policy in the form of the
Waste Confidence Rule that, as I understand it, links the
licensing of nuclear reactors to the availability of safe
storage and, more importantly, permanent disposal capability
for nuclear waste. Can you briefly explain what that means in
practical terms for the licensing any of our nuclear reactors?
Ms. Piccone. I am sorry, Mr. Tonko. I don't have that
information, but I can go back to staff and get that for the
record for you.
Mr. Tonko. Are there any on the panel that would want to
speak to the waste confidence rule?
Mr. Kuczynski.
Mr. Kuczynski. Yes, I think it is more appropriate today to
call it about the continued storage rule where the NRC has
revised the Waste Confidence Rule that they reviewed the
storage of spent fuel at our facilities for a variety of
scenarios, and the conclusion was, from a safety,
environmental, security standpoint, that we can store onsite
for significant lengths of time.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And, Dr. Piccone, under a best-case
scenario, what is a minimum time to complete NRC's process and
issue a construction license?
Ms. Piccone. There are three things that are necessary for
a decision to be made. One is the completion of the supplement
to the Environmental Impact Statement, then the adjudicatory
hearing, and then the Commission to make a decision on the
contested and uncontested issues. It is hard to speculate on
the length of time it would take for the adjudicatory
proceeding. There are approximately 300 contentions and there
may be additional new contentions or amended contentions. The
adjudicatory hearing is suspended right now, and there is no
schedule for a hearing.
Mr. Tonko. Well, given those conditions, do we not need an
interim policy of some sort?
Ms. Piccone. An interim policy?
Mr. Tonko. Interim storage.
Ms. Piccone. Well, the waste is being stored right now
safely at nuclear power plants.
Mr. Tonko. But should there be an improved or more
conclusive or predictable process if this interim is challenged
on the given situations that we have today?
Ms. Piccone. I think that is a national policy decision,
sir, and not NRC.
Mr. Tonko. Mr. Fettus, your organization sued NRC against
the 2010 revision of the Waste Confidence Rule, as did New
Jersey and several other States. Can you explain why you did
that and where things stand today from your perspective?
Mr. Fettus. Thank you, Mr. Tonko.
Yes we did. And we were successful in front of a bipartisan
panel of the D.C. Circuit with the decision in 2012. The reason
why we sued was the lack of a basis for the NRC's judgment that
there would be confidence that there is a long-term disposal
option on the table. And, importantly, the problem was not
necessarily that Yucca Mountain does not exist. The problem is
that there was no NEPA review supporting, supporting, the NRC's
decision. The NRC has conducted a NEPA review, and they have
finalized it, and we have challenged that current review once
again in the United States Court of Appeals, and that
litigation is pending. The issue there is whether or not, at
least as far as we are concerned, whether or not the NRC
complied with the D.C. Circuit's explicit directions in the
2012 decision and whether or not the NEPA review complies with
the law. And the NEPA review is the National Environmental
Policy Act and the environmental impact statement that needs to
inform its decision on whether or not there is confidence to
store the waste in the interim time up to the final disposal.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Harper from Mississippi for 5
minutes of questions.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thanks to each of you for being here and making this
effort on such an important issue.
Mr. Fitz, if I could talk to you for a moment, the
Department of Energy recently announced its intention to
initiate a new permanent repository program for nuclear
material generated from National defense activities. As you are
aware, Washington State holds about two-thirds of all defense
material at the Hanford site. Did DOE consult with the State of
Washington prior to making this announcement?
Mr. Fitz. Thank you for the question. I am not aware of the
consultation. I can't say that it did not occur, but it is not
within my personal knowledge, and I can say personally that the
announcement caught me by surprise.
Mr. Harper. Were you advised of anyone that told you, yes,
they told us about it, or you just can't rule it out because
you are not privy to it.
Mr. Fitz. It is the latter, or both I should say. I have
not heard of any mention of consultation, and I can't rule it
out.
Mr. Harper. Does Washington believe this new policy would
help the Federal Government fulfill its responsibilities under
the Tri-Party Agreement between DOE, the Environmental
Protection Agency, and the State of Washington?
Mr. Fitz. There is not a deadline in the Tri-Party
Agreement for actually disposing of waste. There is a deadline
for getting waste treated, which right now I think is in
question with waste treatment plant delays. As to the wisdom of
splitting off the defense stream from commercial waste, I would
say a couple of things. First, our position has been consistent
that as long as the law requires moving forward with the
Nuclear Waste Policy Act process for licensing Yucca Mountain,
that should be respected. I can speak to what I understand to
be my clients' policy position that pragmatically if there is
another way to get waste disposed of more quickly, they are
open to that, but I would echo what Mr. Fettus said--or, I am
sorry, Mr. White said about DOE's schemes that don't have
certainty or budget as a substitute for what right now is the
legal process.
Mr. Harper. One last area. I understand that the high-level
tank waste at Hanford is to be vitrified into large logs that
are engineered to be disposed in Yucca Mountain. If DOE pursues
a defense-only repository, what will happen with the vitrified
waste logs from Hanford, and would this delay the shipment of
material out of Washington State?
Mr. Fitz. I think that is an unknown, and that is a concern
for Washington.
Mr. Harper. Thank you very much.
I yield back in the interest of time.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman yields back his time. We think we
have got--with the votes that are just called--we think we have
got 15 or 20 minutes left. We will try to quickly get to
everybody. And then we will decide how to deal with the panel.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
McNerney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is interesting testimony. And I appreciate you all
coming down here today.
Mr. Shimkus. Jerry, pull your mic up to you so that
people----
Ms. Piccone. Yes, as discussed in detail in Volume 4 of the
Safety Evaluation Report, the geologic repository operations
area, or the GROA, which is part of the repository, must be
located on lands that are either acquired and under the
jurisdiction and control of DOE or permanently withdrawn and
reserved for its use. The land on which the repository
operations area will be located must also be free and clear of
significant encumbrances, such as mining rights deeds, rights
of way, or other legal rights.
In its application, DOE explained that it submitted a land
withdrawal legislation to Congress in 2007. Congress did not
enact that bill and DOE has not completed any other land
acquisition process. Therefore, NRC staff concludes that DOE
has not acquired the lands needed for the repository operations
area, nor have any necessary lands been permanently withdrawn
and reserved for DOE's use. In addition, because DOE has not
completed a land withdrawal or other acquisition process, DOE
has not demonstrated that the land would be free and clear of
significant encumbrances.
Mr. McNerney. That is an issue for the Congress to deal
with, is that right?
Ms. Piccone. That is what DOE submitted in their
application. That is what NRC reviewed. DOE could submit
additional information identifying other mechanisms and NRC
would then review those as well.
Mr. McNerney. Mr. Ronningen, thank you for coming. A little
part of my district is in [inaudible] Territory. So I
appreciate what you are doing. You mentioned that there were
two private entities that announced sites in the last 4 months.
Could you expand on that a little bit?
Mr. Ronningen. Yes, sir. The Lee Eddy Group in New Mexico
has approached the industry to develop centralized interim
storage. And the WCS, Waste Control Specialists, in Texas has
also come forward to announce that they wish to develop
centralized interim storage.
Mr. McNerney. Those are both [inaudible]
Mr. Ronningen. Right. They would be consolidated interim
storage, not repositories.
Mr. McNerney. Is there any possibility there would be local
support for those projects?
Mr. Ronningen. They are already working on that.
In the case of Waste Control Specialists, a couple years
ago they were successful in garnering local support for a low-
level waste facility. And they wish to expand that to
consolidate interim storage. And, again, the Lee Eddy Group has
been working with local community members to get that approval
from their constituents.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Mr. White, you also mentioned the need for public-private
partnerships. What do you have in mind exactly for that?
Mr. White. A single-purpose entity that would be solely
responsible for the management of the program. One of the
problems with the Department of Energy's management is that
they are a large organization, rather unwieldy. This program
tends to be one of the minor focuses of the Department. We need
an agency or, again, a public-private corporation that would
have the authority and the focus to simply work on this issue
alone.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back my time.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much for yielding back.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr.
Whitfield, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you all for joining us today.
Mr. Kuczynski, when I go to the [inaudible] Talk about
nuclear waste. And we talk about the almost $20 trillion of
Federal debt that we are approaching in this country. And, in
1982 I think, Congress passed the Nuclear Waste Policy Act. And
I think in 1987, Congress identified Yucca Mountain----
Mr. Shimkus. Ed, make sure you talk loud. I don't think
your microphone is working anymore. And I think we have lost
them on the panel except for the chairman. I wonder how that
happened.
Mr. Whitfield. Anyway, so Congress identified Yucca
Mountain as the permanent spot. And then we started spending
large sums of taxpayer dollars in preparing Yucca Mountain. And
I don't know the exact figure, but I understand it was roughly
$10 billion or $12 billion in preparation. And then, in 2010,
the Obama administration made a decision that they were not
going to pursue the licensing process. And then a lawsuit was
filed by various groups saying that the NRC and DOE were
violating the law. And the petitioners or plaintiffs won that
lawsuit. And, at some point in there, the Federal Government
could not meet its legal obligation to take possession of this
waste and move it to Yucca Mountain or a permanent site. And so
another lawsuit was filed on that, and now there are judgments
against the Federal Government for that. So, the amount of
dollars the taxpayers have been paying out, and we still don't
have a permanent site. And now this administration is saying
that we need a separate site for military nuclear waste.
And it is so frustrating because Congress made a decision a
long time ago under Federal law to do this. And I understand
our process of filing lawsuits, and we all have the right to do
that. But, I mean, don't you think that taxpayers have a right
to just be totally upset about this process and the fact that--
I am sure that you would like to see Yucca Mountain open as
well. But am I being inaccurate in what I am saying here? I may
have a few factual points that are not correct. But,
philosophically, the American people are being taken to the
cleaners on this. And it is a statement that Congress has
clearly said that we want it to be at Yucca Mountain. Am I
wrong on this?
Mr. Kuczynski. No. We share your frustration. I think you
are accurate in almost everything you have said. And there are
downsides, the longer this is prolonged, the more expensive it
is for taxpayers and utility rate customers. The science has
been completed. The NRC has ruled, utilized that $12 billion to
$15 billion to use the best experts we have in our country. NRC
is seen as the gold standard and that ought to mean something.
So, from a science standpoint, the Yucca Mountain facility,
obviously a couple more hurdles, but it is set to be a
repository. And that is the best way to serve the interests of
taxpayers and customers across this country.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, personally, I think it is very
frustrating that the Obama administration is doing everything
that they can do to create obstacles.
And I would just like to publicly thank the chairman of
this subcommittee, John Shimkus, because he has been a real
leader in trying to make sure that the intent of Congress is
pursued and followed through on this. And so many of us want to
help him in any way that we can to complete this project and
get it behind us. We have spent enough time and money on this
in my humble opinion.
Mr. Kuczynski. In our view of the process back in the
1980s, under the Nuclear Waste Policy Act, there are provisions
for local communities and States to take part in that process.
They did take part. Congress overrode those objections. And we
ought to follow the law.
Mr. Whitfield. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
The chair now recognizes--and we are fine on time, Gene--5
minutes for questions. And if you want to come down here and
use this mic, you can.
Mr. Green. I think I can probably talk without it.
Mr. Shimkus. Now it is working.
Mr. Green. I was out at Yucca Mountain, what, 4 years ago
with the chair. I didn't go on the last trip you did because,
coming from Texas, I was actually on an offshore oil rig. When
I was out there, we met with all the county officials where
Yucca Mountain is. And it seemed like, to an elected official,
in the counties around Yucca Mountain, they all supported the
use of the permanent repository. But my first question was, has
any country in the world developed a long-term nuclear storage?
Because I know Sweden, I went there one time, and they had a
prototype of a hole in the ground. And, of course, they joked
that Sweden is nothing but granite, so you can put anything
down there. But has any country developed a long-term nuclear
storage?
Mr. Fettus. The only operating geological repository was in
the United States, which is the WIPP facility in southeastern
New Mexico for transuranic waste or trace amounts of plutonium
for defense, transuranic waste. And it is currently shut down
after an accident in February of 2014.
Mr. Green. OK. My big concern, though, is the interim
storage because of what is happening. And, by the way, Mr.
Kuczynski, I congratulate Southern Company because I am a
supporter of expansion of nuclear power. And you have the first
expansion in decades to be able to do it because if you are
worried about carbon, nuclear power is a solution. Now, we need
to deal with the storage capacity, both long term and interim.
But my question is about the interim storage. Are there safety
concerns about storing the spent nuclear facilities on the
locations they are now?
Mr. Kuczynski. No. We have constructed our spent fuel pools
and our dry cask storage facilities. They meet strict
environmental, safety, security requirements. And recent
studies have shown both of safe for the foreseeable future. And
that was a basis of the continued storage rule.
Mr. Green. What is the cost for the Department of Energy's
failure to take title of that spent fuel? Have you all
estimated that?
Mr. Kuczynski. I can give you some ballparks, every cask
that we load on the dry cask I would just say it is about $2
million. And we have about 100 of them in our system. We plan
to do about 25 of them a year going forward. So that is
ballpark. And we do not recover all of those funds through
litigation. In fact----
Mr. Green. I assume you have to go, the ratepayers are
actually paying for that?
Mr. Kuczynski. Absolutely.
Mr. Green. Would opening an interim storage facility help
relieve many of those storage concerns, nuclear, and I assume
the other companies around the world, around the country
anyway?
Mr. Kuczynski. The interim storage?
Mr. Green. Yes.
Mr. Kuczynski. I think that is an avenue that this
committee ought to look at. Our position is the long-term
repository is the method. The statutory limit of, I think, the
capacity is not necessarily technically based. I think we ought
to pursue all storage at Yucca. Interim at Yucca would make
more sense to me than interim storage at other facilities. Each
time you build something new and then have to continue to move,
it makes it more expensive for everybody.
Mr. Green. Well, obviously, we need to develop a long-term
storage. But I would also like to see on a lot of the
companies, including the south Texas project that I supported
back as a State legislator in the 1970s, I would like to see
expansion there. But we do need to have long-term storage. And,
ultimately, I think we ought to take responsibility as a
Federal Government for the interim storage in locations that
are around the country. Maybe they are not all like what
Southern Company does or Sacramento or someplace else. But I
think it is our responsibility. We need to deal with it.
Mr. Kuczynski. In general, we are not opposed. However, I
think the law states that licensing of the long-term facility
is first priority and then interim is after that.
Mr. Green. OK. Mr. Chairman, I will yield back my time.
Thank you for the hearing.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
We have 45 seconds before the votes are closed on the
floor. I really want to appreciate and thank my colleagues for
being really precise and attempting to be to the point.
After consultation with the minority, we have agreed to
adjourn in a minute. So we won't come back for additional
questions. We want to thank you for your testimony.
I want to remind you that the hearing record is open for 10
business days, so you may get questions submitted for the
record. If you would then reply to us in that case, we would
appreciate it.
With that, again, thank you very much. And the hearing is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:12 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Thank you, Chairman Shimkus, for holding this hearing and
for your continued leadership on this important issue. I also
thank the witnesses for being here this morning.
It's a pleasure to welcome Commissioner Greg White, who has
served on the Michigan Public Service Commission since 2009.
Commissioner White's service and national leadership on nuclear
issues will be missed when his term concludes this summer.
33 years after the Nuclear Waste Policy Act was enacted
into law, the federal government continues to struggle to
fulfill its legal obligations to properly dispose of our spent
nuclear fuel from commercial power plants, and our defense
nuclear waste. Ironically, it's the lack of appropriations to
finish out the job that is forcing additional costs on to
American consumers and taxpayers.
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission, in partnership with the
Department of Energy, has a statutory obligation to complete
the licensing process for Yucca Mountain. To support this
effort, the House of Representatives recently passed an
appropriations bill with strong funding levels for DOE and NRC
explicitly for this purpose. Additionally, the bill prohibited
DOE from walking away from Yucca Mountain.
But after 30 years and $15 billion spent on this permanent
repository we seem to be at a standstill, and the current
administration's nuclear waste management policy appears to be
simply ``delay and complicate.''
For example, in March the administration announced it would
separate the disposal path of material generated by defense
activities from commercial spent nuclear fuel and pursue a new
repository solely for defense waste. This announcement marked a
major departure from a 30 year-old bipartisan policy to dispose
of commercial and defense waste in a single repository.
Recently there has been renewed interest and urgency in
solving our nuclear waste management system deadlock. Breaking
this deadlock will likely require legislation. Some suggest an
interim storage program, intended to take title to commercial
spent nuclear fuel and move defense nuclear waste on an
accelerated timeframe. However, the Nuclear Waste Policy Act
blocks licensing of an interim storage facility until
construction of a permanent geological repository is authorized
by the NRC. Linking an interim storage site to the development
of a permanent repository could represent a breakthrough in
nuclear waste management policy. But we must ensure that spent
nuclear fuel will not be stored in an ``interim'' facility
forever.
Other proposals emphasize moving ``stranded fuel,'' or
spent nuclear fuel from shutdown reactors. Despite the urgency
many of us feel about these closed down sites, taking care of
them should not be pursued to the exclusion of dealing with
fuel throughout the entire system.
I hope today's hearing will advance the discussion to break
the current impasse in our nation's nuclear waste management
policy. Our witnesses today bring years of experience and deep
commitment to resolving the nuclear waste question.
----------

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
