- OVERSIGHT OF THE PIPELINE SAFETY, REGULATORY CERTAINTY, AND JOB CREATION ACT OF 2011 AND RELATED ISSUES

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF THE PIPELINE SAFETY,
REGULATORY CERTAINTY, AND JOB CREATION ACT OF 2011 AND RELATED ISSUES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 14, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-67

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

___________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
97-940    WASHINGTON : 2016
_________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                     Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               JERRY McNERNEY, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        PAUL TONKO, New York
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREGG HARPER, Vice Chairman          GENE GREEN, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     LOIS CAPPS, California
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             KATHY CASTOR, Florida
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   PETER WELCH, Vermont
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILL FLORES, Texas                   FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma               officio)
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     3
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     7

Witnesses

Stacy Cummings, Interim Executive Director, Pipeline and
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration......................     8
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Stan Wise, Commissioner, Georgia Public Service Commission (on
behalf of the National Association of Regulatory Utility
Commissioners).................................................    56
Prepared statement \1\.......................................    58
Donald Santa, President and CEO, Interstate Natural Gas
Association of America.........................................    75
Prepared statement...........................................    77
Ron Bradley, Vice President of Gas Operations, PECO Energy (on
behalf of the American Gas Association)........................    84
Prepared statement...........................................    86
Andrew Black, President and CEO, Association of Oil Pipe Lines...   103
Prepared statement...........................................   105
Carl Weimer, Executive Director, Pipeline Safety Trust...........   116
Prepared statement...........................................   118
Dianne Black, Assistant Director of Planning and Development,
County of Santa Barbara, California............................   138
Prepared statement...........................................   140

Submitted Material

Corrective Action Orders from the Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety Administration to the Plains Pipeline Company.   160

----------
\1\ The addendum to Mr. Wise's testimony is available at: http://
docs.house.gov/meetings/if/if03/20150714/103737/hhrg-114-if03-
wstate-wises-20150714.pdf.

OVERSIGHT OF THE PIPELINE SAFETY, REGULATORY CERTAINTY, AND JOB
CREATION ACT OF 2011 AND RELATED ISSUES

----------

JULY 14, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:16 a.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed
Whitfield (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Whitfield, Olson, Shimkus,
Pitts, Latta, Harper, McKinley, Kinzinger, Griffith, Johnson,
Long, Flores, Mullin, Hudson, Upton (ex officio), Rush,
McNerney, Tonko, Green, Capps, Sarbanes, Loebsack, and Pallone
(ex officio).
Staff present: Nick Abraham, Legislative Associate, Energy
and Power; Will Batson, Legislative Clerk; Leighton Brown,
Press Assistant; Allison Busbee, Policy Coordinator, Energy and
Power; Tom Hassenboehler, Chief Counsel, Energy and Power; A.T.
Johnston, Senior Policy Advisor; Brandon Mooney, Professional
Staff Member, Energy and Power; Mark Ratner, Policy Advisor to
the Chairman; Dan Schneider, Press Secretary; Caitlin Haberman,
Democratic Professional Staff Member; Ashley Jones, Democratic
Director of Communications, Member Services and Outreach; Rick
Kessler, Democratic Senior Advisor and Staff Director, Energy
and Environment; John Marshall, Democratic Policy Coordinator;
and Alexander Ratner, Democratic Policy Analyst.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Mr. Whitfield. I would like to call the hearing to order
this morning, and I would like to recognize myself for a 5-
minute opening statement.
This morning we are going to be conducting an oversight
hearing on the Pipeline Safety, Regulatory Certainty, and Job
Creation Act of 2011, and its implementation of the Pipeline
and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA). I
certainly want to welcome the interim Executive Director of
PHMSA, as well as a second panel that includes representatives
of the oil and natural gas industry, local government and
witnesses with other perspectives.
It has been more than 3 years since the Pipeline Safety Act
was enacted, and PHMSA's implementation has not been
satisfactory. Many of the mandates; at least 17 out of 42
included in the Pipeline Safety Act, have not been completed,
including several described as key mandates with potentially
large impacts on pipeline operations nationwide. The potential
consequences of these delays are serious. In May, a significant
oil spill occurred in Santa Barbara, California, and just days
ago the same company reported another incident in Illinois. The
committee has written letters both to PHMSA and this company
seeking more information. It cannot be said for certain that
full implementation of the Pipeline Safety Act would have made
a difference in Santa Barbara or any other individual oil spill
or natural gas pipeline explosions. Nonetheless, we owe it to
the American people to ensure that all reasonable steps are
taken to ensure the safety of the Nation's pipelines. The
Pipeline Safety Act includes a number of such steps that have
yet to be put into action.
The increase in domestic oil and natural gas production is
clearly good news, but it does present significant
infrastructure challenges. Whether it is oil, refined products,
or natural gas, there is inherent risk in moving high volumes
of product through aging and sometimes inadequate
infrastructure. Part of the answer lies in constructing new
pipelines and replacing old ones, but perhaps even more
important is applying new technology to ensure the safety of
the existing system.
Many experts believe that pipelines are the safest means of
transporting natural gas and liquid hydrocarbons, but the Santa
Barbara spill and other recent incidents underscore the fact
that there is considerable room for improvement. It is
important to understand why the timely implementation of the
Pipeline Safety Act has proven so difficult, and particularly
since more money has been given to PHMSA, and we would like to
know how PHMSA can expedite this matter.
And as we begin to look ahead to reauthorization of this
same statute, we are also interested in learning about PHMSA's
priorities and if additional legislative steps should be taken.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Ed Whitfield

Pipeline safety oversight is an important and ongoing
priority with this subcommittee. This morning we will conduct
our first oversight hearing on the Pipeline Safety, Regulatory
Certainty, and Job Creation Act of 2011 and its implementation
by the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration
(PHMSA). I welcome the interim Executive Director of PHMSA as
well as a second panel that includes representatives of the oil
and natural gas industry, local government and other
perspectives.
It has been more than three years since the Pipeline Safety
Act was enacted, and PHMSA's implementation has not been
satisfactory. Many of the mandates--at least 17 out of 42
included in the Pipeline Safety Act, have not been completed,
including several described as key mandates with potentially
large impacts on pipeline operations nationwide.
The potential consequences of these delays are serious. In
May, a significant oil spill occurred in Santa Barbara,
California, and just days ago the same company reported another
incident in Illinois. We have written letters both to PHMSA and
this company seeking more information.
It cannot be said for certain that full implementation of
the Pipeline Safety Act would have made a difference in Santa
Barbara or any other individual oil spill or natural gas
pipeline explosion. Nonetheless, we owe it to the American
people to ensure that all reasonable steps are taken to ensure
the safety of the nation's pipelines. The Pipeline Safety Act
includes a number of such steps that have yet to be put into
action.
The increase in domestic oil and gas production is clearly
good news, but it does present significant infrastructure
challenges. Whether it is oil, refined products, or natural
gas, there is inherent risk in moving high volumes of product
through aging and sometimes inadequate infrastructure. Part of
the answer lies in constructing new pipelines and replacing old
ones, but perhaps even more important is applying new
technology to ensure the safety of the existing system.
Many experts believe that pipelines are the safest means of
transporting natural gas and liquid hydrocarbons, but the Santa
Barbara spill and other recent incidents underscore the fact
that there is considerable room for improvement. It is
important to understand why the timely implementation of the
Pipeline Safety Act has proven so difficult and how PHMSA can
expedite matters. And as we begin to look ahead to
reauthorization of this statute, I am also interested in
learning about PHMSA's priorities and if additional legislative
steps should be taken.

Mr. Whitfield. We have two panels of witnesses this
morning, and I will be introducing them right before they give
their opening statement.
At this time, I would like to recognize the gentleman from
Illinois, Mr. Rush, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
important and timely hearing today on the issue of pipeline
safety oversight.
Mr. Chairman, in the past, the issue of pipeline safety has
been one that we have worked on in a bipartisan matter, and it
is my hope and my expectation that we will continue to work on
this important matter in the same tradition as we address this
very, very important issue in this Congress.
Mr. Chairman, unfortunately, the issue of pipeline safety
too often takes a backseat to other pressing matters until
there is an accident or there is a tragedy that focuses the
public's attention back on this issue. Of course, today's
hearings take place against a backdrop of the major Santa
Barbara pipeline breach that spilled 100,000 gallons of crude
oil in May, polluting the Pacific Ocean, damaging Southern
California beaches, and killing hundreds of thousands of
wildlife.
Additionally, Mr. Chairman, just over the weekend there was
another smaller, but no less troubling spill, in my home State
of Illinois from a station operated by the Plains All American,
the very same company that owned the California pipeline that
ruptured just 2 months ago. Two ruptures in 2 months, Mr.
Chairman.
So, Mr. Chairman, while this subcommittee continues to
debate issues such as fast-tracking the pipeline permitting
process, I think that it is imperative that we also examine the
safety mechanisms we currently have in place to ensure that
they are working effectively. And whether there are
deficiencies in areas of resources or leadership, I believe
there is much more work to be done in order for Americans to
feel a greater sense of confidence in the agencies that are
responsible for pipeline safety oversight.
Once again, Mr. Chairman, I applaud you for holding this
timely hearing today, and I look forward to hearing from all of
our expert witnesses.
And with that, I yield back. I yield to Mrs. Capps for what
time I have left.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Ranking
Member, Mr. Rush, for holding this hearing and giving me the
opportunity to provide an opening statement.
I want to thank Chairman Upton and Ranking Member Pallone
for a strong leadership within our committee on these issues,
and for working with me to incorporate oversight of the recent
oil spill in my district into this hearing. And I want to
welcome my constituent, Dianne Black, from the County of Santa
Barbara, who will be testifying on the second panel today.
And as was already mentioned, nearly 2 months ago, over
100,000 gallons of crude oil spilled from the ruptured Plains
All American pipeline into the coastline of my district. The
oil gushed from the ruptured pipeline, flowed down a hill,
through a culvert, onto the beach and into the ocean along the
pristine Gaviota Coast. From there, tens of thousands of
gallons of oil spread for miles down the coast, closing popular
beaches, valuable fisheries, devastating wildlife, and bringing
back horrible memories of the Platform A disaster more than 45
years ago.
Since that devastating oil spill in 1969, the Santa Barbara
community has dedicated itself to learning from that tragedy
and working to ensure that it does not happen again. Sadly,
even in a community as determined as ours, May 19 reminded us
that spills are inevitable as long as we continue to depend on
oil for so much of our energy needs.
I know the Plains spill in my district certainly is not the
first pipeline failure, nor will it be the last. Time and time
again, we have seen oil and gas pipelines fail, causing
irreparable harm to lives, property, and the environment. Just
last Friday, as was mentioned as well, we saw yet another oil
spill in Illinois from a Plains pipeline; the very same company
responsible for the spill in my district. These spills remind
us that we have a responsibility to do everything we can to
prevent spills from happening, but also to be prepared to
minimize the damage when they do occur. That is why today's
hearing and our work to reauthorize federal pipeline safety
programs are so important. As a result of the Plains spill in
my district we have already gained valuable insights and
identified weaknesses that must be addressed.
I want to thank Chairman Upton and Ranking Member Pallone
for working with me to fully investigate this spill, ensure
this Administration is following through on its overdue
pipeline safety reforms.
Over the years, regardless of who is in the White House,
federal pipeline regulations have been weak and ineffective.
There is a reason that the company that built the pipeline that
ruptured in my district sued in 1998 to have it be regulated by
the Federal Government, rather than the County of Santa
Barbara. They knew federal regulators would ask fewer
questions, impose fewer restrictions. This cannot be allowed to
continue.
I recognize progress has been made in recent years. We
still have a long way to go. While PHMSA has certainly dragged
its feet in implementing key reforms, Congress has also failed
to provide the agency with the resources it needs to meet the
growing demand. I often hear many of my colleagues tout efforts
to support the rapid growth in domestic oil and gas development
and pipeline construction in recent years. While I don't share
necessarily their enthusiasm for this development, I hope we
can all agree that we must also support efforts to ensure
federal regulators have the resources they need to keep pace
with this growth. We simply can't have one without the other.
Mr. Chairman, these are just a few of many issues I hope
this committee can examine closely as we work to reauthorize
pipeline safety programs. These issues have traditionally been
very strongly bipartisan. I hope that continues throughout this
process.
And I apologize for going way over Mr. Rush's time, and I
yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentlelady yields.
At this time, recognize the gentleman of the full
committee, Mr. Upton, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So today, this subcommittee returns to the very important
issue of pipeline safety, and I welcome the Interim Executive
Director Stacy Cummings of PHMSA to this hearing, and I look
forward to the prompt confirmation of a permanent
administrator, as much work needs to be done in the months
ahead.
This committee has a long bipartisan history on pipeline
safety issues, including passage of the Pipeline Safety,
Regulatory Certainty, and Job Creation Act of 2011, Upton-
Dingell. That law held particular significance to me, as it
came in the aftermath of a serious oil spill into a tributary
of the Kalamazoo River just outside of my district in Michigan.
Following the spill, I worked closely with my friend, John
Dingell, on a bipartisan basis, as we also worked closely with
our friends on the Transportation and Infrastructure Committee
to get the Pipeline Safety Act on the books, signed by
President Obama. The law contains numerous provisions designed
to reduce the likelihood of similar pipeline spills, and
minimize the impact of those when they do occur. However, the
Pipeline Safety Act will not achieve its primary objectives
until it is fully implemented, and I am most disappointed that
more than \1/3\ of its requirements remain incomplete long
after congressionally mandated deadlines have passed. This
includes several of the law's most important mandates, such as
automatic and remote-controlled shutoff valves, leak detection,
accident and incident notification, excess flow valves, and
maximum allowable operating pressure. Some of these provisions,
I am convinced, would have made a difference in the recent oil
spill in Santa Barbara had they been implemented by PHMSA in a
timely manner.
In the last couple of days, PHMSA has announced proposals
for two of these overdue mandates, and while these late steps
are certainly in the right direction, there is no question
something needs to change with the way PHMSA is implementing
the Pipeline Safety Act. I intend to ask questions to find out
what more Congress can do to speed up the implementation of
those requirements.
The urgency for pipeline safety is greater than ever. With
record levels of natural gas and liquid hydrocarbons being
produced in this country and throughout North America, the
volumes traversing pipelines are setting records. And although
pipelines are among the safest means of transport, the Santa
Barbara spill is a harsh reminder that rigorous risk-based
enforcement needs to be a priority.
This committee takes pipeline safety very seriously. That
is why we insist that new pipelines be built with state-of-the-
art safety features. It is also why we passed the Pipeline
Safety Act to improve the safety of the 2 \1/2\ million miles
of existing pipelines throughout the country. This includes
many old and potentially vulnerable pipelines, such as one that
carries oil beneath the Upper Peninsula and the Lower Peninsula
through the Straits of Mackinac in Michigan. I think we can all
agree that it is much, much better to be in a position to
prevent incidents before they happen rather than to respond
after they occur.
In the last hour, the State of Michigan released its own
report on pipeline safety, including specific recommendation on
the Straits Pipelines, as well as other steps that can be taken
to improve safety, including a better relationship between the
state and PHMSA. I look forward to studying the report and
commend the state for its commitment to pipeline safety.
As we look ahead to continued implementation of the
Pipeline Safety and to the law's reauthorization, we will
insist on greatly improved performance from PHMSA, and this
hearing is certainly an important step towards getting us to
where we need to be.
And I will yield the minute if any of my side wants a
minute. If not, I will yield back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Today, this subcommittee returns to the very important
issue of pipeline safety. I welcome the Interim Executive
Director Stacy Cummings of the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials
Safety Administration (PHMSA) to this hearing, and I look
forward to the prompt confirmation of a permanent
Administrator, as much work needs to be done in the months
ahead.
This committee has a long, bipartisan history on pipeline
safety issues, including passage of the Pipeline Safety,
Regulatory Certainty, and Job Creation Act of 2011. That law
held particular significance to me, as it came in the aftermath
of a serious oil spill into a tributary of the Kalamazoo River
just outside my district in Michigan. Following the spill, I
worked closely with my friend John Dingell on a bipartisan
basis--we also worked closely with our friends on the
Transportation and Infrastructure Committee to get the Pipeline
Safety Act on the books. The law contains numerous provisions
designed to reduce the likelihood of similar pipeline spills
and minimize the impact of those that do occur.
However, the Pipeline Safety Act will not achieve its
primary objectives until it is fully implemented, and I am
disappointed that more than one-third of its requirements
remain incomplete long after congressionally mandated deadlines
have passed. This includes several of the law's most important
mandates, such as automatic and remote-controlled shutoff
valves, leak detection, accident and incident notification,
excess flow valves, and maximum allowable operating pressure.
Some of these provisions probably would have made a difference
in the recent oil spill in Santa Barbara had they been
implemented by PHMSA in a timely manner.
In the last few days, PHMSA has announced proposals for two
of these overdue mandates. While these late steps are in the
right direction, there is no question something needs to change
with the way PHMSA is implementing the Pipeline Safety Act. I
intend to ask some tough questions to find out what more
Congress can do to speed up the implementation of these
requirements.
The urgency for pipeline safety is greater than ever. With
record levels of natural gas and liquid hydrocarbons being
produced in this country and throughout North America, the
volumes traversing pipelines are setting records. And although
pipelines are among the safest means of transport, the Santa
Barbara spill is a harsh reminder that rigorous risk-based
enforcement needs to be a priority
This committee takes pipeline safety very seriously. That
is why we insist that new pipelines be built with state-of-the-
art safety features. It is also why we passed the Pipeline
Safety Act to improve the safety of the 2.6 million miles of
existing pipelines throughout the country. This includes many
old and potentially vulnerable pipelines, such as one that
carries oil beneath the Straits of Mackinac in northern
Michigan. I think we can all agree that it is much, much better
to be in a position to prevent incidents before they happen
rather than to respond after they occur. Just a few minutes ago
the state of Michigan released its own report on pipeline
safety, including specific recommendations on the Straits
Pipelines as well as other steps that can be taken to improve
safety including a better relationship between the state and
PHMSA. I look forward to reading the report and commend the
state for its commitment to pipeline safety.
As we look ahead to continued implementation of the
Pipeline Safety Act and to the law's reauthorization, we will
insist on greatly improved performance from PHMSA, and this
hearing is an important step towards getting us to where we
need to be. Thank you.

Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back the balance of his
time.
At this time, recognize the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Pallone, for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you and
Mr. Rush holding this long-overdue oversight hearing on the
2011 Pipeline Safety Act.
The vast network of transition pipelines in this country
are considered by most Americans as out of sight and out of
mind, but when something goes wrong, the presence of these
facilities can make themselves known in the most devastating
and sometimes deadly ways. Unfortunately, there are one too
many examples of this since 2010, first in San Bruno,
California, then in Marshall, Michigan, and most recently in
Santa Barbara. There the rupture of a Plains All American
pipeline spilled over 100,000 gallons of crude oil onto the
coastline. And I am no stranger to the damage that can be
caused by pipeline failures. Twenty-one years ago, a pipeline
exploded in my district in Edison, New Jersey, destroying
around 300 homes, melting cars, and lighting up the sky from
New York to Pennsylvania. Unfortunately, that loud and powerful
explosion was met with a staggering level of inaction by the
Department of Transportation's Office of Pipeline Safety, and
its parent organization, the Pipeline and Hazardous Material
Safety Administration, or PHMSA.
Two decades and four reauthorizations later, PHMSA has made
little progress. The shortfalls of the agency have drawn the
attention of industry and safety advocates alike, as well as
Democrats and Republicans. I am deeply concerned about PHMSA's
inability to carry out its mission, numerous safety
recommendations, or congressional mandates. Almost 5 years
after the last reauthorization, it is especially troubling how
many mandates have yet to be implemented by the agency. Many of
the outstanding requirements are critically important to
safety, such as those dealing with operating pressure, leak
detection, and automatic or remote-controlled shut-off valves.
The lack of inaction on automatic and remote-controlled shut-
off valves is particularly galling considering the NTSB
recommended expanded use of these damage prevention
technologies 20 years ago. I remember that during the whole New
Durham explosion, again, in my district in Edison.
Even more troubling is the discovery that OMB is also to
blame. Last night, the committee inadvertently received a
version of PHMSA's testimony that had been marked up by OMB,
and OMB's comments clearly showed concern over being called-out
over this outrageous delay, asking whether PHMSA has a
``planned response to a question about why this rule has been
under EO 12866 review so long. If so, could you provide a
summary of that response?''
Perhaps, Mr. Chairman, we need to get OMB up here to
explain to the American people and this committee as to why
they have held up these proposed rules for so long. Progress
must finally be made to help ensure the safety of our pipeline
system, and I hope that this hearing leads to that.
I am about to yield, Mr. Chairman, but I just want to say,
I was first elected to Congress not long before that explosion
in Edison, and we were very fortunate that--I think one person
had a heart attack and lost their life because of the
explosion, but there wasn't anybody who directly was impacted,
although, obviously, that person was who had the heart attack.
And for several years after that, we made a number of
recommendations including the remote shut-off valves, but I
really feel like there is a lot of hoopla when these explosions
or tragedies occur, but then not much happens afterwards in
terms of preventing them again. So hopefully, we will get
something out of this hearing today and the committee's action.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
And that concludes the opening statements.
So on our first panel, we have one person, and that is Ms.
Stacy Cummings, who is the Interim Executive Director for the
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration.
So, Ms. Cummings, if you would come forward, and you will
be recognized for 5 minutes for your opening statement, and at
the end of that time, we will give members an opportunity to
ask you some questions. So thank you very much for being with
us, and be sure to get your microphone up close and turn it on.
And you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF STACY CUMMINGS, INTERIM EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
PIPELINE AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SAFETY ADMINISTRATION

Ms. Cummings. Thank you for that introduction.
Chairman Upton, Ranking Member Pallone, Chairman Whitfield,
Ranking Member Rush, members of the subcommittee, thank you for
inviting me to testify today on the Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety Administration's progress in implementing the
Pipeline Safety Act of 2011, and thank you for providing PHMSA
with the tools we need to execute our pipeline safety mission.
My name is Stacy Cummings. I am the Interim Executive
Director of PHMSA. In May, I traveled to the site of the Plains
Pipeline oil spill in Santa Barbara, witnessing for myself its
effect on the environment and nearby communities. The spill
disrupted businesses, threatened wildlife, and impacted local
residents and tourism. This spill was unacceptable, and
Americans deserve to be confident that the pipelines in their
communities are operating safely.
What I saw in Santa Barbara as well was PHMSA's rapid and
comprehensive response to the spill. Immediately following
notification, PHMSA personnel were on the scene, where we
remain actively involved now. Our inspectors continue to
conduct a comprehensive investigation into the cause of this
failure, and we continue to support the unified command's spill
response efforts, lead by the Coast Guard and EPA. PHMSA
quickly issued a corrective action order to Plains Pipeline,
and the affected pipeline remains shut down under our
authority. We will make sure that the operator identifies the
root cause of the failure, and mitigates any additional risks
before we allow them to restart that pipeline.
I was very impressed by our PHMSA team in the western
region, as well as throughout the country. It is truly an honor
to lead a workforce so clearly dedicated to its safety mission.
Here in Washington, PHMSA continues to take action to
successfully meet the requirements of each mandate in the
Pipeline Safety Act. I speak for the entire agency when I say
that we share your concern and sense of urgency. We are
committed to satisfying every mandate.
The rulemaking process is methodical, inclusive, and
transparent. It enables PHMSA to fully consider stakeholder
input. In the past month, PHMSA has welcomed new executive
leadership, and with the support of the Office of Management
and Budget, we have issued two proposed rules and one final
rule. Those rules address three mandates from the Pipeline
Safety Act, and five NTSB recommendations. We continue to work
to advance significant rulemakings on natural gas and hazardous
liquid pipelines. These proposed rules are anticipated to be
published by the end of this year. But rulemaking is not the
only tool that PHMSA uses to improve pipeline safety. As we saw
in Santa Barbara, pipeline failures don't wait on the
rulemaking process, and neither will PHMSA. We are first and
foremost a safety agency. We execute our mission on several
fronts with one goal in mind; to drive down the pipeline
failure rate to zero. In addition to developing safety
regulations, we focus on reducing risk by reaching out to the
regulated community to ensure that they both understand and
comply with federal safety regulations. We conduct integrated
inspections, we hold operators accountable through enforcement,
we provide grants to our local and state pipeline safety
partners, and we also fund research to develop innovative
safety solutions. For these reasons, pipeline failures are low
probability events, even as risk factors increase.
Unfortunately, when pipeline failures do occur, they can be
fatal and costly. At PHMSA, we think that one pipeline failure
is one too many.
PHMSA was founded just 10 years ago, and yet so much has
changed since then. Our Nation's energy supply and
transportation pipeline network continue to grow exponentially.
These changes are tremendous opportunities for our Nation, and
provide an opportunity for PHMSA to evolve with the industry we
regulate. Whether it is through smarter data or funding
research for better detection technology, PHMSA will weigh and
act on a range of options for implementing innovative pipeline
safety solutions. PHMSA is committed to working with this
committee to ensure that we are well positioned to adapt to a
modern and evolving infrastructure. Americans deserve to be
confident that PHMSA is protecting people and the environment.
We take this charge very seriously.
Again, thank you for your support. I look forward to
answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Cummings follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Ms. Cummings, thank you very much. And I am
going to defer my questions, but I am going to recognize at
this time, Mr. Olson, of Texas, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the chair. And welcome, Director
Cummings. It is always great to have someone who served our
Navy, as the daughter of a career naval officer.
Ms. Cummings. Thank you.
Mr. Olson. My home State of Texas is no stranger to
pipelines. According to EIA, we have nearly 60,000 miles of gas
pipelines. Oil lines cover the state as well. They are vital to
our economy, to the Nation's economy, as they carry the
products that keep America moving.
It is not just oil and gas in pipelines. Water pipelines
can blow out as well. We saw that last year when Sunset
Boulevard became Sunset River. A 93-year-old pipeline blew out,
sending 20 billion gallons of water all over the campus of
UCLA. We know that pipelines are the safest way to move oil and
gas, but just like airplanes, when the worst happens, it can be
tragic. People can be killed. Eight people lost their lives in
San Bruno. Eight people in their homes. And that is why we
should always keep moving forward with pipeline safety.
It seems clear that PHMSA was never going to make our
deadlines that we imposed with the most recent Pipeline Safety
bill. And when PHMSA has a long list of new rules to write, do
you try to triage them and focus on the ones that are more
important to keeping people safe? How are you working through
that list?
Ms. Cummings. Thank you for that question, Congressman.
Yes, we had 42 mandates in the 2011 Pipeline Safety Act, of
which we have completed 26. We are working on every single one
of those 42 mandates, and in the case of the mandates that are
going to be addressed through rulemakings, we haven't been
waiting on the rulemaking process to get information out to our
stakeholders, to the industry, and to the public. We have
sanctioned studies, and we have issued reports to Congress. We
have held public meetings and workshops. We have issued advance
notices of proposed rulemaking to help us gather stakeholder
data, and in some cases we have proposed rules that we have
issued, like the two that we were able to issue in the last
month. Those are all very important ways that we get
information out to the stakeholders and to industry as we
continue to work to fulfill the remainder of the 42 mandates,
again, many of them with formal rules that we are in process
working on.
Mr. Olson. So 42; 26 down, 16 to go----
Ms. Cummings. Right.
Mr. Olson [continuing]. If my math is right. Keep working
hard on that.
Ms. Cummings. We will.
Mr. Olson. My second question, I hope to ask this to the
second panel as well--if I call the city hall in the village of
Pleak back home in Texas, and ask Mayor Bittner or Fire Chief
Gania has PHMSA reached out to you about pipeline safety, what
do you think they will say? Put it another way, how much have
you done outreach to the first responders and leaders at local
communities?
Ms. Cummings. I hope that what he will say is, yes,
absolutely, PHMSA has reached out. We reach out to our
stakeholders in many ways. I mentioned a couple of them being
public meetings and workshops. We partner with the first
responder community to make sure that they have access to
training. We also have several grants. About \1/3\ of our
budget goes to grants. And some of those grants are technical
assistance grants where the mayor or the first responder
community can actually apply for a grant with PHMSA to get
technical assistance to provide training, to do outreach to the
public, to invest in equipment that is going to help them
respond to a pipeline accident if it were to occur. So there
are many opportunities for stakeholders such as your mayor and
the first responder community to interact with PHMSA, and for
us to help them be prepared.
Mr. Olson. I will check with them and confirm those.
Ms. Cummings. Thank you.
Mr. Olson. Great, thanks for that answer. Final question,
you have always kept the focus on risk-based standards over the
years, and that is appropriate, but how does this risk-based
standards agenda move forward, evolve with these new
rulemakings?
Ms. Cummings. One of the most important changes to the
pipeline safety program over the last 10 to 15 years has been
our implementation of integrity management. Integrity
management is a risk-based approach where we require the
operator to identify, assess, and mitigate risks associated
with their specific pipeline. The operator is in the best
position to understand the uniqueness of the location, the
condition of their pipeline, as well as what is moving through
their pipeline. And so our program for integrity management is
our risk-based approach, and we are going to continue to
improve it, enhance it, and expand it through the rulemakings
that you are going to be seen proposed over the next year.
Mr. Olson. Thank you.
I am out of time. Yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, recognize the gentleman from
Illinois, Mr. Rush, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. Ms. Cummings, I really want to thank you so much
for being here today with us, and I know your job is not an
easy one and you are the Interim Executive Director, and I
enjoyed our recent discussions.
And I would like to--before I begin, if you can give me an
update on the pipeline meeting that happened on Friday near
Highland, Illinois. Is the spill contained? And I have heard
that the oil has reached a tributary of Silver Lake concerning
the water supply for the citizens of Highland, and I would like
to know if the water supply is safe, has it been affected, and
give me an update if you will on the clean-up efforts that
PHMSA is conducting there or overseeing there near Highland,
Illinois.
Ms. Cummings. Happy to, and thank you for the question.
Mr. Rush. Yes.
Ms. Cummings. On Friday in Pocahontas, Illinois, a pipeline
fitting at a pump station blew out, discharging about 100
barrels of crude onto the ground. The spill did migrate down a
ditch into a creek, as you mentioned, and it did threaten the
water source. It was heading in the direction of a reservoir
that held a water source for Highland, Illinois. We were
notified of the spill through the National Response Center,
which is the appropriate way to be notified. We immediately
sent a PHMSA investigator to be on the scene, and that
investigator was on the scene by 4:00 p.m. that very day. An
incident command center was set up. The State of Illinois had
the lead on that. And what they did was they managed the
response, they immediately went in to stop the flow of oil, and
they were able to stop the flow of oil before it got to the
point where it threatened the water source. So as was confirmed
to me yesterday through an update from our team, the water
source was--oil did not get into the water source--into that
reservoir.
The clean-up effort did work. They used booms, and then for
the past several days, they have been using different methods
to recover the oil. And they are in the process of continuing
to do that.
I can get you a very, very specific update in writing for
the record if you would like, but I would like to point out
that this was Plains Pipeline, which is the same operator from
the Santa Barbara spill.
Today, we are issuing a corrective action order to Plains
specifically related to this spill in Illinois, and I sent a
letter yesterday to the CEO of Plains Pipeline, and he and his
team are going to be here in D.C. at PHMSA, and we are going to
talk to them on Friday about their safety record, safety
culture, and what they are doing to address these two issues,
but also the safety of their entire system.
Mr. Rush. In your opinion, do most mayors, county
executives, local leaders even know what pipelines are in their
jurisdiction and what those pipelines are carrying, and if they
wanted to obtain this information, can they get it from PHMSA?
Ms. Cummings. Yes. We have an online tool called the
National Pipeline Mapping System, NPMS. That tool in its
entirety is limited in access, but what we do is we have
individual access for people based on the information that they
need to know. So a local executive, a local emergency
responder, or a state-level emergency responder or executive
would have the ability to apply for a password----
Mr. Rush. Yes.
Ms. Cummings [continuing]. And they would have role-based
access to the information that they need to identify what
pipelines are in their area. And if anybody needs any help
accessing that or getting access, we would be happy to provide
that assistance.
Mr. Rush. Most citizens of my state would really be
surprised to know the number of pipelines, an enormous amount
of pipelines that are located in the State of Illinois. Do you
have any idea about the percentage of the Nation's pipelines
that go through the State of Illinois?
Ms. Cummings. I think you asked the percentage of the 2.6
million?
Mr. Rush. Yes.
Ms. Cummings. No, I can't tell you the exact percentage. I
can absolutely get you that for the record, but I agree with
you, there are many pipelines in the State of Illinois that we
regulate as well as that are regulated by the state.
Mr. Rush. I was told, Mr. Chairman, that in one part of my
district, Will County, \1/8\ of the state's entire pipelines go
through--and this is a small quadrant of my district in the
State of Illinois.
I want to thank you again, Ms. Cummings. And I yield back,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, recognize the chairman of the
full committee, Mr. Upton, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Upton. Again, appreciate the hearing. And as I
indicated in my statement, there are a number of us that are
not happy with the failure to really implement a number of the
issues that were signed into law a number of years ago.
Literally about \1/3\ as we calculate, \1/3\ of some of those
regulations.
So I guess I have a question. As we look to reauthorizing
this bill, which, as you know, expires the end of September,
should we be providing more direction to PHMSA to prioritize
the outstanding mandates, or should we allow PHMSA to finalize
the regs required by the 2011 law before determining what
changes need to be made? What is your suggested course?
Ms. Cummings. We do have significant progress that we have
made on the mandates, over and above the ones that we have
completed, and we do appreciate your patience in completing
those mandates. Every single one of them is critical and
important for pipeline safety. Each one of those mandates are
as important to PHMSA as they are to you, and we have a plan
moving forward to complete them.
We do think that during the reauthorization process, we
would like to sit down with the committee staff, we would like
to sit down with you, talk about specific ways that we can use
reauthorization to help us expand pipeline safety, improve
pipeline safety, but we do recognize that we have a lot of work
to do and we are very, very focused on it, and we have a plan
to complete every one of these mandates.
Mr. Upton. So one of the easiest ones, in my book, to
implement was the change that we did that a company had to
report formally, on a timely basis----
Ms. Cummings. Yes.
Mr. Upton [continuing]. And we changed that to say it had
to be within an hour.
Ms. Cummings. Yes.
Mr. Upton. We look at the Santa Barbara spill a couple of
weeks ago, and that spill, as I understand it from talking to
Lois Capps, what went on for many, many hours. I mean how is it
not easy to say it has to be done within 1 hour, and it doesn't
happen, here we are 4 years later. That was one of the big
issues that we had in the Kalamazoo River spill in Calhoun
County back in 2010. They did know that it was going on but
they didn't report it until even perhaps a couple of days
later. One billion dollars in clean-up.
Ms. Cummings. PHMSA agrees that timely notification is
absolutely critical because the sooner we begin response in the
rare and unfortunate circumstance of a pipeline rupture.
Earlier this month, we issued a proposed rule that will require
operators to notify as soon as practicable, but not more than 1
hour after they have detected a release, to the National
Response Center. So we are proud to have gotten that proposed
rule issued. It was issued earlier this month.
Mr. Upton. But why did it take so long? That was the
intent, that was what we discussed. It was in black and white--
--
Ms. Cummings. Yes.
Mr. Upton [continuing]. And 4 years----
Ms. Cummings. I----
Mr. Upton [continuing]. Is OMB that slow? Do I need to go
back to Sylvia Burwell, when she was there, to----
Ms. Cummings. I understand--and I sense your frustration
that it has taken us this long to have the proposed rule out,
but I would like to point out that we have issued multiple
safety advisories, and we have shared with the industry how
critical it is for timely notification.
As we execute the investigation into the incident at Santa
Barbara, and also in Illinois, we are absolutely going to be
looking at timelines and notification as part of our corrective
action order, and we do expect operators to be notifying the
NRC as soon as possible so that they can begin that clean-up.
Mr. Upton. OK, let me ask one last question in my remaining
minute. In the current Integrity Management Program for
inspecting for oil and gas pipelines, is there a priority for
increased inspections or shut-off valves on pipelines that are
over 30 years old? So not new ones----
Ms. Cummings. Yes.
Mr. Upton [continuing]. But the ones that were made more
than 30 years ago, or more than a mile under water. So I look
at the difference between--in the Straits of Mackinac, it is
more than a mile. I look at the Chesapeake Bay, I am not sure
if there are pipelines there or not. I look at pipelines that
are going out in the ocean. Are there any regulations that are
pending or that you are reviewing that would look at existing
pipelines of somewhat older nature----
Ms. Cummings. Yes.
Mr. Upton [continuing]. In certainly environmentally
sensitive areas, and if not, should we be looking at those here
as we look to reauthorize the bill?
Ms. Cummings. I am going to ask if I can respond to you on
the record on that specific question on whether or not that is
in the regs now or the regs that we are planning.
Mr. Upton. Do you think that is a good idea that we do
that?
Ms. Cummings. I think that a risk-based approach looks at
probability and consequence, and that we should be looking at
everything that impacts the probability of a pipeline failure
as well as the consequence. So proximity to water as well as
age impact both likelihood and consequence. Those sound like
intriguing ideas, but I would definitely like to talk to the
technical experts before providing you with a specific----
Mr. Upton. I look forward to your response.
Ms. Cummings. Thank you so much.
Mr. Upton. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, the chair recognizes the
gentleman from California, Mr. McNerney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Ms.
Cummings, for testifying this morning.
I would like to know a little bit about how you prioritize
your inspections. Is there a way for you to determine what
pipelines are most at risk? Could you explain that a little
please?
Ms. Cummings. Yes, absolutely. Thank you. We prioritize our
inspections using a risk model driven by data, and so we have
about 26 different elements that look at the condition of the
pipe, the age of the pipe, what is being moved in the pipe, as
well as past performance, and what information we have learned
through the inspections that we have already provided. And we
use that information and put it into an algorithm, and that
algorithm gives us basically advice on which companies, which
operators, we should be inspecting. We then have our regional
directors who are experts and who really know the system, use
that information as input to create their annual plan to make
sure that we are visiting those pipeline operators that are at
higher risk more frequently----
Mr. McNerney. OK.
Ms. Cummings [continuing]. And to make sure that we are----
Mr. McNerney. So how much transparency does that algorithm
have? Is that something that is publicly available?
Ms. Cummings. I am not sure that it is publicly available,
but I would be happy to schedule a briefing with you or your
staff to go over that algorithm and how we use it.
Mr. McNerney. OK, that might be a good idea.
Ms. Cummings. Sure.
Mr. McNerney. Is PHMSA moving forward with regulations on
automatic shut-down valves and remote-control valves?
Ms. Cummings. We are. In 2012, we provided a report to this
committee. It helped us to inform our thinking on automatic
shut-off valves, remote-controlled shut-off valves, and other
safety technology, to the technical feasibility of it, the
operational feasibility, as well as economic. So we are working
on several rules right now. One of them looking at specifically
leak detection in valves. The others looking at how we can
improve integrity management, which does include the operator
evaluating the usefulness and the safety benefit of valves. So
we are working on that, and we hope to get those proposed rules
issued----
Mr. McNerney. OK, thank you.
Ms. Cummings [continuing]. As soon as possible.
Mr. McNerney. How is PHMSA doing with regard to controlling
fugitive gas emissions and safety of pipelines that are serving
fracking production?
Ms. Cummings. Can I get back to you on the record on that
question?
Mr. McNerney. I suppose you can. In fact, yes, I would
say----
Ms. Cummings. Thank you.
Mr. McNerney [continuing]. You should.
Ms. Cummings. Thank you.
Mr. McNerney. Does PHMSA have the resources to complete
rulemaking on a timely basis?
Ms. Cummings. We are so grateful that in 2015, Congress
provided us with the resources we need to hire 109 new people
for the pipeline program. While 80 percent of those positions
are going to be resources in the field to support inspections
and enforcement, 20 percent of them are going to be at
headquarters, and those positions are specifically going to
help support our regulatory agenda, economic analysis,
training, certification, and support of our state partners.
Mr. McNerney. So, now, you said you hired 100-and-some
people, are those mostly technical people, or are they
management?
Ms. Cummings. Yes. A great proportion of them are
technical, yes. So in the field, the 80 percent of the 109;
engineers, auditors, inspectors, and enforcement tech.
Mr. McNerney. What are the requirements for PHMSA issuing a
corrective action order?
Ms. Cummings. The requirement for a corrective action order
is imminent hazard, and that is part of our statutory
authority. So the time when you will most likely see us issue a
corrective action order is going to be after a pipeline
failure, such as the one in Santa Barbara or the one in
Illinois.
Mr. McNerney. But you can and have issued those before
failures?
Ms. Cummings. We can if we have evidence of an imminent
hazard, but more likely it is going to be issued after. And----
Mr. McNerney. So you don't have any historical examples of
issuing one before an accident?
Ms. Cummings. I don't have any examples for you right now.
I will ask my technical team and get back to you on the record
if we have an example of that.
Mr. McNerney. Well, OK. In the remaining 40 seconds, please
explain a little bit about the rulemaking process.
Ms. Cummings. Yes, sure. Before we are ready to issue a
rule, and we are putting together the information, we are
generally going to do public workshops, we are going to do
studies, and sometimes we are going to issue an advanced notice
of proposed rulemaking, which is more of a wide open request to
stakeholders to provide us information to inform the rulemaking
process. We are going to take all that information, we are
going to put it together into a rule that has the safety
requirements, safety benefits, and also the economic benefits.
So what is the cost versus the safety benefit of the
regulation? We issue that proposed regulation to the Federal
Register. Again, we get stakeholder input. We put that
stakeholder input together, and we have two advisory committees
that we consult with at--when we are moving towards the final
rule stage. We use them to advise us on the benefit of the
rule, the safety requirements that we have put together, as
well as the operational ability to implement, and then the
economics, the cost of it. Once we issue a final----
Mr. McNerney. I am going to have to yield back, Mr.----
Ms. Cummings. OK. Thank you.
Mr. McNerney. I have run out of time. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. She was giving great detail.
At this time, I recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Shimkus, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome, Ms.
Cummings.
Ms. Cummings. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. The spill in Illinois is located in my
district. I talked with the city manager actually, yesterday
morning. I think one of the interesting things was Keystone
goes through that area also, and Keystone had provided them
with a response trailer in which they were able to deploy with
their firefighters to ensure the protection of the water
supply, which is called Silver Lake. And so I would concur with
what you concluded, that there is no threat to their drinking
water. And their response was as per you would expect when you
have pipelines. We do have a lot of pipelines. We have the
Patoka Terminal. So these things happen, and they are
regretful, but we--the issue is responding. I think those of us
who were here when we passed the last piece of legislation were
hoping that--we know we are not going to be perfect, but we
want, obviously, to have a better process in place to be able
to ensure that we can identify these before the accident
occurs. Hence, all these lines of questions.
The first issue that I would like--you have answered some
of them in your testimony, but could any of the Pipeline Safety
Act mandates have made a difference, do you know, in the recent
pipeline breaks, whether that is in California or the one
recently in Illinois?
Ms. Cummings. Because those two investigations are still
going on, I don't think I can presuppose what the cause was,
but we will absolutely be looking through our investigation at
the condition of the pipe, we will be looking at their inline
inspection results, we will be looking at what happened in the
control room, how quick were they to respond, did they follow
their emergency response plans, as well as the placement and
how quick they closed valves and pumping stations. So I would
be happy to, once the investigation is complete, do an analysis
of the results compared to the rulemakings and the mandates
that we currently have----
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, that would be helpful. I can't speak for
California, but I know Plains put up a Web site to give the
public access, whoever knew about it, to go to the Web site to
get a current update on their response, and I think that has
been very helpful.
I was going to ask about where--but you answered this
already too, that you--there will be a correction action order
probably conducted.
Ms. Cummings. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. Can you talk through some of the criteria that
may be involved in that and maybe some of the benchmarks,
because now what we want to do is make sure there is some
certainty----
Ms. Cummings. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. Obviously, from the local
community that it is ready to go and up and running?
Ms. Cummings. Absolutely. The corrective action order is
being issued today by our regional director to Plains. And so I
can tell you in general what is going to be in it. They were
still working on it, the specifics, as I was coming over to
this hearing. But we are going to be looking at what was the
cause. We are going to be looking at--because it was a pipe
fitting, to look and see where else in the network those pipe
fittings are so that we can make sure that this event won't
happen somewhere else on the pipeline network. We are going to
be looking at their emergency response notification, when did
they notify, what was the timing, when did they know. And we
will be looking for them to use third party analysis similar to
what we have required from Plains in Santa Barbara, and provide
those results to us so that we can perform our investigation.
Mr. Shimkus. And lastly, we understand that you are having
difficulty collecting data from states and localities about
drinking water supplies and other ecological information. How
can we help, or what can we do to help get the states to
provide the information you need to do based upon past
legislation and your intent on analysis?
Ms. Cummings. Right. Yes, through our National Pipeline
Mapping System, in trying to complete the mandates, and also
just create a good system that we can use but also that is
transparent, we have had some issues getting access to the
right data especially in a cost-effective manner. We would love
help in figuring out the best way to get that data. We are
looking at information collections right now, but I would love
to take you up on your offer, and maybe through our
reauthorization discussion or just individually, if we can come
up with some ways to make that path cleaner, that would be
great.
Mr. Shimkus. Well, and that is why we have these hearings
too, to find out ways we can work together and be helpful. So I
am sure the committee is taking notes, and we can follow up
with that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
At this time, recognize the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Pallone, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Ms. Cummings, in the 2002 reauthorization,
Congress added language to Section 60112 of the law to make it
easier for the Secretary to take corrective action against a
pipeline that poses a threat to life, property, or the
environment, and because the department doesn't issue licenses
to pipeline operators, this authority is perhaps the closest
tool the Secretary has to suspending or revoking a license. I
know that PHMSA used this authority to address threats posed to
Santa Barbara by two of the lines operated by Plains All
American, but I am concerned that perhaps the hurdle for using
this authority is still too high, and that the Secretary isn't
able to take advantage of it as often as may be needed to
protect the public and our environment.
So my question is, do you need more flexibility or
different, more useable tools to quickly address the threat of
unsafe facilities?
Ms. Cummings. The imminent hazard requirement is what we
would use in order to issue a corrective action order in order
to shut down a pipeline. We do have a lot of tools in our
toolbox, but I think--I would very much like to have the
opportunity to talk in more detail about that specifically, and
whether or not there was a way for us to use that emergency in
advance of an accident. That is something we would like to talk
about in the future. But we are not afraid to use corrective
actions when we need to--corrective action orders, and we have
a lot of other tools in our toolbox that we continue to use for
strong enforcement.
Mr. Pallone. All right. And Congress will need to
reauthorize the Pipeline Safety Act soon, and yet, as a number
of us noted in our opening statements, PHMSA has yet to
complete some of the most critical rulemakings mandated by the
2011 Act, including work surrounding leak detection, a very
important matter in light of the recent incident in Santa
Barbara. Not only does the Pipeline Safety Trust flag this
inability to complete its rulemakings as a problem, but
industry also views this as a matter that is hurting safety, as
evidenced in Mr. Santa's testimony. My understanding is that
these rulemakings have been held up in review at OMB due to
open cost benefit analysis questions. So if you could answer my
question. What are these open benefit cost analysis questions
referred to in the comment?
Ms. Cummings. Well, we work with our interagency partners,
OMB being one of those partners, to ensure that we are speaking
with one voice on policy matters. We value the input of OMB.
Whenever we go through the process of working a rule through
OMB, it always ends up being a better product. Some of the
things that they would ask us questions about through the
rulemaking process are going to be what are the assumptions
that we used in order to generate the cost versus the benefit.
They are going to be looking at the data that we used to
justify the benefit that we have calculated. And we always get
good information from OMB, and we reply as quickly as we
possibly can, as do they, we work together to come up with the
best possible rule. It is very important to us that when we do
issue a rule, we get it right.
Mr. Pallone. But how can these questions remain open for so
long, and how have you tried to resolve them, and maybe most
importantly, how can we help you? I mean perhaps it is not your
agency's fault, these rules have yet to see the light of day,
but you need to tell us what is going on and how we can help
you get the job done.
Ms. Cummings. I appreciate that offer for support from this
committee. We believe that we have a very good relationship
with OMB, and as I said, we believe we get very valuable
information back through the process. In my experience, we have
been working very closely with OMB and they have been very
cooperative in helping us move our rules forward, but again, we
want to make sure we get the rules right, and the very
methodical, open, and transparent process enables us to do that
with stakeholder input.
Mr. Pallone. Is there any way that we can help you though
because, you know, they have remained open for so long, and I
know you say you are trying to resolve them, but how are we
going to resolve it and how can we help you?
Ms. Cummings. I think having oversight hearings like this
are a great way to do that. It brings visibility to PHMSA as an
agency and also to the mandates of the Pipeline Safety Act. And
I think that we have a great plan moving forward, and that you
are going to see some proposed rules out of us, as you have in
the last month. I think you are going to see them for the rest
of the year.
Mr. Pallone. OK, thank you.
Ms. Cummings. Yes.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, recognize the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, Mr. Pitts, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Director, the notices of proposed rulemaking
announced in the last 2 weeks on accident notification and
excess flow valves show some incremental progress to address
safety, however, there are many significant rules still
pending.
My question is, when can we expect these rules to be
published, and will PHMSA commit to sharing a timeline or
schedule for completion?
Ms. Cummings. Yes, we have several rules that we are
actively involved in the rulemaking process. We have a Web site
that the Department of Transportation keeps up-to-date, and
that Web site will provide the schedule of where the rule is
and when we anticipate proposing it or issuing it. In addition,
we at PHMSA have a Web site that we keep up-to-date on every
mandate, all of the 42 mandates, as well as other activities in
the Pipeline Safety Act. We keep that up-to-date as well. And
so at any time, if you wanted information about our progress on
the mandates, or where we are in the rulemaking process, that
is very transparent and it is available on our Web site. But we
would be happy to come and provide you with a detailed brief of
each of our rules, what we are looking at for the rules, and
the schedule.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you. Last year, Congress increased PHMSA's
fiscal year 2015 budget by 23 percent, and PHMSA has committed
to hiring over 100 new personnel to conduct inspections and
handle enforcement cases. What progress has PHMSA made to hire
and train new personnel, and, you know, what can Congress do to
help expedite the process?
Ms. Cummings. Yes, we are so grateful that in the 2015
fiscal year, we have enough funding to hire 122 new positions,
with 109 of them being in the pipeline program. I mentioned
earlier that 80 percent of those are going to be in the field.
We are in the process of onboarding people that have accepted
positions, we are at 46 percent fill rate. We have a very
robust strategy to bring the remainder of those positions
onboard. We are doing things like holding veterans fairs, we
are doing recruitment, we have looked at our requirements to
make sure that we are reaching the breadth of the folks out
there who would be interested in coming to work for PHMSA. We
have even requested direct hire authority, which we haven't
received, but that would be very helpful in targeting those
engineering skill sets that we are looking for at PHMSA. And as
far as training, we have a very robust training program. We are
going to train those new employees in a bit of a boot camp
scenario so that they are being trained together, and so that
they become valuable parts of our inspection team as soon as
possible.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you. Section 4 of the Pipeline Safety Act
required PHMSA to issue regulations if appropriate requiring
the use of automatic or remote-controlled shut-off valves in
new or entirely replaced transmission pipelines. This
regulation could improve the ability of pipeline operators to
quickly stop the flow of crude oil or natural gas in the event
of an accidental release. Operator delay in shutting down
pipeline flow has been identified as the exacerbating factor in
a number of recent pipeline failures, most probably in the
September 2010 natural gas pipeline in San Bruno, California,
when it took an hour and a half to manually close the valve. In
2010 and '11, PHMSA issued notices of proposed rulemaking for
both gas and liquid pipelines, and both announcements made
clear that some changed the requirements for automatic or
remote-controlled valves was being considered. PHMSA studied
the issue, it has reported to Congress, so why, years later,
hasn't PHMSA finalized their regulation?
Ms. Cummings. We have issued studies, reports to Congress,
and advanced notice of proposed rulemaking. The rules that I
spoke to you about, that we have a plan moving forward and we
are working to propose, do address things like integrity
management, increasing the breadth of our regulations, as well
as automatic and remote-controlled shut-off valves, leak
detection, and other safety technologies that are available in
the market but we will propose in those rules very soon.
Mr. Pitts. Is PHMSA reviewing the need to propose changes
to existing exceptions from federal regulation for gathering
lines, and if so, when will this review conclude?
Ms. Cummings. We are. We are looking at that as well as
looking at how that might inform the rulemaking process. I can
get back to you on exactly when we are going to be releasing
that information, but we are working on it and we have a plan
to release it.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time has expired.
Mr. Whitfield. The chair now recognizes the gentleman from
New York, Mr. Tonko, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, Director Cummings,
thank you for joining us. I have to state, I don't envy your
position today, having to appear before this committee and
defend the agency and, frankly, its weak, as I would see it,
record of achievement. That is not a reflection on you, but of
the failure of the Administration and Congress to support this
agency and the vital safety mission that PHMSA serves.
Mr. Weimer, in his testimony, said there is plenty of blame
to be shared for the slowness in implementing pipeline safety
initiatives. I agree. Placing blame doesn't solve any problems.
Aggressive, faster action is what we need. That requires
additional sustained resources for your agency, our job here in
Congress, and it requires PHMSA, DOT, and the Administration
truly to put safety first.
We have been installing and conveying petroleum, petroleum
products, and natural gas for pipelines for more than 60 years,
and I simply do not believe we have to continue to tolerate the
number of accidents that occur as a basic cost of doing
business.
Section 8 of the 2011 Pipeline Safety Act directed the
agency to study leak detection systems used by hazardous liquid
pipeline operators, and to issue regulations to require lead
detection on these pipelines and/or to set leak detection
standards. The fact that Congress needed to put this into law
in 2011 is disappointing. It seems to be a basic safety
requirement that should have been in place some time ago, and I
believe PHMSA completed that required study at the end of 2012,
as you indicated. That is correct, right?
Ms. Cummings. That is correct, 2012.
Mr. Tonko. So when are we going to see a proposed rule, a
final rule?
Ms. Cummings. The status of the rulemakings that I spoke of
earlier are notice of proposed rulemakings. We at PHMSA, the
current team, the executive team, as well as the career staff,
are focused and are completely committed to getting those
proposed rules complete, getting them issued, and then quickly
turning around, looking at stakeholder feedback, and turning
them into rules. We are absolutely committed to that, and we
have a plan to do it.
Mr. Tonko. Well, we are going to watch closely. Apparently,
damage to pipelines by excavation continues to be one of the
main causes of significant pipeline incidents. As I stated
earlier, we have been building and using pipelines for a very
long time. How detailed and accurate are the maps of the
existing pipeline network?
Ms. Cummings. I spoke earlier about the National Pipeline
Mapping Program that we have, and as you point out, the
availability of data there is as good as the data that comes
into it. It is complete from a federal perspective of our
oversight, but there is more information that we would like to
collect. Data is one area that I think we have room to improve,
and I think we have room to work together to improve. Being
able to have complete access and visibility and transparency
across the country, and also to be able to evaluate through our
data, our data systems and analytics, those are all very
important and things that we are looking to do in the future,
and it would be great to work with this committee to figure out
ways to use data more effectively.
Mr. Tonko. Yes. Thank you. Most decisions about zoning and
development are made at the local level. Is there a way to
better engage our local officials? Do mayors and planning
boards have appropriate access, great access to information
that impacts their communities?
Ms. Cummings. Yes. That is a great question. Part of our
Stakeholder Outreach Program at PHMSA looks at all sorts of
things, ways that we can get information out, public workshops,
local open houses, as well as the grant programs that we have,
specifically around things like excavation damage. We also look
at ways that we can provide information to localities about
planning and development as people start to move closer to
pipelines that have been there for a very long time, and we do
a lot of outreach related to that, as well as support to local
planning. Our state partners are critical in our National
Pipeline Safety Program, and so any way that way improve that
collaboration, improve that relationship, we want to do that,
and we are definitely open to ideas for how we could do that
better.
Mr. Tonko. And I thank you.
It seems as though I am almost out of time here. I would
just encourage us to move along with the final plans that will
be presented, the proposals that you have talked of, and to be
able to go forward and address safety to the max.
And with that, thank you, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
At this time, recognize the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Latta,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks very
much to our witnesses for being with us today. Appreciate your
testimony today.
And I was interested in your testimony where you cited that
we have about 2.6 million miles of pipeline right now in the
Nation, and that--also that the mileage is going up every year
from the past where we were doing, it looks like you said,
between 3 to 4,000 miles, and now to about 3,500 or 7,500
miles----
Ms. Cummings. Yes.
Mr. Latta [continuing]. Per year. And I know that we have
had the Secretary of Energy in and he talked about the energy
boom, of course, that is occurring in this country on the
natural gas and on the oil side, which makes it essential that
we have the pipelines out there to move the energy that we
have. And, of course, like across Ohio and across my district
there are new pipelines being proposed, and I was wondering if
you could--again, from your testimony, you state that you would
like to work again more with Congress to explain those risk
reduction proposals. So if you, again, could give more
information to us on that, what those proposals might be on
those reductions.
Ms. Cummings. Sure. You did mention new construction and
growth of the network. We do intend to spend about 25 percent
of our inspection time supporting and looking at new
construction pipelines. The best time to ensure that a pipeline
is safe is during construction, and before it actually goes
into operation. And so the regulations that we have overseeing
new construction as well as our inspection and enforcement are
critical to long-term pipeline safety.
From a risk perspective, some of the things that we are
working on in terms of integrity management are to improve the
actual integrity management process, but also to expand it into
areas where integrity management isn't in place right now.
Integrity management puts the onus on the operator to identify
risk and--they use risk models in order to do that so that they
can prioritize their investment in safety in their pipelines.
One of the things we are doing in September is we are going
to hold a workshop, and we are going to look at risk modeling
across multiple industries, and we are going to see how we,
PHMSA, can take that information and then share it back out
with the industry so they can improve their risk models,
because the best way to implement integrity management is to
properly identify, properly assess risk, that way they can
mitigate it. And our goal is to prevent a failure before it
happens. And that is what risk management enables us to do in
the Pipeline Safety Program.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you. And I know it has come up a
little bit before in regards to the whole question about the
Call Before You Dig----
Ms. Cummings. Yes.
Mr. Latta [continuing]. And I know that around the areas
you have the signs up that--I know that companies have about
the--call the 811 number. And also I see in your testimony that
28.3 percent of all distribution incidents were caused by the
excavation damage, and that cost $25 million in damages, one
fatality, and 15 injuries. And you state that you are working
hard to raise the 811 awareness, but could you give more detail
about what you are doing to raise that with the local
communities again because, again, for a lot of us, we came from
local governments at one point in our lives, and I was a county
commissioner, and we had the planning commission that we all
served on, but what are you doing to really get that
information out, because I know that you talked about the
mapping----
Ms. Cummings. Yes.
Mr. Latta [continuing]. And trying to find that information
out, not only what Mr. Shimkus had brought up about in regards
to water, but others about existing pipelines, but what are we
doing to try to get that, for that 811 information for people
to know that, you know, because a lot of times when people
think about Call Before You Dig, they are thinking, well,
before I go out in my backyard and I am going to dig a new hole
for a tree, that I don't want to hit some kind of a, you know,
an electric line. But now we are talking about those
transmission lines out there with excavation.
Ms. Cummings. Yes. One of the most frequent causes of
pipeline failure is excavation damage. And we have our 811
Program which we oversee in conjunction with Common Ground
Alliance, a not-for-profit group that works on 811. We do have
a grant program associated with excavation damage, as well as
Call Before You Dig. We have been doing a lot of outreach. You
might have seen the Triple Crown winner was wearing an 811 hat
this year. You will see that we are having an 811 day at
National Stadium. We are trying to use media as well as our
local relationships with the local Common Ground Alliance folks
to get the word out to use 811 and Call Before You Dig. It has
been proven through a study that if you use 811, it is over 99
percent effective. So what we need is for people to be making
the call, because we know that if you make the call, that it is
going to be effective.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
At this time, I recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Green, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Cummings, I don't think it is a secret that I am a big
supporter of pipelines. I represent a district in north Houston
and east Houston where I have never not lived on pipeline
easements in my life, so I have a pretty good understanding
about the utility of pipelines. It is the safest way to move a
product. And I guess that is why I am disappointed that we
haven't dealt with the requirements from the previous
reauthorization to now, and since I live there and work there,
I think that we need quicker response. In the 4 years since we
reauthorized pipeline safety last time, and due to the rapid
expansion of oil and gas production, the U.S. will need to
build thousands more miles of new pipelines, including
gathering and transmission lines. Additionally, our power
generation sector increasingly relies on natural gas as we need
more distribution lines as well. But we need to make sure these
pipelines continue to be the safest mode for that
transportation, compared to rail and truck. We must also
address the replacement of the pipelines. Our infrastructure
continues to age. And PHMSA recently discussed a plan called
hazardous liquids integrity verification process. What has the
reception been to that plan from the stakeholders?
Ms. Cummings. The hazardous liquid proposed rule is one of
the rules that I have been talking about. We did issue an
advanced notice of proposed rulemaking. We did get stakeholder
input, and we have used that to put back into the rulemaking
process. We hope to be issuing a proposed rule on that within
the year, and we are working hard on that. Stakeholder input
was an important part of that process. If you would like, I can
put together a briefing that specifically identifies all the
stakeholder input that we have gotten, but I think that--and I
know you have another panel that will have industry reps, I
think that industry is as anxious as we are at PHMSA to have
regulatory certainty, and I think that the plan that we have
moving forward will enable that regulatory certainty. And so we
appreciate your support in giving us the time to complete that
plan and getting that information----
Mr. Green. Well, we may take you up on that. If it is not
with the committee, we have a Natural Gas Caucus here----
Ms. Cummings. Yes.
Mr. Green [continuing]. That we may ask you to----
Ms. Cummings. OK.
Mr. Green [continuing]. Come over.
Ms. Cummings. OK.
Mr. Green. When discussing pipeline replacement, is the
cost recovery a major issue?
Ms. Cummings. Yes, absolutely. We issued in 2011 a Call to
Action, and a majority of the states have responded to that,
but as you point out, replacement of old pipes has a cost to
it, and a lot of our stakeholders are municipalities and they
have to do that through--figuring out ways to recapture the
cost. So that is an issue that those stakeholders are working.
Mr. Green. What agencies are primarily responsible for
setting these policies? I know it could be state and federal,
or both.
Ms. Cummings. Yes.
Mr. Green. Is that true on the policies for pipeline
replacement?
Ms. Cummings. I am not sure I understand your question.
Sorry.
Mr. Green. OK. I assume if they are interstate pipeline----
Ms. Cummings. Yes.
Mr. Green [continuing]. It is federal, but in some cases it
is also a state authority, and I know in Texas, still a
misnomer, our Railroad Commission is actually our pipeline
agency.
Ms. Cummings. Yes.
Mr. Green. But how do you work with other states who may
have an interest in it.
Ms. Cummings. Right. Sorry about that. Of the 2.6 million
miles, while we issue regulations and are responsible for
pipeline safety across the country, we rely on our state
partners to oversee and regulate 80 percent of those pipelines,
and so we have a strong relationship with the states. We
provide them training and certification. We also provide them
grant funding. We evaluate them on a regular basis to make sure
that they have the skills and tools that they need, and we also
have a mentor program that we use to improve state performance
when it comes to the oversight, the regulation of pipelines.
Mr. Green. OK. Mr. Chairman, I am almost out of time, but I
have questions that I would like to submit on PHMSA's leak
detection integrity management rules guidelines, and also the
coordination for it. I would be glad to submit those questions.
Thank you.
Ms. Cummings. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
At this time, recognize the gentleman from West Virginia,
Mr. McKinley, 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This issue is particularly important to us in West Virginia
as we are trying to transport the Marcellus and the Utica gas
throughout the state, and finish the network of piping, but it
seems a few months don't go by without another leak, another
explosion, another fire. We just had one last week again. It
just seems to be one after another, and I don't know how we are
going to stem the loss of confidence of the American public
that we are doing all that we should be doing to do this,
because it is as though someone is willing to let these things
happen because then people turn on fossil fuels, whether that
is oil or gas. So I am hoping it is not part of a plan here to
slow the implementation.
How would you grade the fact--I was a little startled when
17 of the 42 standards have not been met. How would you grade
the performance of the agency? Would you give yourself an A for
what you have done?
Ms. Cummings. Out of the 42 mandates, we have completed----
Mr. McKinley. How would you grade yourself?
Ms. Cummings [continuing]. Twenty six, but we----
Mr. McKinley. How you grade your--are you doing an A grade,
a B, how would you grade yourself?
Ms. Cummings. I have been very, very impressed with the
staff that I have met at PHMSA, and when it comes to commitment
to safety and desire----
Mr. McKinley. How would you grade yourself----
Ms. Cummings [continuing]. To get these rules done----
Mr. McKinley [continuing]. You have----
Ms. Cummings [continuing]. I would definitely give us----
Mr. McKinley [continuing]. Evaded twice already the
question that was asked of you----
Ms. Cummings. Yes.
Mr. McKinley [continuing]. On both sides of the aisle. What
is the schedule----
Ms. Cummings. Yes.
Mr. McKinley [continuing]. And you avoided it, very
effectively I might add. But now--I am going to ask that same
question, but right now first, how would you grade your
performance? Do you think it is a passing grade, is it a C, a
B, how would you grade--did you do what you were asked to do?
Ms. Cummings. We are----
Mr. McKinley. Yes or no, did--A or B?
Ms. Cummings. We have not completed all of the mandates
that you have asked us to complete, but we are absolutely
making progress on every single one of them----
Mr. McKinley. I hear----
Ms. Cummings [continuing]. And----
Mr. McKinley [continuing]. So you are not--you are going to
play that game with me too, I guess. So the other two questions
were when is the schedule? Are you going to finish at the end
of this year, is it going to be spring of next year, when?
Don't tell me to go find it myself on a Web site. I am asking
you, when will you be finished?
Ms. Cummings. I can tell you that we have a plan, and I can
tell you that we are working with our stakeholders to go
through the methodical rulemaking process, and that every
single person at PHMSA is absolutely committed to getting that
plan done.
Mr. McKinley. I am sure you said that back in--2 years--you
or your agency said over the last 3 years, but this has been
since 2011, and I am sure the low-hanging fruit was already
picked to make that happen, but we have 17 more that probably
are contentious. When will they be finished, when will they be
approved? You blamed OMB. I wish OMB were here--whether or not
they would accept that responsibility, but you threw them under
the bus. So I am just trying--what do we have to do to--I want
to restore the trust of the American public that enough is
enough, and I am not getting confidence at all from you. It is
very evasive on this. So how would you do it? If you are not
going to answer the question, you are going to tell me go find
it yourself. Is that correct? Go find it myself?
Ms. Cummings. What I wanted to express when I was telling
you about the Web site was that we are being as transparent as
possible by posting that information on the Web site. The
status of every single individual rule, where it has been and
where it is going, and how long it has been there, is
absolutely available. It is a very transparent process. We have
a plan moving forward. As I said, we have two rules that I
think are close to being complete within this calendar year,
and we have some other rules that we are working very hard on
at PHMSA to get complete, and to have our economic analysis
complete so that we can move to issuing those proposed rules.
Mr. McKinley. So are you suggesting that by the end of next
year you may have all 42 mandates complete?
Ms. Cummings. I know that the rulemaking process that we
are currently going through is going to address 11 of the
mandates, and that we have reports that are currently being
finalized that are going to address four of the mandates. And
so yes, we are making progress on absolutely every single one
of them. I simply can't look into the future and see what
stakeholder input we may get, what new technology might be
developed, or what new requirements might come up to change our
priorities to say exactly when all 42 will be done, but I can
tell you that every single person at PHMSA is----
Mr. McKinley. Well, I hope----
Ms. Cummings [continuing]. Committed at getting----
Mr. McKinley [continuing]. Your priorities----
Ms. Cummings [continuing]. To getting them done.
Mr. McKinley. I hope your priorities are reestablishing the
confidence of the American public, that we are doing everything
we can to give them pipeline safety.
Ms. Cummings. And that is what we want as well.
Mr. McKinley. I yield back my time.
Ms. Cummings. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, recognize the gentlelady from
California, Mrs. Capps, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you, Ms. Cummings, for your testimony. My
questions today, because there are still so many unanswered
ones about the causes of and responses to the May 19 Plains oil
spill in my district, will have to do with that particular
incident.
I know the investigation, not the rulemaking necessarily,
but the investigation takes time. It is important to get the
facts right, but it has been 2 months since the spill occurred
on the pristine coastline, Gaviota Coast, my district. When
will this investigation be completed and the results shared
with the public?
Ms. Cummings. Thank you, Congresswoman Capps. And before I
answer, I would just like to thank you for your support of the
agency, as well as the time you have spent with our PHMSA
employees and talking to them out in Santa Barbara. They
appreciated it, and I hope you found, as I have, how dedicated
to safety those PHMSA staff are, and that they take this oil
spill personally, just like you do.
The investigation will take time. There are many aspects
that will require third party evaluation, as well as research
into different parts of the organization about what happened.
Some of the things that we are specifically focused on is that
third party evaluation of the condition of the pipe. I think
the last I heard, that is going to take a couple of months to
get the report from the third party evaluator.
Mrs. Capps. OK.
Ms. Cummings. The third party evaluation of the inline
inspection, that is going to take a couple of months.
Mrs. Capps. All right.
Ms. Cummings. A corrective action order can actually be in
place for several months, and----
Mrs. Capps. OK.
Ms. Cummings [continuing]. It is not until--go ahead.
Mrs. Capps. I don't want to cut you off, but I do want----
Ms. Cummings. Yes.
Mrs. Capps [continuing]. To ask some other questions as
well, and so I now have a timeframe. And thank you. Please keep
this--my office and my constituents--that is a good way to do
it, and this committee updated as to how things progress.
I must say the information we have so far is very
troubling. Makes us question the condition of--now I understand
it is millions of miles of pipeline running through our
country. As you know, Plains did an inline inspection of line
901, May 5, and this is just 2 weeks before that very line
ruptured. This inspection showed 45 percent metal loss at the
rupture site, yet now we are now shocked to discover that the
actual level of corrosion was over 80 percent when the ruptured
pipe was evacuated. I have seen it myself.
Ms. Cummings, were you surprised by the disparity, and is
this a common occurrence?
Ms. Cummings. The inline inspection tool provides a great
deal of data, and that data has to be analyzed by experts in
order to determine what the data is telling them. They also go
out and actually do digs and look at those anomalies to compare
them to the data to make sure that they are getting the right
information. I think that the results of an inline inspection
need to be looked at from an expert on the data and an expert
on pipelines----
Mrs. Capps. OK. I am cutting you off again, but----
Ms. Cummings. Sorry.
Mrs. Capps [continuing]. You are making it sound so obtuse.
It is a disparity.
Ms. Cummings. It is a disparity.
Mrs. Capps. And it is disturbing, and it is not the only
time it happened. Plains has reported that the inline
inspection also overestimated the amount of corrosion at other
points along the pipeline. We would rather have an overestimate
than--of a corrosion than underestimate, but these inline
inspections are clearly not very accurate. Whether the issue is
with the technology, system operators, or both, there is
clearly a problem here. So what is PHMSA doing to improve the
accuracy? I mean either over or under----
Ms. Cummings. Yes.
Ms. Capps [continuing]. What can we do to improve the
accuracy of the inline inspections in general?
Ms. Cummings. To your point of the investigation, that will
be part of our investigation, but looking at inline inspection
and other assessment tools across the board, our research and
development budget in our program is a partnership with
industry where we identify those areas where we can use our
funds to invest in future safety technologies, and one of the
technologies we invest in a lot is inline inspection and other
assessments. And so your support of our research and
development program is actually the best way for us to be able
to improve that assessment data, and get closer to reality, and
to be able to mitigate risk.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you. In addition, and I hope I can get my
third question out here, in addition to corrosion on line 901,
dozens of corrosion problems have been found on an adjacent
line 903, a longer and wider segment of pipe connected to the
ruptured line 901. These numerous problems have been outlined
in your corrective action order, and I have your submission of
those to us here, and want to submit them for the record here.
Plains has even acknowledged the problem by accelerating the
frequency of its inline inspections after its 2012 inspection
found 41 anomalies serious enough to require excavation. Yet,
despite the pattern of corrosion and failure to accurately
measure the level of corrosion on the rupture site, PHMSA is
still allowing Plains to operate 903 line to reduce pressure.
Why is PHMSA allowing line 903 to operate when it has the very
same corrosion disparities and problems as the pipeline that
ruptured? What assurances can you provide that line 903 won't
have the same problems that line 901?
Ms. Cummings. As you pointed out in our corrective action
order, we did notice similarities between 901 and 903, and so
we took that imminent hazard and we applied it to line 903, and
we have put additional requirements on Plains. Line 901 is
empty. Line 903 does have oil in it. They are not operating it
in regular course of action. About 100 miles away from the
coast, just a portion of 903 is intermittently being operated,
but the rest of 903 remains shut down. And they will only be
able to operate under our authority if we allow them under the
corrective action order.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentlelady's time has expired.
At this time, I would like to recognize the gentleman from
Virginia, Mr. Griffith, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much. Appreciate you being
here.
Mr. McKinley touched on it. Others have touched on it. Mrs.
Capps, in her questions, although she didn't say it directly.
One of the big concerns here is that we passed a law 4 years
ago in an attempt to make the pipelines safer. We are still
trying to get those regulations implemented. They are not ready
yet. And there is a confidence, or a lack of confidence, from
the public.
Now, I am going to take just a second and go to a different
subject. I promise you it is relevant. The EPA's Clean Power
Plan, the final rules are not out yet, some 13 to 16 months
after that rule comes out, the states have to come up with
their plan, and by 2020 they have to start implementing that
plan. As a result, in part of that pressure being placed on
electric generation companies, 2 major pipelines, see, I told
you I would bring it around, 2 major pipelines have been
proposed coming through my region of the state. I represent a
big chunk of one of them, and the other one affects
constituents of mine, even if it doesn't actually come through
my district. Their concern, in many ways, is about safety. And
I have been communicating this morning with one of those
constituents. Her farm is going to be affected by the Atlantic
Coast Pipeline. And there are real concerns there, and part of
the concern, and the lack of confidence, is the states and
individuals are having to deal with the consequences of these
EPA regulations faster than you can get the regulations for
safety that we passed 4 years ago implemented. What do I say to
them when they say to me, in rural areas, the shut-offs are
only 20 miles apart. Twenty miles apart. That is a long way on
a rural road if you have to get from point A to point B, that
is not following a road. What do I say to them about the safety
components when you all can't even get the regs out that we
thought were necessary that you get out 4 years ago, because of
previous safety problems? How do I make my constituents feel
like if somebody is putting a 42-inch natural gas pipeline
through their property or near their property, or they are near
one of the compressing and pumping stations, how can they feel
safe, what can you say to them, because I will tell you that
this one constituent in particular is watching, so look at the
camera and tell her how can she feel safe if her farm is now
going to be dissected or cut through by a pipeline?
Ms. Cummings. Well, PHMSA is first and foremost a safety
agency, and the safety of those pipelines are what we think
about 100 percent of the time. And while we are working on
those 42 mandates, and working on getting those regulations
out, we have a lot of experience with new construction because
we spend about 25 percent of our inspection time with new
construction, looking at how they are implementing our
regulations, how they are testing to make sure they are safe,
and what we have done is we have actually learned a lot about
new construction that we have put out through safety advisory
bulletins, that we have put out to the industry in different
ways that helps to ensure that we learn a lesson.
Mr. Griffith. And I know that you are trying, but it
doesn't instill confidence when we hear about other pipeline
problems in other parts of the country, when we hear that
pipelines that may have problems are still being used, and now
they are saying they want to bring a pipeline through our area.
It causes great concern on the safety factor. What about the
shut-offs in rural areas, should they be closer together. Is
that something that we should be working on in Congress?
Ms. Cummings. So I think we talked earlier about a 2012
report that talked about automatic shut-off valves, and it
talked about them being technically, operationally, and
economically feasible, but not in all cases. And so we will be
putting out proposed rules that will capture the right
stakeholder information to make sure that we put out
regulations that are going to meet the safety requirements
without creating unintended consequences.
Mr. Griffith. Well--and I appreciate that. Another question
I get on a regular basis as a result of being right in the eye
of the storm for major pipelines coming through the area is why
are we cutting through new paths? Is there some safety reason
why you don't want to collocate natural gas pipelines together,
because we are cutting through a bunch of new paths, not
following the lines that are already there?
Ms. Cummings. Yes. We as a safety agency, we don't have a
primary lead role in the permitting and----
Mr. Griffith. I understand that. My question is, is there a
safety concern with collocation?
Ms. Cummings. Yes, I understand. Can I get back to you on
the record? I don't know the answer to that question, I am
sorry.
Mr. Griffith. All right, I would greatly appreciate it
because I probably have--I know I have at least one watching,
but I have a lot of constituents who want to know the answer to
that question.
Ms. Cummings. OK.
Mr. Griffith. With that, I see my time is up. And, Mr.
Chairman, I appreciate you having this important hearing, and I
yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, recognize Mr. Loebsack for 5
minutes.
Mr. Loebsack. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good to see you, Ms.
Cummings.
Ms. Cummings. Thank you.
Mr. Loebsack. I am from Iowa, and I think a lot of us on
both sides of the aisle have a lot of concerns being from these
rural areas----
Ms. Cummings. Yes.
Mr. Loebsack [continuing]. And I echo many of those
concerns that have been already mentioned today. I think I
mentioned to you before your testimony that we have a proposed
Bakken Pipeline that would extend from northwest Iowa down
through my district, much of my district, all the way down to
southeast Iowa, and it would bring that crude from North
Dakota, transport it eventually to points of the east and
south. And I just have a question, from your perspective, you
mentioned that you are involved in safety and all the rest.
Eventually, this is going to be approved or not by the Iowa
Utilities Board, there is not a federal role as far as approval
of this pipeline is concerned, but can you talk to me a little
bit about sort of the safety concerns that you folks basically
have supervision over when it comes to something like this?
Ms. Cummings. Sure. Thank you. The most important thing
that we can do is to build safety and build quality into the
pipeline before it actually goes into operation. And so the
requirements in our regulations for new construction, a lot of
them are prescriptive. So they are looking at things like the
material in the weld, and making sure that they are properly
installed by qualified people to install them. We also require
a hydro test to make sure that, before the pipeline goes into
operation, that it is safe and that there are no leaks. We
would encourage new construction pipeline to do inline
assessments, and to really understand the attributes of the
pipeline so that when integrity management principles are
applied to that pipeline, that there is a baseline that they
can use going forward to look at trends and to be able to
identify that risk. And our goal is to prevent pipeline
failures, and integrity management and risk management, and
inline assessments and other assessments are the way that we do
that.
Mr. Loebsack. So as the regulations currently exist,
encourage is the word--the best word that you can use at this
point?
Ms. Cummings. On the hydro test and on the other
requirements, those are prescriptive, those are requirements.
Mr. Loebsack. Yes.
Ms. Cummings. We have shared information. There is
information available in partnership with industry on best
practices, and when we identify issues that we see are common
across different new construction, whether they are directly
applicable to our prescriptive regulations, or whether they are
best practices, we have ways that we can share them with our
stakeholders to make sure everyone is aware through safety
advisories or through workshops.
Mr. Loebsack. And so I think that is one of the big
concerns that I am hearing----
Ms. Cummings. Yes.
Mr. Loebsack [continuing]. Expressed throughout my district
is the whole safety issue, leakage, all those things.
Ms. Cummings. Yes.
Mr. Loebsack. And if, in fact, the Iowa Utilities Board
does approve this pipeline, I am going to want to make sure
that my constituents get the best information possible.
Opponents are never going to be convinced this thing is going
to be entirely safe----
Ms. Cummings. Yes.
Mr. Loebsack [continuing]. But using the word encourage
doesn't give me a lot of confidence when I go home and then say
to them, well, you know, the regulators are telling me they are
going to encourage folks to do this or that. So I would hope
that there would be something much stronger than that in the
regulations. And I do want to, of course, agree with folks here
today who have expressed concerns that we haven't seen the
final rulemaking actually done yet for a number of these
things, and I just want to encourage you, obviously, to use
that word, because that is all I can do to make sure that we
finish this up.
I have one other question having to do--I don't think it
has been brought up yet today. I served on the Armed Services
Committee for 8 years. Traveled overseas quite a lot. I am not
on the Homeland Security Committee, but, I have a map, an
alleged map at least, of pipelines that are in Iowa, and I
didn't get that map because I am a Member of Congress and
because I have some kind of security clearance to have access
to that map. I have a lot of concerns about access to
information that is open to the public, especially when it
comes to potential terrorist threats. Talk to me about that.
Talk to us about that. How this information that could be used
by potential domestic or international terrorists to disrupt a
pipeline gas or oil, or whatever the case may be, how are we
sure that information is not available to folks out there who
want to do harm to our country?
Ms. Cummings. The National Pipeline Mapping System does
have rule-based access, meaning that the information that is
available to the public is information that we have deemed is
not security-sensitive. We take that threat very seriously as
well, and this committee and our statutory authority has given
us the ability to redact information that we make public to
make sure that security sensitive information is not included
in public release. The information that is available to local
lawmakers, to local emergency responders, they apply for that
access, and they are only given that access when we verify
their identity and their need to have that type of information.
Mr. Loebsack. OK. Thank you.
Ms. Cummings. Thank you.
Mr. Loebsack. Thank you for your testimony.
And I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Whitfield. The chair recognizes the gentleman from
Ohio, Mr. Johnson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Ms. Cummings,
thanks for joining us today.
In your response to Representative Olson a little bit ago,
you said that PHMSA is looking at how to improve and expand--
improve, expand, and enhance risk-based management. Would you
explain a little bit more in detail what you mean by that? How
are you going to go about doing that?
Ms. Cummings. Sure. We have several ongoing rulemakings
that have been the topic of discussion this morning, and
integrity management, which is our risk-based approach to
pipeline safety in high consequence areas, relies on that risk-
based approach. And those rules are going to be proposed to
expand where we are using those risk-based methodologies,
meaning on the percentage of pipe that we are looking at to
apply those integrity management principles where it makes
sense, and also to improve integrity management. I mentioned
that in September, we are going to be holding a workshop, and
we are going to be bringing in folks from across different
industries such as aviation, the energy industry, nuclear, for
example, who use risk-based approaches, and look at how they
model risk because in order to mitigate the proper risk, in
order to avoid a pipeline failure, you need to be identifying
the right risk, assessing that risk, and then mitigating it
properly for your pipeline. And so those are some of the
examples of ways that we are going to be improving integrity
management, both internal to PHMSA and our oversight, but also
integrity management in the industry.
Mr. Johnson. Are you including cost in that analysis and in
the improvement effort, and are you having difficulty in
incorporating cost into a risk-based regulation?
Ms. Cummings. Our statutory authority for PHMSA requires
that our regulations have benefits that exceed costs. So that
is part of our statutory requirement. So yes, we are looking at
the cost to implement these improvements versus the safety
benefit. So in order to do that, we have a team of economists
and they look at past performance, so the risk goes back to
likelihood and consequence, the likelihood and the cost of that
consequence, and then the safety requirements we put in place,
how much it costs to implement them, and we do a comparison of
the benefit versus the cost.
Mr. Johnson. OK. All right, Section 21, Ms. Cummings,
directed PHMSA to review and report to Congress on existing
federal and state regulations for all gathering lines. With the
report, which was submitted more than 1 year late, PHMSA stated
that it is considering the need to propose additional
regulations to ensure the safety of natural gas and hazardous
liquid gathering lines. So is PHMSA reviewing the need to
propose changes to existing exemptions from federal regulations
for gathering lines, and if so, when will this review conclude?
Ms. Cummings. Yes, the report that you are referring to we
delivered to Congress earlier this year, and what we found is
that some gathering lines are actually--have the same
attributes as transmission lines as far as size and amount
carried. And so as a result of that report, we are looking at
our regulations and we expect to propose in our future
rulemaking proposals in the near future, to look at how we can
capture more information about gathering lines, as well as what
parts of our regulations should be applied to gathering lines
based on what we learned in that report.
Mr. Johnson. OK. All right. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
At this time, recognize the gentleman from Maryland, Mr.
Sarbanes, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for being
here.
Can you give us a sense of how much pipeline infrastructure
overall is within the jurisdiction of your agency, kind of
describe that quickly?
Ms. Cummings. Sure. There are 2.6 million miles of pipeline
in the nation. While we as a federal regulator, we issue
regulations across the entire nation for those pipelines, from
an oversight and enforcement perspective, we partner with the
states. So the states actually oversee 80 percent of those 2.6
million pipelines. We enforce and oversee 20 percent. But the
states are very close partners of ours. We provide them with
training, certification, as well as grant funding, and we
provide them mentorship as well.
Mr. Sarbanes. So do you consider--I mean your direct
oversight is with respect to 20 percent, but----
Ms. Cummings. That is right.
Mr. Sarbanes [continuing]. Presumably, you consider
yourself as having oversight responsibility with respect to the
100 percent acting in partnership.
Ms. Cummings. Correct. In partnership with our states.
Mr. Sarbanes. Yes. And can you give me a sense of the
actual amount of FTE, or sort of what the capacity of your
compliance and enforcement staff is within your agency
specifically?
Ms. Cummings. Sure. We are very grateful that this year our
2015 budget gave us the funding we needed to hire 109 new
people into the pipeline part of our organization. Our field
staff prior to that influx of new people was about 135 people.
We are bringing in that 109 new people, so we are almost
doubling our enforcement staff with the positions that were
appropriated--the funds that were appropriated this year for
new positions. So we have in the past, I would say if you are
looking at legacy----
Mr. Sarbanes. Yes.
Ms. Cummings [continuing]. Thirty, thirty-five or so
positions.
Mr. Sarbanes. In any event, I would imagine that you have
some reasonable expectation that the industry, the pipeline
industry itself, will come with kind of a good faith commitment
to meeting the standards that apply to it. Nevertheless, we
have seen companies, like the Plains All American Pipeline and
others, that don't have a great track record when it comes to
putting these kinds of things in place and adhering to them.
And I was wondering what your thoughts might be on ways to
create more accountability within the industry itself, within
these companies, so that the sort of compliance and
accountability arm within those organizations has a heightened
sense of responsibility. That could include things like
certifying that they are meeting certain standards as a
corporation, for example, an understanding that there might be
consequences for not stepping up to that statement of
accountability. Have you thought about things like that that
could improve what I would say in the best sense could be
cooperation between the agency's oversight and the industry's
own responsibility to come in and step up to its
accountability?
Ms. Cummings. Absolutely. An operator is 100 percent
responsible for the safety of the pipelines that they operate,
and they do so under our enforcement and under our guidance and
regulations. One thing that we at PHMSA were happy to see is,
in the last week, API released a safety management system best
practices document that really was the industry coming together
and looking at a tool, safety management systems----
Mr. Sarbanes. Yes.
Ms. Cummings [continuing]. That has been successful in
other industries, and it would take sort of the things we have
been talking about today, about integrity management being
risk-driven, and really take that to another level. So I
believe that the industry is responsible for safety. I think
that they know they are responsible for safety. This is a great
step that they took in partnership with us. We were on the
teams putting this together. The combination of both
prescriptive and performance-based regulations from PHMSA are
another way that industry can, through our performance-based
specifications, apply technology that is going to make the
pipeline system, the pipeline networks, safer.
Mr. Sarbanes. Right.
Ms. Cummings. And so, yes, there is a lot we can do
together----
Mr. Sarbanes. Great. OK.
Ms. Cummings [continuing]. To improve pipeline safety.
Mr. Sarbanes. Well, I appreciate that. And it will be
interesting to monitor how the industry fulfills those new
expectations, but I think that there could be a place in the
future if we don't see that kind of accountability that needs
to be there, for people within these organizations kind of
having to sign on the dotted line and certify that these things
are in place, and put their name as leaders of those
organizations behind those commitments.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, recognize the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Flores, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Ms.
Cummings, for joining us today.
A lot of great questions have been answered and so I just
have a couple of things I would like to drill into that follow
up a little bit on Mr. Sarbanes' question, but more closely to
Mr. Pitts' questions. I think in response to one of Mr. Pitt's
questions you said that the progress you have made to--hiring
that 109 new people is 46 percent, is that correct?
Ms. Cummings. Correct.
Mr. Flores. OK, I just want to verify that. And in your
response you also said something about requesting direct hire
approval. Can you tell the committee what does that give you,
what does that mean, and how do you get that approval?
Ms. Cummings. Direct hire authority is a tool in the
Federal Government that allows us to streamline the hiring
process. It is something that we had requested of the Office of
Personnel Management. We heard back that it was not approved.
We think that that is one tool that we were looking at, but we
are looking at a lot of other tools to recruit for qualified
and well-educated people who want to dedicate their life to
public service, and dedicate their life to safety. So we are
actively recruiting for positions across the country, as well
as here in D.C. And I think I mentioned also that tomorrow we
are going to be having a veterans hiring fair at the Department
of Transportation. So we are really focused on getting great
people into the department, again, who are dedicated to public
service.
Mr. Flores. If you had had direct hire authority at the
beginning of the fiscal year when you got the additional
funding, where do you think you would be on the hiring today?
Ms. Cummings. I think we would be much further along. I
don't want to commit and say that we would be at 100 percent
right now. But we need to make sure that we are hiring the
right people, and so a lot of the process is going through the
reviewing resumes and making sure that we are doing good
interviews, and that we are getting the right people with the
right skills, but I do think we would make more progress. Thank
you.
Mr. Flores. That is all the questions I have. Thank you. I
yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
At this time, recognize the gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr.
Mullin, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Ms.
Cummings, for being here.
A lot of talk has been, obviously, on the pipelines and yet
the pipelines still provide the best option, provide the
resources we are needing to ship across this country from part
A to part B. In fact, 99.9 percent of all of it in the
pipelines, be it natural gas or oil, gets to its destination
with zero incidents. And without question, it is a vital part
of the infrastructure, and a competitive advantage we have in
this country for our energy rates being at the low level that
they are. And what we are talking about right now is going back
to 2011 when there were 17 mandates that hadn't been
implemented, and we have talked a lot about that, but I don't
know if we have really spent the time about the industry
itself. See, as a business owner, the biggest problem we have
is understanding where the regulatory environment is going, and
it is certainty that we are needing. It is understanding of
what are we going to have to comply with. When we are bidding a
job, we have to understand what our cost is going to be. And
since we have been waiting for 4 years for PHMSA to implement
these, it is creating a tremendous amount of uncertainty of
knowing where the industry can go. We know we are going to have
to start building some pipelines in a serious way. I mean as
this Administration's war on coal continues, we are going to
have to get a lot more pipelines in the ground to provide the
resources we are going to have to have.
And, ma'am, the position that you are in is kind of in
question. I mean you are filling in a position, and I commend
you for that----
Ms. Cummings. Thank you.
Mr. Mullin [continuing]. But are you capable right now to
steer to steer PHMSA in the right direction? Are you able to
make those decisions or are you guys going to be sitting there
waiting for the next administrator to be assigned to you?
Ms. Cummings. The President nominated Marie Therese
Dominguez----
Mr. Mullin. Right.
Ms. Cummings [continuing]. And we are anxiously awaiting
her confirmation. She is serving right now as the deputy
administrator at PHMSA. The career staff, the entire operation
at PHMSA is fully dedicated to achieving these mandates, and
regardless of the fact that we are in a transition does not
stop those career employees that work for us from every day
dedicating their time to safety and to completing these
mandates.
Mr. Mullin. Then why haven't they been completed? When the
President puts out an order, it is done. We seem to implement
very complicated--in fact, some regulations it is not even
obtainable and we are already enforcing them. And we are
talking about setting 17 mandates back from 2011. And look, I
am not pushing for them to be there, I am just saying that
either tell the industry you are moving forward or you are not,
or say, hey, we are going to take the best practices that you
guys have already put in place, which this might be an idea.
What you guys have done, you have improved safety in a
tremendous amount so far on your own. The industry has on their
own. Maybe we take their best business practice and say we are
going to take this and apply this, and we are going to see how
it moves forward, rather than keeping the industry in limbo.
And I understand, ma'am, you are doing the best you can, but we
are talking about an industry that is a vital resource that we
have inside the United States, that provides the infrastructure
and the resources that all of us use. I don't care what side of
the aisle you fall on fossil fuels or not, you use them. So we
are trying to make sure that we don't run short of that supply,
and I am just wanting to make sure that we create the certainty
for the industry that is needed to be there. And, Ms. Cummings,
I really do applaud you because I think you are doing an
outstanding job in the position that you are in, but I want to
make sure that the industry isn't held hostage at this time
too.
So thank you for being here. And thank you, Chairman, for
holding this important meeting.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you.
And that concludes the questions, except for mine, and I am
going to recognize myself for 5 minutes. But, Ms. Cummings,
also, I want to thank you for being with us and addressing the
concerns of the committee.
Ms. Cummings. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. And I think it is quite obvious to everyone
that one of the major concerns is that this Act was adopted in
2011, reauthorizing--we have 16 mandates that really have not
been addressed. And Mr. Mullin, I think, made an important
point in his remarks, and that is that these pipeline
companies, as they are involved in maintenance, constructing
new pipelines, making improvements, the uncertainty of what is
going to happen in these areas does present some problems for
them. And I don't think any of us can say with certainty that
the fact that these 16 mandates have not been put in a
regulation had anything to do with these spills. We don't know
that. But one conclusion we can come up with and we know for a
fact that you all cannot do any of your regulations, you can't
make them final without a signoff of OMB, they have to be
involved in that process, and every agency--and in Congress, we
all have our priorities and I think everyone recognizes that
the priority for this Administration is the Clean Energy Plan,
and that is a priority for OMB, and EPA has been super
aggressive in that area. And one conclusion that we can come up
with is that MSHA and the regulations coming out of your agency
is not the same priority as the Clean Energy Plan in this
Administration. Now, I am not going to ask you to address it,
but that is a logical conclusion that we can come up with.
So I want to thank you once again. We look forward to
working with you as we move forward, and you can be relieved at
this time. And thank you for being with us.
And I would like to call up the second panel of witnesses
at this time. And if the second panel would just have their
seat, and then I am just going to introduce you when you give
your opening 5-minute statement, and then we will go from
there.
OK, our first witness today is Mr. Stan Wise, who is a
Commissioner with the Georgia Public Service Commission, and he
is going to be testifying on behalf of the National Association
of Regulatory Utility Commissioners.
Mr. Wise, thanks very much for being with us, and you will
be recognized for 5 minutes. And we would just ask you to turn
the microphone on, and just kind of watch when the red light
goes on and your time has expired. But thanks for being with
us, and you are recognized.

STATEMENTS OF STAN WISE, COMMISSIONER, GEORGIA PUBLIC SERVICE
COMMISSION (ON BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REGULATORY
UTILITY COMMISSIONERS); DONALD SANTA, PRESIDENT AND CEO,
INTERSTATE NATURAL GAS ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA; RON BRADLEY,
VICE PRESIDENT OF GAS OPERATIONS, PECO ENERGY (ON BEHALF OF THE
AMERICAN GAS ASSOCIATION); ANDREW BLACK, PRESIDENT AND CEO,
ASSOCIATION OF OIL PIPE LINES; CARL WEIMER, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
PIPELINE SAFETY TRUST; AND DIANNE BLACK, ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT, COUNTY OF SANTA BARBARA, CALIFORNIA

STATEMENT OF STAN WISE

Mr. Wise. Well, good morning, Mr. Chairman, and members of
the committee. Thank you so much for this opportunity to
testify on this very important issue.
I am testifying on behalf of my state and NARUC, and first,
let me just say that Georgia's Pipeline Safety Program is one
of the larger state programs based on service, miles, mains,
inspectors, and budget, and our program has been ahead of the
curve on cast iron replacement and bare steel. We have less
than 5 miles remaining. We have done it over a 20-year period.
And let me say, in no small part, it is important that we
recognize the relationship that our inspectors and our state
has had with PHMSA, and the ability to go ahead and be able to
do the job we can because of that important financial
partnership as well as a sharing of information as we go along.
But one issue that continues to cause problems for us is
the increasing delays in receiving base grant reimbursements,
and like other states over the past few years, the amount of
time that Georgia has had to wait to get paid for enforcing
these important pipeline safety rules has increased steadily.
And in years past, our finance department could depend on
timely payments, which is very important in tight state
budgets. This clearly is an issue that needs to be resolved.
Nineteen states have adopted new civil penalty standards.
Some states believe that it is more important to penalize
earnings or rates of return rather than to simply levy fines.
We also believe that the state damage prevention issue prevents
some states from participating in the program, and ineligible
for state one-call and preventive grants, because of state law.
And these exemptions directly affect safety in those states,
and is counterproductive to the goal of preventing damage. We
do agree that PHMSA needs to publish the required study on
automatic and remote-control shut-off valves. States need to
know what this rate structure is, even if it raises rates in
our state, for the stability that would be required for the
installation and maintenance of these facilities. PHMSA has not
published the evaluation of the current integrity management
regulations, and whether or not these requirements should be
expanded beyond the high consequence area. NARUC and its
members are very interested in the findings of this study. High
consequence areas, and they have not--PHMSA has not updated the
National Pipeline Mapping System to include the identification
of high consequence areas.
On leak detection, PHMSA has produced a report, but not yet
published the notice of proposed rulemaking. The language in
the 2011 Act has caused financial difficulties in the states
which I referenced, and specifically to Georgia, and they must
issue waivers for the 36 more states each year.
Gathering lines is certainly important in this new paradigm
of oil recovery in our country, and we suggest that the
gathering lines should be regulated in order to risk to the
public.
Notice of proposed rulemaking released on excess flow
valves was released earlier this month. NARUC is currently
reviewing that proposal.
We also believe that PHMSA has not yet implemented
regulations on maximum allowable operating pressure. We need to
see these rules in a prudent and expeditious manner to ensure
the public safety of these lines.
Mr. Chairman, we specifically speak to safety and
efficiency issues. It could be economic. These are important
issues to our states. The implementation and the
reauthorization of the Pipeline Safety Act is important to
NARUC and our states, and we thank you for this time to be able
to express our views.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wise follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[The addendum to Mr. Wise's testimony has been retained in
committee files and can be found at: http://docs.house.gov/
meetings/if/if03/20150714/103737/hhrg-114-if03-wstate-wises-
20150714.pdf.]
Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you, Mr. Wise.
And our next witness is Donald Santa, who is the President
and CEO of the Interstate Natural Gas Association of America.
Mr. Santa, thanks for being with us, and you are recognized for
5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DONALD SANTA

Mr. Santa. Good afternoon, Chairman Whitfield, and members
of the subcommittee. My name is Donald Santa, and I am
president and CEO of the Interstate Natural Gas Association of
America, or INGAA.
INGAA represents interstate natural gas transmission
pipeline operators in the U.S. and Canada. The pipeline systems
operated by INGAA's 25 member companies are analogous to the
interstate highway system; transporting natural gas across
state and regional boundaries.
In the wake of the natural gas pipeline accident in San
Bruno, California, in 2010, INGAA's Board of Directors
committed the Association and its member companies to the goal
of zero pipeline safety incidents. While this is a tough and
some would say impossible goal to meet, the emphasis is in the
right place; a pursuit of excellence.
While progress towards INGAA's goal of zero incidents must
continue, whether or not new regulations are issued, it is
important and desirable that there be consistency between the
voluntary commitments in the INGAA action plan and the
regulations that will implement the 2011 Pipeline Safety Act.
INGAA has engaged in active dialogue with PHMSA and other
stakeholders over the past 3 years to achieve this goal. This
has been constructive, and we have every reason to believe that
the comprehensive rule proposed soon will affect INGAA's input.
Still, these proposed regulations are behind the schedule that
Congress prescribed in 2011. INGAA acknowledges that regulation
should be thoughtfully considered and include an analysis of
costs and benefits. The practical consequences of this delay,
however, is to erode the confidence of some pipeline companies
that proceeding with the dedication of resources needed to
implement the pipeline safety commitments will be consistent
with the final rules adopted by PHMSA. This hesitancy is rooted
in the perceived risk that the rules ultimately might compel
repeating certain steps in the pipeline safety action plan.
This is not insignificant. For example, testing pipelines for
material strength is both costly and disruptive because
pipelines need to be removed from operation to complete this
testing. This do-over risk creates financial risk for pipeline
operators and their customers, as well as the risk of more
extensive operational disruptions that would be needed. This
do-over risk should not be permitted to hold us back when we,
as an industry and or regulators, should be moving forward.
Our purpose here is to work collaboratively with PHMSA.
Because the regulatory process indeed goes beyond what PHMSA
can control, INGAA wishes to make the point that it is critical
that these natural gas pipelines safety regulations be
completed in a workable and timely manner. It is worth
recalling that the title of the most recent law reauthorizing
the Pipeline Safety Act makes the point. It is the Pipeline
Safety, Regulatory Certainty, and Job Creation Act of 2011.
Regulatory certainty is necessary to move forward.
INGAA supports the reauthorization of the Pipeline Safety
Program during this Congress. My written statement includes
some suggestions for the legislation, including providing some
more definition for several key natural gas regulations. With
further definition from Congress, we believe the proposed rules
could be completed in a more timely manner, and the pipeline
industry would have greater certainty about what future
regulations would require. This would allow operators to start
working towards those requirements now, as opposed to just
waiting until a set of regulations is final at an unknown date.
We continue to believe that a reauthorization bill, and the
accountability and oversight that comes with it, will help to
get PHMSA back on track for meeting the safety mandates
required in 2011. I would be happy to discuss this and further
suggestions.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I am
happy to answer any questions of the subcommittee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Santa follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Well, thanks very much, Mr. Santa.
And our next witness is Mr. Ron Bradley, who is Vice
President of Gas Operations for PECO Energy, and I think you
are testifying on behalf of the American Gas Association.

STATEMENT OF RON BRADLEY

Mr. Bradley. Good afternoon, Chairman Whitfield, and
members of the committee. My name is Ron Bradley, and I serve
as the Vice President of Gas Operations at PECO, which provides
reliable electric and natural gas customer--or service to more
than 1.6 million electric customers, and more than 500,000 gas
customers in southeastern Pennsylvania. I appreciate the
opportunity to testify on behalf of the natural gas
distribution industry.
PECO is a part of the Exelon family of companies. Exelon is
the Nation's largest competitive energy provider. In addition
to Exelon's generation, power, and unregulated businesses, our
sister utilities include BGE in Baltimore, and ComEd in
Chicago. Combined, we serve 6.6 million electric customers in
Illinois, Maryland, and Pennsylvania, and more than 1.1 million
natural gas customers in Maryland and Pennsylvania.
Today, I am testifying on behalf of the American Gas
Association which represents more than 200 local distribution
companies, also known as LDCs, which serve more than 71 million
customers.
AGA's member companies operate 2.4 million miles of
underground pipeline, safely delivering clean, affordable
natural gas to residential, commercial, and industrial
customers. LDCs provide the last critical link in the energy
delivery chain, connecting interstate pipelines directly to
homes and businesses. Our focus today is ensuring that we keep
the gas flowing safely and reliably.
As part of an agreement with the Federal Government, most
states assume primary responsibility for safety regulation of
LDCs, as well as intrastate transmission pipelines. Some
governments are encouraged to adopt minimum standards
promulgated by the U.S. Department of Transportation. Many
states choose to adopt standards that are more stringent than
federal requirements. Additionally, our companies are in close
contact with state pipeline safety inspectors, working in a
collaborative manner that provides for far more inspections
than required under federal law.
LDCs do not operate strictly in a compliance culture, but
rather in a culture of proactive collaborative engagement. Each
company employs trained safety professionals, provides ongoing
employee evaluations and safety training, conducts rigorous
system inspection, testing, maintenance, repair, and
replacement programs, and educates the public on natural gas
safety. AGA's commitment to enhancing safety adopted in 2011
provides a summary statement of these commitments. The
Association has also developed numerous pipeline safety
initiatives focused on raising the bar on safety, including
peer-to-peer reviews and best practice forums that share best
practices, and lessons learned throughout the industry.
Each year, LDCs spend approximately $19 billion on safety;
one half of that on our voluntary activities. This number
continues to escalate as work commences on newly approved
accelerated pipeline replacement programs.
The Pipe Inspection, Protection, Enforcement, and Safety
Act of 2006, and the Pipeline Safety, Regulatory Certainty, and
Job Creation Act of 2011, both outline several programs that
help continue to improve the safety of the industry. AGA member
companies have implemented aspects of these programs either
through DOT regulation or voluntarily. However, many of these
programs are in their infancy in terms of implementation, and
we encourage Congress to allow these programs to develop and
mature. In the case of the unanimously passed 2011 Act, we
dealt with a number of key issues. Several of the required
regulations have yet to be finalized. Progress is being made,
however, and thus, we believe it would be premature to make
changes to the law at this time. For instance, the industry is
experiencing significant uncertainty regarding PHMSA
implementation of maximum allowable operating pressure, and the
integrity verification programs. We are prepared to act, but
regulatory certainty provided by implementation of regulation
would be beneficial to the industry and customers alike.
Layering new laws and regulations onto companies before
existing regulations have been finalized and given a reasonable
amount of time to work is likely to create uncertainty that
undermines our shared safety goals. PHMSA has issued a number
of significant guidance documents, released the results of
congressionally mandated study on leak detection, and created a
database to track progress in replacing cast iron.
With regard to replacement of cast iron, the quantity of
these mains continues to steadily decline, making up less than
3 percent of total mileage. There are 29,358 miles of cast iron
still in use, and the industry estimates it will cost $83
billion to complete that.
We applaud the committee's focus on the common goal to
enhance the safe delivery of this vital energy resource, and I
am pleased to answer questions on these topics and other topics
you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bradley follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Bradley.
And our next witness is Mr. Andy Black, who is the
President and CEO of the Association of Oil Pipe Lines, and he
had many productive years here at the Energy and Commerce
Committee, and welcome back, Mr. Black, and you are recognized
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ANDREW BLACK

Mr. Andrew Black. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members. I am
Andy Black, President and CEO of the Association of Oil Pipe
Lines.
Mr. Whitfield. Is the microphone on?
Mr. Andrew Black. Yes, sir. Can you hear me better? I am
also testifying on behalf of API.
We represent transmission pipeline operators that deliver
crude oil, refined products like gasoline, diesel fuel, and jet
fuel, and natural gas liquids such as propane. Our U.S.
pipelines extend 192,000 miles, safely delivering 14.9 billion
barrels of crude oil and energy products a year.
Pipelines play a critical role in delivering energy to
American workers and families. Americans use the energy in our
pipelines delivered in their cars and trucks to work or driving
on the job. Farmers use propane for rural heating and crop
drying. American workers use raw materials like ethane for
their good-paying manufacturing jobs.
Pipelines are an exceedingly safe way to deliver the energy
America needs. The average barrel of crude oil or petroleum
products reaches its destination safely, greater than 99.999
percent of the time. Since 1999, pipeline incidents impacting
the public or environment are down 50 percent. Corrosion cost,
pipeline incidents are down 76 percent thanks to the widespread
use of smart inline inspection to detect corrosion in pipes.
Pipeline incidents caused accidentally by third party damage
are down 78 percent. But even with these improvements in
pipeline safety over the last 15 years, we know today we need
to keep improving pipeline safety further, and are committed to
doing so.
Last year, liquid pipeline operators spent more than $2.2
billion evaluating, inspecting, and maintaining their
pipelines. The spending shows that we are expending a great
amount of resources to make pipeline incidents even rarer.
I would like to share with you a number of the industry-
wide efforts we have underway to improve pipeline safety. Two
years ago, liquid pipeline operators launched the Pipeline
Safety Excellence Initiative. It includes shared pipeline
safety principles, such as the goal of zero incidents. Pipeline
Safety Excellence also embodies the work of nearly a dozen
industry-wide groups to improve pipeline operations and safety.
We are funding research and development on new and improved ILI
smart pig technologies, developing new best practices to detect
and respond to potential cracking in pipes, improving leak
detection program management, and ensuring pipeline
construction quality management. Strategic initiatives reflect
review of safety performance data and lessons learned from
pipeline incidents to make safety improvements. What results of
the recent California release are not yet available of the
investigation. We look forward to understanding the root causes
of that incident, and addressing any recommendations for safety
improvement industry-wide. Strategic initiatives also reflect
lessons from safety investigators and address the
recommendations of the NTSB and advisories from PHMSA. One of
our most recent safety successes that PHMSA Executive Director
Cummings mentioned is a new tool to manage comprehensively and
holistically all of the different pipeline safety activities
across the company. API recommended practice 1173. The NTSB
recommended we develop this best practice for pipeline safety
management system after the 2010 Marshall, Michigan, pipeline
release.
We embraced NTSB's recommendation and worked together with
PHMSA, state regulators, natural gas pipeline operators, and
process safety experts over a stretch of 2 years to reach an
agreement on this important advance in pipeline safety. Over
that time, we consulted with safety experts within other
industries successfully using safety management systems to
improve safety in their sectors. Our members are now planning
aggressive implementation of this pipeline safety management
system recommended practice because of the opportunity we have
to improve pipeline safety industry-wide.
Another success story is the work of our emergency response
team. Local fire and police departments, especially volunteer
departments in rural locations, told us they just didn't have
the resources to obtain pipeline-specific emergency response
training. We responded to this need by bringing pipeline
training to them free of charge through an online course. This
and other pipeline emergency response tools can be reached
through the Web site, Pipelineemergencyresponse.com. For these
efforts, I will proudly travel later this month to Nashville in
the annual meeting of the National Association of State Fire
Marshals to receive their Norm Mineta Excellence in
Transportation Safety Award, presented this year to API and
AOPL jointly for the work of our emergency response team. This
award is given annually to an individual or team that has made
a significant and lasting contribution to the safety of people,
products, and materials in transit. Through this award, state
fire marshals recognize individuals and teams that have
encouraged transportation safety standards above what is
required, and have worked to ensure the safety of emergency
responders.
As you can see, there is much work underway to improve
pipeline safety performance. Thank you for the opportunity to
testify.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Andrew Black follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you, Mr. Black.
And our next witness is Mr. Carl Weimer, who is the
Executive Director of the Pipeline Safety Trust. Thanks for
being with us, and you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CARL WEIMER

Mr. Weimer. Good afternoon, Chairman Whitfield, and members
of the committee. Thank you for inviting me to speak here
today.
The Pipeline Safety Trust came into being after a pipeline
disaster that occurred in 1999. While prosecuting that
incident, the U.S. Justice Department was so aghast at the way
the pipeline company had operated and maintained their
pipeline, and the lack of oversight from federal regulators,
that they asked the federal courts to set aside money from the
settlement of that case to create the Pipeline Safety Trust as
a watchdog organization over both the industry and the
regulators. We have been trying to fulfill that vision ever
since.
Reviewing the implementation of the 2011 Pipeline Safety
Act is somewhat difficult because of the many required reports
and changes to the regulations have yet to be produced. The
slowness of the reporting and rulemaking process seems at odds
with the public proclamations of concern and action from the
Administration. While many are frustrated by this slow
progress, it is difficult to know exactly where to lay the
blame. PHMSA is partially to blame, since they have been slow
to produce the required reports and regulation, but they have
also been clear with Congress for a number of years now that
they lack the resources needed to complete their mission in a
timely manner. We also have noted that many times regulations
and reports, once produced by PHMSA, get significantly delayed
by the Secretary's office itself, or by the White House's
Office of Information Regulatory Affairs. It would appear there
is plenty of blame to be shared for the slowness in
implementing many important pipeline safety initiatives.
Even with the slowness and delay, progress has recently
been made, as evidenced by the reduction in the number of
pipeline failures that involve both injuries and death to all-
time low levels. Unfortunately, at the same time that the
number of failures that injure people has been decreasing, the
number of significant failures that dump products into the
environment and damage property is increasing, as dramatically
shown by the recent spill of crude oil into the ocean near
Santa Barbara, and the second spill in just a few years of
crude oil into the Yellowstone River. This increase in the
overall significant failure rate shows that while the focus
today maybe on PHMSA, ultimately, the companies that own and
operate these pipelines are the ones that need to be held
responsible for their failures.
PHMSA has in play a number of significant rulemakings that
may very well address many of the key issues that were asked to
address in the 2011 Act; expansion of integrity management,
leak detection, automated shut-off valves, gas gathering lines,
excess flow valves, depth of burial of stream crossings, and
verification of maximum allowable operating pressure. We say
these issues may be addressed because at this point we really
don't know. While PHMSA has started the rulemaking process for
many of these issues, for the most of these items no actual
rule or proposed rule has been produced.
Some of these efforts started well over 4 years ago, and
the exact nature of the hold-up is unclear. We ask that you
help break this logjam of delay, and if that is not possible,
Congress should include these specific rules in the statute as
part of the upcoming reauthorization.
Congress also asked for non-rulemaking studies and actions
in the 2011 Act, which also have not been accomplished. The
areas we are most concerned with include the available--
availability of meaningful facility response plans, maps of
high consequence areas, a study of the sufficiency of
regulations for transport of diluted bitumen, report on
excavation damage, and an NTSB-requested audit of the Integrity
Management Program.
The report of gathering lines was recently submitted, but
the gathering line issue is of particular importance to us
since we see thousands of new miles of gas gathering lines
going into the ground every year, with the majority of them
being completely unregulated.
With the large increase in new pipeline infrastructure in
some parts of the country, the aging infrastructure in need of
replacement in other areas, and increased complexity of risk-
based regulations, we were happy to see Congress provide a
significant increase in PHMSA's budget for fiscal year 2015.
This budget increase will allow PHMSA to add an additional 100-
plus new positions, targeted inspections and enforcement, as
well as more adequately compensating the states for their
pipeline safety programs. It is now your job to ensure that
PHMSA effectively expands and manages this increased workforce
in ways that help decrease the recent uptick in significant
pipeline safety failures.
As reauthorization of the National Pipeline Safety Program
begins later this year, we would support a straight
reauthorization of the current program to allow PHMSA to
finally produce all the rules and reports previously requested,
and address the long list of recommendations from the NTSB. For
such a straight reauthorization to be successful, Congress
needs to remain actively involved in oversight to ensure the
Administration is doing the things they have been charged with.
Thank you again for letting me testify today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Weimer follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you.
And at this time, I would like to introduce Mrs. Capps to
introduce our final witness.
Mrs. Capps. Mr. Chairman, thank you for giving me this
privilege. And it is an honor to welcome you to our panel and
to our discussion today Dianne Black, who is Assistant Director
of Planning and Development for the County of Santa Barbara.
And I know that she has worked for the county for 30 years, and
in that time, has had a lot to do with various regulations
having to do with pipeline safety, and in her current role she
has been in the middle of all the spill recovery and response
efforts, as well as pipeline safety having to do with our most
recent incident on the Gaviota Coast.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you. And you are recognized for
5 minutes, Ms. Black.

STATEMENT OF DIANNE BLACK

Ms. Dianne Black. Thank you. Good afternoon, Chairman
Whitfield, and other members of the committee. Thank you for
inviting me to testify today. My name is Dianne Black, I am the
Assistant Director of the Planning and Development Department
for the County of Santa Barbara in California.
I have been involved in the emergency response, permitting,
and recovery for the Refugio oil spill, which was the result of
a ruptured pipeline onshore in our county. I have overseen the
permitting of oil and gas facilities in the county for nearly
20 years, and I have been involved in other oil spill
responses, including the Torch oil spill from Platform Irene in
1997. I appreciate being here to share the experiences of Santa
Barbara County in the review and permitting of oil and gas
projects and associated pipelines.
Now the disclaimer. Within the Refugio oil spill response,
I may be a decision-maker again for either emergency permits or
other types of permits, and if that occurs, I will need to
approach each permit application on a case-by-case basis. As a
practical matter, that means that today I can provide you with
general information, but I can't discuss how I might act on an
application without reviewing it and reviewing the public
comment associated with it.
With respect to the pipeline in Santa Barbara County that
recently failed, the County of Santa Barbara entered into a
settlement agreement with Celeron Pipeline Company in 1988
concerning the presumption that the county is preempted by
federal law from regulating the design and operation of that
pipeline. That precluded the county from inspecting operations
by, and most permitting of, what is now known as the Plains All
American Pipeline, the line central to the Refugio spill.
For the past decade or more, the county has not--to oil
company applicants, the construction and safety systems
required for inter and intrastate pipelines. Instead,
subsequent to changes in federal law in 2002, the county has
evaluated oil and gas projects, including associated pipeline
systems, in their entirety as is required under the California
Environmental Quality Act. The Federal Pipeline Safety
Improvement Act of 2002 does not preempt local jurisdictions in
California from their obligations under CEQA.
Working with oil company applicants, this has resulted in
oil companies in Santa Barbara County routinely including
state-of-the-art leak detection and spill prevention
technology, including automatic shut-off systems in their
project descriptions, which are then analyzed under CEQA.
Pipeline systems which include automatic shut-off systems
minimize the potential impacts from oil spills, including
biological hazardous materials and risk, air quality, and
recreational impacts.
Within the CEQA process, the County of Santa Barbara does
not dictate what equipment oil companies must use in their
pipelines in order to minimize impacts from oil spills. Rather,
it is the oil companies themselves, through their own
engineers, who determine what technology to build into pipeline
projects in order to minimize impacts from spills. Automatic
shut-off systems rely on pipeline sensors which detected
changes in the pressure and flow, which indicate when there may
be a problem in the pipeline. When pressure or flow anomalies
are detected, the system automatically shuts down the pumps and
valves associated with the pipeline to limit the potential
release of oil. Automatic shut-off systems are distinguished
from remotely-operated systems by the fact that automatic shut-
off systems do not require human action, decision-making, or
intervention to shut down the pipeline system. In other words,
there are preset parameters which, if triggered, result in the
pipeline system being automatically shut down without any human
action. To be clear, the Plains All American Pipelines, both
901 and--which was the subject of this spill, and 903, to which
it connects, do not have automatic shut-off systems. With the
exception of the Plains pipelines, all of the major
transmission pipelines in the county are equipped with
automatic shut-off systems. These include all the pipelines
that transport oil and gas from the offshore platforms to
facilities in Santa Barbara County, and you can see those on
the map that I provided for the record.
Additional pipelines within the county that are equipped
with automatic shut-off systems include--the map that is on the
screen, include line 96, which transports oil from the Ellwood
Onshore Facility to Las Flores Canyon. Line 300, the onshore
length of the pipeline from Platform Irene to the Lompoc Oil
and Gas plant, and on to the Santa Maria Refinery. The Sisquoc
Pump Station, which transports oil from the Sisquoc Pump
Station to the Santa Maria Pump Station, and a permitted but
not yet constructed pipeline in northern Santa Barbara County.
Again, all of these automatic shut-off systems were
incorporated into the project description for individual
projects by oil company applicants prior to environmental
review.
That concludes my prepared comments, and I would be happy
to answer questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Dianne Black follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you, Ms. Black. And thank all of
you for your statements.
And I will recognize myself for 5 minutes of questions. Ms.
Black, before you came today and listened to the testimony of
Ms. Cummings, were you aware that 16 of the 42 safety standards
in the 2011 bill had not had final regulations issued? Were you
aware of that before?
Ms. Dianne Black. Mr. Chair, I was aware, but only most
recently had I become aware of that.
Mr. Whitfield. Because of this bill, all right.
Ms. Dianne Black. Right.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, do any of you have any conclusions
yourself as to why PHMSA has been not able to complete these
safety standards? OK. All right.
Mr. Wise, on gathering lines, I know MSHA does not require
regulations of of gathering lines, but some states have decided
to regulate those. Has Georgia taken action on that or----
Mr. Wise. No, sir, because for the most part, we are not
the beneficiary of the opportunity to have gathering lines. We
are----
Mr. Whitfield. Right.
Mr. Wise. We are not a fracking state.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
Mr. Wise. But we do think it is important. And again, as I
said in my summary, that it is about safety or efficiency or
both, and that if you are going to have pipeline safety, that
it is important that gathering lines could and should be
included in the states choose to enact that level of
regulation.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes. Mr. Santa, do you or Mr. Bradley or Mr.
Black have any comments on gathering lines in general?
Mr. Santa. Mr. Chairman, many of our associate operators--
INGAA represents the operators of natural gas transmission
pipelines, in particular interstate transmission pipelines. We
do not represent the gathering segment of the industry, so
probably that question is best directed to those who represent
or are in that segment.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Do you have any additional comments you
would like to make about it, Mr. Black?
Mr. Andrew Black. Well, oil gathering lines are regulated
to some extent by PHMSA if they are in a non-rural setting, if
they cross an environment, an unusually sensitive area, or
exceed a certain diameter.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
Mr. Andrew Black. So more liquid is gathering regulations.
Mr. Whitfield. Do any of you have any idea what percent of
all the pipelines in America have these automatic shut-off
valves in them? Does anybody have any idea on that? OK. Do you,
Mr. Weimer, have any ideas on that? OK.
They are not required, and I know that MSHA has conducted a
study on this, and I guess as a layman you would think that
this would be of benefit, but I keep hearing from technical
people that it is not always a benefit. Would anyone have a
comment on that? Yes, Mr. Black.
Mr. Andrew Black. Liquid pipeline operators recommend and
widely use automated remotely operated shut-off valves so that
a trained control room operator can deploy that valve as part
of a controlled shut-down of a pipeline. Long-haul, high
pressure, liquid pipeline operators generally do not use
automatic shut-off valves and don't recommend it because of the
pressure surge that can be created from a quick shut-off of an
automatic valve that is not part of a planned shutdown.
We have analyzed and found nine releases in the past that
are because of conditions similar to an automatic shut-off
valve shutting. Found one rupture that put 4,000 barrels of
refined products out on the right-of-way, that was caused
because of conditions like automatic shut-off valves. So in
liquids, long-haul, high pressure pipelines, automatic shut-off
valves are not recommended.
Mr. Whitfield. Now, corrosion of pipelines is a major
concern, correct? And it is my understanding that in different
geographical areas, there are different amounts of corrosion.
Is that true or is that not true?
Mr. Santa. Yes, Mr. Chairman, that is true because a lot of
it has to do with the environment----
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
Mr. Santa [continuing]. In which the pipeline is located,
the soil, things of that nature.
Mr. Whitfield. And I have heard that in the Santa Barbara
area that that is prone to a lot of corrosion there. Would
anybody be able to confirm that or not? OK.
OK, now, would you agree--all of you would agree that
pipelines still is the safest way to transport this material.
Is everybody in agreement with that?
Mr. Wise. Yes, sir. And clearly, and as I have directed in
our state, that we have had an aggressive replacement of bare
steel and cast iron, and so where we had a very safe program to
begin with, it is even safer today. And the One-Call Program
has made it continue to be safer.
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Mr. Wise. But it is an extraordinary delivery process.
Mr. Whitfield. Right.
OK, Mrs. Capps, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you. I want to thank all the witnesses
for being here today and for your testimony, and particularly,
of course, my constituent coming all the way from California,
and the fact that she testified in the state panel just last
week on this topic. And in the wake of the Plains oil spill on
May 19 on our shoreline, there has been a lot of discussion
about the fact that the Plains All American--we have touched on
it already, the Plains All American Pipeline is not equipped
with an automatic shut-off system. And when questioned about
this, that particular company echoed the longstanding industry
position that such systems are not feasible for oil pipelines,
yet Santa Barbara County has demonstrated this claim is not
true.
So, Ms. Black, you explained in your testimony that there
are numerous pipelines in Santa Barbara County that employ
automatic shut-off systems and state-of-the-art leak detection
technologies. Would you describe a few of the projects
currently using these advanced safety systems in our county?
Ms. Dianne Black. I went over those very briefly in my
testimony, but I will----
Mrs. Capps. I know----
Ms. Dianne Black [continuing]. Repeat it----
Mrs. Capps [continuing]. But----
Ms. Dianne Black. I will repeat it a bit more slowly and
emphasize that when I talk about automatic shut-off systems, I
really mean the whole system. So I have heard the testimony
from oil company representatives that they feel it is not the
best practice, and that there is some risk involved. That has
not been our experience. We have looked at them as a system
where the pump is shut off and then valves are shut off
sequentially. So I think we really have to talk about it as a
system rather than valves.
So in Santa Barbara County, in addition to the pipelines
that come from the platforms and have shut-off systems, we have
several pipelines, most recently line 96, which is associated
with the Venoco's Platform Holly, transports oil from the
Ellwood Onshore Facility to Las Flores Canyon, and then ties
into the Plains All American Pipeline. That has an automatic
shut-off system. Line 300, which is the onshore length of
pipeline from Platform Irene to the Lompoc Oil and Gas Plant,
and then on to the Santa Maria Refinery----
Mrs. Capps. Yes.
Ms. Dianne Black [continuing]. Has an automatic shut-off
system. The Sisquoc Pipeline which transports oil from the
Sisquoc Pump Station to the Santa Maria Pump Station, so pretty
much onshore oil, also has an automatic shut-off system. And
then we most recently permitted the Foxen Petroleum Pipeline,
which was permitted with an automatic shut-off system.
Mrs. Capps. And I would like to ask for these to be
submitted for the record, Mr. Chairman. And just to follow up
briefly, has the use of any of these advanced systems caused
any secondary ruptures or other serious problems in the county?
Ms. Dianne Black. No, not in our entire history with them.
Mrs. Capps. OK. And oil development continues to thrive in
the area, am I correct on that?
Ms. Dianne Black. It does, as you can see from the map,
although offshore oil has somewhat declined----
Mrs. Capps. Right.
Ms. Dianne Black [continuing]. Because of resources.
Mrs. Capps. And no pipeline operators have gone bankrupt
due to the cost of installing these systems, to your knowledge?
Ms. Dianne Black. No.
Mrs. Capps. OK. There has also been some confusion
regarding the definition of the term automatic. Plains and
other companies often refer to their systems as automatic, even
though a human operator must still decide to activate. That was
the case with Plains. To clarify, the automatic shut-off system
installed in Santa Barbara County, the ones you were
describing, require no human intervention, is that correct----
Ms. Dianne Black. That----
Mrs. Capps [continuing]. Just to be clear?
Ms. Dianne Black. That is correct.
Mrs. Capps. And can you briefly explain how these advanced
systems work compared to those on the ruptured Plains pipeline?
Why are they so much more effective at detecting and stopping
spills?
Ms. Dianne Black. They are more effective because they
don't require human interaction or intervention. They shut off
based upon preset parameters, so an operator isn't having to
make a decision that----
Mrs. Capps. All right.
Ms. Dianne Black [continuing]. An actual parameter has been
reached.
Mrs. Capps. Now, here is the other thing, and maybe this
goes to CEQA too, our local program. While the local companies
technically voluntarily install the more advanced systems, it
is clear that the law, both state and federal, have played an
important role. Can you elaborate on this--it sets the standard
and everybody kind of gets onboard just because of the
consequences of not doing so. So there is a self regulatory
agency as well. What is the policy mechanism that pushed these
companies to proactively include the state-of-the-art
technologies in their project?
Ms. Dianne Black. Well, the California Environmental
Quality Act is a very powerful tool in California. The County
of Santa Barbara reviews the whole of every project, whether it
is something that is under our direct jurisdiction or not, we
review it. And so pipeline companies in Santa Barbara County
include in their project descriptions automatic shut-off
systems to mitigate upfront the impacts of a potential spill.
Mrs. Capps. I have used up my time, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
very much.
Mr. Latta [presiding]. The gentlelady's time has expired
and she yields back.
And I would also like to thank our panel today for being
here. It has been very informational.
Mr. Wise, I think you were here for the testimony when Ms.
Cummings was testifying, and she noted that there are issues
with getting information from the states in a cost-effective
way. Would you speak to the data you worked to provide to
PHMSA?
Mr. Wise. I am sorry, sir?
Mr. Latta. Ms. Cummings noted that there are issues with
getting information from the states and getting that
information in a cost-effective way. Would you be able to speak
to the data that you worked to help provide to PHMSA in their
mapping and everything else?
Mr. Wise. In my role as a commissioner, it is a state
commission, we believe that our office of pipeline safety is
extraordinary, and they do a great job of getting the
information that is requested. And when there is an issue,
PHMSA relates it to our staff and then we respond very quickly
to that. And so I don't--I believe that we have a good working
relationship, that they acknowledge the role that we played in
Georgia to have a very safe delivery system, and I would be
surprised to hear that, at least in my state, and haven't heard
it from the other states, that there is a problem with
information coming from the state commissions.
Mr. Latta. Let me ask, also in your testimony that--you
said that PHMSA has not updated the National Pipeline Mapping
System including the identification of the high consequence
areas. Could you go into that and the high consequence areas,
and maybe what should be done?
Mr. Wise. Well, again, there is going to be the high
deliverability, and it is an issue that clearly is important to
the states and the regulators, and I think it was a question
that was asked of one of the representatives--the members today
about releasing that information to the public, and we are not
knowledgeable of some of this mapping to this point, and
believe it should be released.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you.
Mr. Black, how do pipeline operators use the inline
inspection of so-called smart pig technology to find problems
in the pipelines?
Mr. Andrew Black. Yes, the smart pig device travels inside
of the pipeline, gathering information about the pipeline as it
goes. It uses technology to detect wall thickness, and
different technologies to determine potential cracks. And then
the information that is provided from the onboard computer that
has traveled through the pipeline is reviewed. That is raw
data, it is terabytes of it, that third party experts, as
Director Cummings said, then review and they determine whether
the information that has been provided is just about the
natural features of the pipe or is about something that an
operator needs to consider addressing. And importantly also,
the smart pig vendor and the pipeline company will uncover a
section of the pipeline that has been tested and review the
results of the inline inspection to field inspections to
calibrate the accuracy of the pig. This has succeeded in
reducing corrosion-caused incidents by more than 76 percent
over the last 15 percent. And corrosion was really the reason
for modern integrity management and the advent of this inline
inspection technology. It has been proven successful. Got a lot
of R&D right now to improve the ability of the machines to
sense more, and then the analytics of the people to determine
what the machines are telling us.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Mr. Santa, could you talk more about the 9-point pipeline
safety action plan you mentioned, and what INGAA has done to
educate the public about the safety measures that are
undertaken with pipeline projects?
Mr. Santa. Yes, sir. In the wake of the San Bruno tragedy
in 2010, the INGAA Board committed to a set of voluntary
commitments to improve pipeline safety. As I said in my
testimony, it was anchored in the goal of zero incidents as the
goal. That 9-nine program includes many of the elements that
were addressed in the 2011 pipeline safety reauthorization, as
well as some of the relevant NTSB recommendations. I won't go
through all of the 9 points. Two of them to point out is a
commitment to expand the use of integrity management, the--
consequence areas. Another one is to perform the testing of
pipe where it is necessary to verify the material strength of
that pipe. We have engaged in an extensive outreach with
pipeline safety stakeholders to keep them abreast of the
progress that we are making there. Pipeline companies as part
of their outreach to the public along their corridors
communicate this, and also in connection with new pipeline
projects, part of the outreach to the public includes
addressing the safety of these systems.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much.
And I am going to yield back, and recognize the gentleman
from California for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank the panel. Very informative. I only have 5
minutes of questions, so I am a little disappointed.
Mr. Cummings, I am going to start with you. I asked--I mean
Mr. Weimer. I asked Ms. Cummings to describe the rulemaking
process. Her answer was very roundabout, very hard to
understand. Is it a transparent process and is there a good
deal of room for improvement in that process?
Mr. Weimer. Yes, we think there is a good deal of room for
improvement. Parts of it are transparent when they do the
advance notice of proposed rulemaking, and the notice of
proposed rulemaking. It opens it up for public comments, and
all those public comments are transparent. Where it kind of
disappears from that transparency is in the interim. Like on
the liquid rule that was drafted almost 5 years ago, they went
through an advanced notice of proposed rulemaking, took lots of
public comments, supposedly went back and then wrote a proposed
rule, and then it disappeared into the black box somewhere
between the Secretary's office and the White House.
Mr. McNerney. Yes.
Mr. Weimer. And that part of the process of where that is
and why it has taken so long is, I think, why everybody up here
has been frustrated.
Mr. McNerney. And the agency wouldn't have any control over
that.
Mr. Weimer. Well, I think once PHMSA writes the rule and
sends it up, it's over their head. So it is above their pay
grade at that point.
Mr. McNerney. Well, you mentioned that Congress should
expedite the rulemaking or write rules into the legislation.
Now, in my opinion, that would open up a lot of opportunity for
legal action, for law suits. Wouldn't that be the case?
Mr. Weimer. Well, I think it is probably wise that you are
not pipeline engineers and experts that--so drafting rules
might not be the best for Congress, but there are instances
where that has been very successful. In the 2006 Act, you put a
rule right in there for excess flow valves that led to millions
of excess flow valves being put on the new houses being
constructed around the country that the NTSB says has saved
lives.
Mr. McNerney. Yes.
Mr. Weimer. And so there are a few instances where specific
rules that are pretty well clarified can be put right into the
statute.
Mr. McNerney. Well, thank you. Well, we are seeing an
abundance of natural gas production now in this country, do we
have the capacity to manage that safely with minimum leakage
and minimum opportunity for accidents?
Mr. Weimer. Well, I think it is a good step forward. The
new budget that PHMSA was given to hire more inspectors and
enforcement folks, and to help support the states in that too.
I think the piece that is missing is the gathering lines that
has been talked about. When Ms. Cummings talks about 2.6
million miles of pipelines in this country, she isn't including
the 2 or 300,000 miles of gathering lines that are completely
unregulated----
Mr. McNerney. Yes.
Mr. Weimer [continuing]. In most all states.
Mr. McNerney. OK, thank you.
Mr. Black, I am going to follow up on the smart pig
question. Do you think that is the best technology that is out
there for inspecting pipes?
Mr. Andrew Black. Of the methods of conducting integrity
management, we have found inline inspection or smart pigs to be
the best. So now the research projects are about how to make
those pigs more capable, and to improve our capability to
process that information. We find the hydrostatic pressure
testing to be very helpful when commissioning a new pipeline,
for understanding if it is ready for operation.
Mr. McNerney. Is there any technology out there that you
think is going to make it easier or cheaper to conduct testing?
Mr. Andrew Black. Well, it is not getting cheaper to use
these. The pigs are getting more specialized. Whereas there
used to be one type of pig that did one type of data gathering,
now operators are using multiple types of----
Mr. McNerney. Yes.
Mr. Andrew Black [continuing]. Technologies. That means
multiple types of inspections or several in the same train
with--inside a pipe. That is where technology is growing, and
we are spending a lot of money on research and development and
a consortia to try to improve that record further and drive
down the number of incidents.
Mr. McNerney. OK. Mr. Santa, you mentioned that there is a
need for consistency between voluntary actions and rules. How
do you find the cooperation between the agency and the private
sector?
Mr. Santa. Mr. McNerney, as I mentioned in my testimony,
INGAA and its members have engaged with PHMSA and other
stakeholders following the 2011 reauthorization, and we found
that to be a good and productive process, and we believe that
our input will be reflected in the rules when they are
proposed. By the same token, we need that certainty that comes
with those proposed rules, and also as I noted, given the
delays that have occurred and that may well continue, getting
some items addressed in the reauthorization we think would be
constructive.
Mr. McNerney. I just want to say, Mr. Wise, I detected a
lot of frustration in your testimony about unpublished
information that is out there, the delays, and I know you don't
have time to answer on my 5 minutes, but I certainly appreciate
your comments.
Mr. Wise. Thank you, sir.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, recognize the gentleman from
Virginia, Mr. Griffith, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you all very much for being here.
I asked the earlier panel about collocation and if they
knew of any safety concerns with locating within the same
easement, and I will open that up to any of you all. Do you all
know of any safety concerns, mainly talking about natural gas?
Two pipelines, one in my district, one in just outside of my
district, are being built in Virginia, are being proposed in
Virginia as we speak. Anybody know why they can't collocate
with other gas pipelines or in the same easement footprint? Any
safety reasons anybody knows about? Mr. Bradley?
Mr. Bradley. Yes, I will take a shot at answering from the
perspective of the natural gas distribution companies. We are
in the streets with the water departments, with the sewer
departments, and many times our infrastructure went in the same
time. So you pick a year, 1950, 1940, so we are back together.
We try to go in together to make sure that we minimize the
impact on the town, the neighborhood, and we keep costs down by
sharing some of the restoration, repave kind of costs. With
that being said, it is still important for us to make sure that
there is some separation that is acceptable between the
infrastructure.
So we try to leverage the proximity in local build-up
communities, and we do go in, not in the same trench but in the
same street, we just keep the right separation.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much. I appreciate it. Anybody
else want to----
Mr. Santa. I mean there are instances where natural gas
transmission pipelines are collocated with other
infrastructure, for example, sometimes the same corridors as
electric transmission lines. There are issues there that need
to be addressed in terms of the cathodic protection of the
pipelines and things of that nature. So one needs to be mindful
of that. But I think pipeline operators look for opportunities
to use corridors that already have been used to avoid the
disruption and the effects on the communities and the
environment.
Mr. Griffith. And assuming that there isn't a safety
concern, that would be a wise path, would it not?
Mr. Santa. For purposes of minimizing disruption, it would
be, yes.
Mr. Griffith. Absolutely. Appreciate that very much.
Mr. Bradley, do local distribution companies pay user fees
for the transmission lines?
Mr. Bradley. By way of paying for the transmission service,
we do----
Mr. Griffith. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bradley [continuing]. Pay user fees indirectly.
Mr. Griffith. All right.
Mr. Bradley. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. And you mentioned in your testimony that
there are several regulations that have just been implemented
and need time to work before assessing whether additional
changes need to be made to enhance safety. Can you tell me what
some of those regulations are?
Mr. Bradley. Could you say that again?
Mr. Griffith. Yes, sir. You said in your testimony there
are several regulations that have recently or just been
implemented and need time to work before assessing whether
additional changes need to be made to enhance safety.
Mr. Bradley. Yes, thank you. So we are watching the
regulations around construction. There is a regulation that was
just released around construction around new infrastructure.
So, for example, there is a lot of gas main being installed.
There is a drive for it, not only from a safety perspective,
but from a brand new service to customers perspective. And in
doing that, a number of our local distribution companies just
aren't staffed for it, so we contract the work out. We want to
make sure that the contractors are qualified effectively to do
the work. There is a ruling out that we are reviewing right now
that speaks to that. We want to make sure that it is going to
hit the need that is required for this.
Mr. Griffith. All right. And can you tell me how data is
gathered and shared among the industry over time that might be
used to enhance regulations in the future----
Mr. Bradley. Yes.
Mr. Griffith [continuing]. Or help us figure out what we
ought to do?
Mr. Bradley. HEA member companies are involved in a number
of activities that support that, so we meet frequently for best
practice reviews. We like to check in with each other to figure
out who is doing whatever it is best. We look at benchmark
data, we see who has that figured out, whether it is OSHA
recordables, whether it is pipeline incidents, we bring people
in to meet. One of the big issues that you have heard about is
underground damages. So we want to understand the best
performer relative to hits per 1,000 ticket calls. We want to
bring those in and talk to them. We do that frequently at the
American Gas Association. In addition, we do peer reviews--
peer-to-peer reviews with our companies.
Mr. Griffith. Well, I do appreciate that.
I do have another safety question one of my constituents
has asked, because we are dealing with these pipeline issues,
and particularly large natural gas pipelines. Right now, they
are being told it is safe to drive over them when they put them
in the ground. They are being told they can drive over it. Does
anybody know of any reason why that would be a problem, because
a lot of my folks are going to harvest timber once every 35 to
50 years. Would that be a problem for a timber truck to drive
over one of these, or a fully loaded cattle truck?
Mr. Santa. Mr. Griffith, I think those kind of issues would
be addressed in the design of the pipeline, and there is a very
extensive review of that that occurs at the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission, and also as part of that there is the
application of the PHMSA pipeline safety rules during that
process. So I do not think there is any reason for undue
concern about that.
Mr. Griffith. All right. I appreciate it very much. And I
yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
At this time, recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Tonko, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Weimer, your testimony points to a recent National
Transportation Safety Board report on the integrity management
of gas transmission pipelines in high consequence areas. You
list seven areas that the NTSB identified for improvement in
these system requirements. Has PHMSA acted on any of these
recommendations at this point?
Mr. Weimer. No, I--they are fairly new regulations and
PHMSA hasn't acted on them. It is another one of those things
that may be in some of the regulations they are working on.
There was a lot of discussion as part of the advanced notice of
proposed rulemaking on both the liquid and the gas side about
strengthening some of the integrity management rules. So some
of those things may be acted on, but they haven't been acted on
yet.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And there are several major natural
gas pipeline projects, either proposed or underway, that will
pass through my given congressional district. These projects
are quite unpopular in the communities that will be hosting
them. And my constituents have raised a number of concerns
about these projects, including the safety of the pipelines and
the associated facilities. Compression stations, as an example.
Also because these projects will pass through small
communities, my concern is that they do not come under the high
consequence area designation. For anyone impacted by an
accident, there is no such thing as a low consequence area. And
it sounds as if the Integrity Management Program isn't
achieving the additional safety we would all like to see.
So what standards, materials, and technologies are
available to ensure greater safety of pipelines and their
associated facilities?
Mr. Weimer. Well, I think the Integrity Management Program
has achieved some of the things that it was set out to do, and
the recent NTSB study that I had mentioned paints that picture,
that for some time dependent flaws like corrosion, it has been
pretty successful, and NTSB says that in those rural areas that
are not currently covered under integrity management or those
high consequence areas, expansion of those types of
technologies into those areas would help. The problem they saw
was that companies aren't really integrating other types of
risks into their integrity management very well. It has helped
with some things, but not across the board.
Mr. Tonko. Yes. And your testimony indicates that
significant incidents are increasing on pipelines in high
consequence areas, and apparently, excavation is one of the
main causes of significant pipeline incidents. So I gathered
from Mr. Cummings' response to my question to her about--or Ms.
Cummings' response to my question to her about whether PHMSA
has accurate and complete maps of pipeline locations, that the
answer is no.
Mr. Weimer. Yes, and that is one of the rules they are
working on, strengthening that National Pipeline Mapping
System. The current plus or minus factor on a lot of that maps
is plus or minus 500 feet. So the pipeline could be, you know,
on the other side of the road or a different side of the
neighborhood than where----
Mr. Tonko. And----
Mr. Weimer [continuing]. It shows on their maps.
Mr. Tonko. And to the impacted communities, that is a
relevant situation.
Mr. Weimer. Right, and----
Mr. Tonko. Yes.
Mr. Weimer. But the one thing to mention is that those maps
should never be used for excavation. You know, if you really
are going to go in and dig, you need to call 811 to get a
really accurate location of where the pipeline is.
Mr. Tonko. And I think it is easy to calculate that the
efforts of PHMSA to communicate with local authorities about
how to avoid excavation damage is handicapped by that lack of
information. Frankly, this is shocking. At a minimum, we should
know the location of the existing networks. Would this
information help to avoid the problems we are seeing with
excavation damage to pipelines?
Mr. Weimer. Well, I think more accurate maps would help
give people an idea of where the pipelines are in their area
but really the way to get at the excavation damage is just for
everybody to really understand that 811, Call Before You Dig.
That is the accurate system that is going to really keep----
Mr. Tonko. And is it a resource problem when it comes to
accurate mapping, or are there other barriers that face us in
obtaining or organizing this information?
Mr. Weimer. Yes, I think to some degree it is a resource
problem. I have heard the industry talk about how expensive it
would be to go out and GIS their pipelines to more accurate--
lots of companies have already done that, but other companies
haven't.
Mr. Tonko. Did the states do a better job?
Mr. Weimer. The states--this is really a federal regulation
of the NPS mapping, so it falls on PHMSA.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I see I have exhausted my time. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Tonko.
We were waiting for Mr. Green, who I was told was on his
way.
Mr. Weimer, one other question I would just like to ask
you, you had mentioned in your opening statement that the
public--the Pipeline Safety Trust was funded originally through
the Department of Justice in a court case. I was curious, your
funding today, is that through private donations or how is that
done today?
Mr. Weimer. Well, luckily, the Board members of the
Pipeline Safety Trust, who were the families originally that
had lost their children in that explosion, invested that money
very wisely, so we received $4 million from the Justice
Department to create the trust. I think we have $4.4 million of
it today, so a large degree we live off that wise investment,
and we also do get some grants, and we run an annual national
conference that brings in some money also.
Mr. Whitfield. Excellent. OK, thanks.
Mr. Green has appeared. So at this time, I would like to
recognize the gentleman from Texas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Commissioner Wise, PHMSA has not published any information
pertaining to valves, integrity management, or leak detection.
Can you explain what steps the Georgia Public Service
Commission can and has taken to address these issues without
PHMSA action?
Mr. Wise. We are very interested both in my state and the
National Association on this information. We think it is vital
to understand the impact and a potential rate structure impact
on the LDCs, and the customers that pay their bills.
Mr. Green. Yes. OK. In your testimony you mentioned
gathering lines. Can you explain your position on the issue of
what PHMSA needs to do to fulfill its responsibilities?
Mr. Wise. We believe the review should be left to the
individual states as to the level of scrutiny and inspection of
gathering lines. PHMSA should respond to that request. Georgia
is not going to be one, we don't have gathering lines, but I
think a number of states, for safety and integrity of the
system, we should have some level of review.
Mr. Green. OK. Obviously, in Texas we have no shortage of
gathering lines.
Mr. Weimer, it seems that PHMSA is focused on public
awareness but hasn't accomplished much by way of regulation. It
seems that the industry has done quite a bit to address
pipeline safety even without PHMSA. What are your thoughts on
the industry actions?
Mr. Weimer. Yes, public awareness has been a hard nut to
crack and the industry has spent tens of millions of dollars on
it. There are regulations that require the industry to reach
out to a variety of stakeholders, the public, local public
officials, or emergency responders, but there is no requirement
on the other end that the local governments pay attention. So
to some degree, the industry has been pushing out a lot of
information, but it is falling in the hands of people that are
way too busy already and it is not being paid attention to
enough. Somehow, we need to learn to message better to all
those local governments so they pay attention instead of
waiting until something happens, like in Santa Barbara, and
then all of a sudden they are paying lots of attention.
Mr. Green. Well, it is frustrating though because I think I
have been on the committee for about three or four pipeline
reauthorizations, and this is, say, 4 years from when we last
did it and they still haven't gotten most of the requirements
that we wanted done in 2011. Do you think that two additional
years would provide PHMSA the appropriate amount to finalize
these outstanding policies?
Mr. Weimer. I think it would provide them enough time to
get most of that done. It sounds like a lot of the new rules
are about to roll out. Once the rule comes out, there is going
to be another year for the public--for all the stakeholders to
comment and for them to redraft the rule, so we are not going
to really know what is and isn't in these rules for a couple of
years, one way or another at this point.
Mr. Green. Yes. Mr. Santa, in your testimony you discuss
the PHMSA user fee. What benefits would increased assessments
provide?
Mr. Santa. Mr. Green, the user fee offsets the cost of the
PHMSA Program and also is the source of a lot of the funds that
PHMSA provides to the states in the form of state grants.
Mr. Green. Yes.
Mr. Santa. And I know that Mr. Wise in his testimony on
behalf of NARUC made the case for even more funding there. I
think the point raised by INGAA in our testimony had to do with
the equity of the way the user fee is structured by statute,
that it is collected only from natural gas transmission
pipeline operators, when in fact, the large majority of the
funds collected via that fee are used for other purposes. And
we raised questions as to whether or not this still
legitimately constitutes a user fee. We pointed out that the
Senate Appropriations Committee and the Transportation, Housing
and Urban Development bill highlighted this issue. So I think
it is an effective mechanism to fund the program, however, the
equity of it in terms of the collection and the beneficiaries
is something I think that needs to be addressed both as a
matter of policy and also to continue to satisfy the law.
Mr. Green. Would that be something we could do in a
pipeline safety reauthorization?
Mr. Santa. Yes, sir, I believe it is. It is something
that--in that language in the Senate Appropriations Bill, they
noted that it was something for the authorizing committees to
address.
Mr. Green. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
At this time, I would recognize the gentleman from
Illinois, Mr. Rush, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, I am going to be brief.
I just have a question for Ms. Black.
Mrs. Black, I want to thank you for being here, and all of
our thoughts and prayers are with you and the Santa Barbara
area as you continue to deal with the spill that caused so very
much damage to your community.
What was your initial reaction when you heard that Plains
America, the same owners of the pipeline that ruptured in Santa
Barbara just 2 months ago, was also responsible for another,
although smaller, leak in Illinois this past weekend, and are
you satisfied with the corrective action that PHMSA imposed on
Plains America? And lastly, do you feel that there is more to
be done either from the standpoint of information-sharing,
regulatory authority, additional resources, or any other area
that could help empower local communities and help prevent
future disasters?
Ms. Dianne Black. That was a long question.
Mr. Rush. Yes, it was.
Ms. Dianne Black. So I will try to piece it apart and
answer it.
Mr. Rush. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Dianne Black. Please feel free to follow up if I miss
pieces of it.
Mr. Rush. Yes.
Ms. Dianne Black. So reaction. I felt sorry for the
community that also suffered. So that was really personal
reaction.
In terms of satisfaction with the corrective order, I will
let you know. It depends on what sort of process is undertaken
to recommission line 901. I am satisfied that it shut in right
now. I am satisfied that Plains has not recommissioned line
903, at least as to the Sisquoc Pump Station. So I am satisfied
with that right now, but I am concerned about recommissioning
that line without having the protection systems in place that
are in place for other pipelines within the county. So I would
be very satisfied if an automatic shut-off system were put into
place on that pipeline. And I would be very satisfied to see
the smart pig results and the interpretation of those results
to see if there are other issues within the line.
Mr. Rush. So are you satisfied then with the level of
responsibility that Plains America assumed and their subsequent
actions in Santa Barbara, were they strong actions, corrective
actions?
Ms. Dianne Black. So the response in Santa Barbara County
so far has really been clean-up efforts. And yes, I think that
under unified command, Plains has done a good job of addressing
clean-up concerns. What we haven't seen yet is the
recommissioning efforts; what is going to happen when that
pipeline is put back into service, and what sorts of systems
will be in place then.
Mr. Rush. Yes. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, these witnesses have been in the chair for a
long time, and you have been in the chair for a long time, so
in the interest of time I am going to yield back the balance of
my time.
Mr. Whitfield. You know what, you are a fine gentleman.
Mr. Rush. I thought so. I thought so.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, I want to thank the witnesses for
being with us today. We do value your input. And as we move
toward reauthorization, of course, your comments will be
useful.
I am also inserting into the record, at the request of Mrs.
Capps, the corrective action orders from the Pipeline and
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration to the Plains
Pipeline Company, without objection.
Mr. Whitfield. And then we will keep the record open for 10
days for any additional materials. I know that one of the
Democratic members had asked to submit some questions, I think,
to Ms. Cummings, so that will be done as well.
But thank you all. We look forward to working with you as
we move forward, and thanks for coming all the way from
California and Washington State.
And with that, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:25 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
