- EXAMINING IMPLEMENTATION OF THE BIOLOGICS PRICE COMPETITION AND INNOVATION ACT

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING IMPLEMENTATION OF THE BIOLOGICS PRICE COMPETITION AND
INNOVATION ACT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 4, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-114

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

___________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
20-488 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016
______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          KATHY CASTOR, Florida
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina         Massachusetts
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TONY CARDENAS, California
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
CHRIS COLLINS, New York                  officio)
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Joe Barton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     3
Hon. Gene Green, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Hon. Marsha Blackburn, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Tennessee, opening statement..........................     6
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     7
Prepared statement...........................................     8

Witnesses

Janet Woodcock, M.D., Director, Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research, Food and Drug Admiistration, Department of Health and
Human Services.................................................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Answers to submitted questions \1\...........................    72
Sean Cavanaugh, Deputy Administrator and Director, Center for
Medicare, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services,
Department of Health and Human Services........................    24
Prepared statement...........................................    26
Answers to submitted questions...............................    73

Submitted Material

Draft questions for hearing, submitted by Mr. Green..............    51
Letter of February 3, 2016, from Seth Ginsberg, President, Global
Healthy Living Foundation, to Mr. Pitts and Mr. Green,
submitted by Mr. Pitts.........................................    54
Statement of the National Association of Chain Drug Stores,
February 4, 2016, submitted by Mr. Pitts.......................    57
Report of Industry Standard Research, ``ASBM Labeling Survey,''
February 2015, \2\ submitted by Mr. Shimkus
Report of Industry Standard Research, ``Biosimilars Naming and
Labeling: A Study of U.S. Pharmacists,'' October 2015, \3\
submitted by Mr. Shimkus
Letter of December 21, 2015, from Hon. Brad R. Wenstrup, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Ohio, to Stephen
Ostroff, Acting Commissioner, Food and Drug Administration,
submitted by Mrs. Ellmers......................................    64
Statement of the Coalition of State Rheumatology Organizations,
February 4, 2016, submitted by Mrs. Ellmers....................    67

----------
\1\ Dr. Woodcock's response has been retained in committee files
and also is available at  http://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/
IF14/20160204/104408/HHRG-114-IF14-Wstate-WoodcockJ-20160204-
SD005.pdf.
\2\ The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at  http://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF14/
20160204/104408/HHRG-114-IF14-20160204-SD010.pdf.
\3\ The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at  http://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF14/
20160204/104408/HHRG-114-IF14-20160204-SD009.pdf.

EXAMINING IMPLEMENTATION OF THE BIOLOGICS PRICE COMPETITION AND
INNOVATION ACT

----------

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 4, 2016

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:30 a.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joseph R.
Pitts (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Pitts, Guthrie, Whitfield,
Shimkus, Blackburn, Lance, Bilirakis, Long, Ellmers, Bucshon,
Brooks, Collins, Barton, Green, Schakowsky, Butterfield,
Castor, Sarbanes, Matsui, Schrader, Kennedy, Cardenas, and
Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Leighton Brown, Press Assistant; Rebecca
Card, Assistant Press Secretary; Paul Edattel, Chief Counsel,
Health; Carly McWilliams, Professional Staff Member, Health;
Katie Novaria, Professional Staff Member, Health; James
Paluskiewicz, Professional Staff Member, Health; Graham
Pittman, Legislative Clerk; Chris Sarley, Policy Coordinator,
Environment and the Economy; Jennifer Sherman, Press Secretary;
Adrianna Simonelli, Legislative Associate, Health; Heidi
Stirrup, Policy Coordinator, Health; John Stone, Counsel,
Health; Sophie Trainor, Policy Advisor, Health; Christine
Brennan, Democratic Press Secretary; Jeff Carroll, Democratic
Staff Director; Tiffany Guarascio, Democratic Deputy Staff
Director and Chief Health Advisor; Samantha Satchell,
Democratic Policy Analyst; Matt Schumacher, Democratic Press
Assistant; Kimberlee Trzeciak, Democratic Health Policy
Coordinator; Arielle Woronoff, Democratic Health Counsel.
Mr. Pitts. The subcommittee will come to order. The
chairman recognizes himself for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF PENNSYLVANIA

Biologics are used to treat a number of serious diseases
and conditions and have improved the lives of millions of
Americans. They are produced from living cells using
biotechnology and are often significantly more time consuming
and resource intensive to consistently manufacture than small-
molecule, chemical drugs. Due in large part to these
complexities, biologics tend to be more expensive and why the
traditional generic approval pathway is not suited for bringing
lower-cost alternatives to market.
In 2009, this committee passed the Biologics Price
Competition and Innovation Act, BPCIA, by a vote of 47 to 11.
Enacted in 2010, BPCIA established a new abbreviated pathway at
FDA for biological products determined to be biosimilar to or
potentially interchangeable with a previously approved
reference product.
FDA approved the first biosimilar in March 2015. It is
convening an advisory committee next week to consider a second
application. And while there are close to 60 additional
proposed biosimilar products enrolled in FDA's Biosimilar
Development Program, the Agency has yet to issue guidance
documents on several key policy issues that could have a
significant impact on patient safety, prescriber decision
making, and market competition.
I look forward to hearing from Dr. Woodcock about where
these documents are in the review process. And I would like to
walk away from today's discussion with a better understanding
of the Agency's current thinking on issues such as naming,
labeling, and interchangeability.
Meanwhile, in preparation for biosimilars coming to market,
the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services recently issued
payment guidance related to Medicare Part B for biosimilars.
Members will want to understand the implications of this broad-
payment policy and if it will account for variations and
differences between biosimilar products and moreover, what
might that payment policy mean for the eventual growth of this
market and innovation.
With both witnesses here, we will be able to explore how
could or should pending issues before FDA, for example, naming
and interchangeability, impact the reimbursement policy under
the Medicare program as well as access and portability for
beneficiaries.
The committee will have an opportunity to hear directly
from FDA and CMS on their progress with implementation of BPCIA
and future outlook.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Joseph R. Pitts

Biologics are used to treat a number of serious diseases
and conditions and have improved the lives of millions of
Americans. They are produced from living cells using
biotechnology and are often significantly more time consuming
and resource intensive to consistently manufacture than small-
molecule, chemical drugs. Due in large part to these
complexities, biologics tend to be more expensive and why the
traditional generic approval pathway is not suited for bringing
lower cost alternatives to the market.
In 2009, this committee passed the Biologics Price
Competition and Innovation Act (BPCIA) by a vote of 47 to 11.
Enacted in 2010, BPCIA established a new abbreviated pathway at
FDA for biological products determined to be ``biosimilar to''
or, potentially, ``interchangeable with'' a previously approved
reference product.
FDA approved the first biosimilar in March 2015 and is
convening an advisory committee next week to consider a second
application. And while there are close to 60 additional
proposed biosimilar products enrolled in FDA's Biosimilar
Development Program, the agency has yet to issue guidance
documents on several key policy issues that could have a
significant impact on patient safety, prescriber decision-
making, and market competition.
I look forward to hearing from Dr. Woodcock about where
these documents are in the review process and would like to
walk away from today's discussion with a better understanding
of the agency's current thinking on issues such as naming,
labeling, and interchangeability.
Meanwhile, in preparation for biosimilars coming to market,
the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) recently
issued payment guidance related to Medicare Part B for
biosimilars. Members will want to understand the implications
of this broad payment policy and if it will account for
variations in differences between biosimilar products and
moreover, what might that payment policy mean for the eventual
growth in this market and innovation.
With both witnesses here we will be able to explore how
could or should pending issues before FDA, for example, naming
and interchangeability, impact the reimbursement policy under
the Medicare program as well as access and affordability for
beneficiaries?
The committee will have an opportunity to hear directly
from FDA and CMS on their progress with implementation of BPCIA
and the future outlook.
I yield the balance of my time to the chairman emeritus,
Mr. Barton.

Mr. Pitts. I yield the balance of time to Chairman Emeritus
Mr. Barton.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOE BARTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing. And thank you for holding it at 10:30 where I can
actually be on time. I appreciate that.
Six years ago, I co-authored, along with Congresswoman Anna
Eshoo, the Biologics Price Competition and Innovation Act,
commonly known as BPCIA, which just as an aside you would have
thought we would have come up with a better name than something
like that.
Today, we sit as a subcommittee with numerous concerns
about the implementation or more appropriately the lack thereof
of this important piece of legislation. Only one biosimilar has
been approved. Numerous products are waiting to proceed through
the approval process and many physicians, patients, and
concerned individuals like myself are concerned with the lack
of progress.
We all agree that it is important for FDA to get it right,
but most of us think it is also time for FDA to get on down the
road and decide exactly how to proceed with the approval
process. There have been seemingly unending delays that are
frustrating to legislators, innovators, doctors, and patients.
I have sent letters to the FDA, OMB, and CMS, expressing these
frustrations. I am concerned that the CMS decision regarding
reimbursement for biosimilars to be the average sales price for
all biosimilars plus 6 percent of the Reference Product ASP.
This approach undermines the real intent of the legislation.
We want to foster a robust biosimilar market. CMS' approach
eliminates any financial incentives in reimbursement for
biosimilars by potentially forcing doctors and patients to use
one non-interchangeable biosimilar in place of another based on
price alone. This is detrimental because all biosimilars, as we
all know, are not equal. By definition, they are not equal. I
cannot overstate the importance of treating each biosimilar
individually rather than as if they were a generic drug.
I am also concerned about the lack of FDA guidance
regarding interchangeability in naming. Due to the absence of
any such guidance, the FDA approved a biosimilar, Zarxio, with
a placeholder name 6 years after the bipartisan, bicameral
BPCIA was signed into law. We are still waiting and this is
simply unacceptable.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the ranking member on the subcommittee, Mr. Green,
for 5 minutes for his opening statement.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I start, I would
like to have unanimous consent to place in the record a letter
from Biosimilar Council and ask unanimous consent.
Mr. Pitts. With no objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GENE GREEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Green. Thank you and good morning. Dr. Woodcock,
welcome again, and Mr. Cavanaugh, thank you for being here.
Today's hearing is the first we have had in the House of
Representatives on biosimilars since the passage of the
Biologics Price Competition and Innovation Act, or BPCIA, as
part of the Affordable Care Act in 2010. It is particularly
timely because the FDA is both developing the standards for
approval of biosimilars and reviewing and acting on a growing
number of applications for approval. At the same time, CMS
recently released its final Physician Pay Schedule, PFS rule,
which detailed the Medicare Part B payment methodology for
biosimilars. Determinations on biosimilars that are approved,
regulated, and reimbursed is critical to the success of this
new and emerging market and must be in alignment to facilitate
our robust, safe, and competitive marketplace.
As we know, biologics place an important and growing role
in our healthcare system. They arguably represent the future of
therapeutics and hold immense promise to further transform the
way we treat and prevent diseases.
According to the RAND Corporation, world-wide sales of
biologics were $46 billion in 2002, representing 11 percent of
the global pharmaceutical market. Experts are predicting that
by 2017, biologics are expected to grow to between $205 to $235
billion, representing approximately 20 percent of the global
pharmaceutical marketplace.
Recognizing a need for non-innovative biologics is
analogous to the generic drug market facilitated by Hatch-
Waxman. And I worked with then Representative Tammy Baldwin and
former representative and now Governor, Jay Inslee, years ago
to introduce a bill proposing a pathway for approval of
biosimilars, not long after the BPCIA became law, paving a way
for injection of competition in the biologics space.
I know we all agree that competition is good for patient
safety, consumer choice, and drive savings for consumers and
the healthcare system at large. There are a number of
outstanding issues on how these will be evaluated and treated
by the FDA including naming, interchangeability, labeling, and
exploration.
The complexity of these issues are difficult to overstate
and I thank FDA for their on-going efforts to develop policies
on these questions. However, decisions on these major questions
should not be on a case-by-case basis and it is time for the
FDA to articulate clear guide rails and principles to industry
and the public so that rules of the road are established and
understood.
Public and provider trust in the safety of biosimilars is
vital to the success of this market. Acceptance of some
generics did not happen overnight. Only through a public,
transparent process of developing guidelines and rulemaking
will the public trust be earned.
I look forward to hearing from FDA on the status of these
policies and how the Agency is moving these efforts forward.
Recently, CMS detailed how biosimilars would be treated
under Medicare Part B and I have serious concerns about the
final rule. While I appreciate the Agency's desire to control
costs, I fear that in this instance it would undermine this
infant market and create a race to the bottom. If all
biosimilars are on the same blended code, we actually
disincentivize companies for investing in further trials for
additional indications and would drive folks away from this
market that we are trying to foster.
Robust competition will ultimately realize the most
sustainable, significant savings for the program and the best
for patients. This rule seems in conflict with the efforts of
the FDA to foster the biosimilars marketplace. I look forward
to hearing from CMS on how this determination was made,
responses to the concerns about potential undermining of the
biosimilars market and I thank you all for being here today.
And I yield back the balance of my--well, does anybody want a
minute on our side? No? OK. I yield back my time, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Green follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Gene Green

Good morning and thank you all for being here.
Today's hearing is the first we have had in the House of
Representatives on biosimilars since passage of the Biologics
Price Competition and Innovation Act (BPCIA) as part of the
Affordable Care Act in 2010.
It is particularly timely because the FDA is both
developing the standards for approval of biosimilars and
reviewing and acting on an increasing number of applications.
At the same time, CMS recently released the final Physician
Fee Schedule (PFS) rule, which detailed the Medicare Part B
payment methodology for biosimilars.
Determinations on how biosimilars are approved, regulated
and reimbursed at all critical to the success of this new,
emerging market, and must be in alignment to facilitate a
robust, safe, and competitive marketplace.
As we know, biologics play an important and growing role in
our health care system.
Arguably, they represent the future of therapeutics and
hold immense promise to further transform the way we treat and
prevent disease.
According to the RAND Corporation, worldwide sales of
biologics were $46 billion in 2002, representing 11 percent of
the global pharmaceutical market.
Experts are predicting that by 2017, sales of biologics are
expected to grow to between $205-235 billion, representing
approximately 20 percent of the global pharmaceutical
marketplace.
Recognizing the need for non-innovator biologics analogous
to the generic drug market facilitated by Hatch-Waxman, I
worked with then Representative Tammy Baldwin and former
Representative Jay Inslee years ago to introduce a bill
proposing a pathway for the approval of biosimilars.
Not long after, the BPCIA became law, paving the way for
the injection of competition into the biologics space.
I know we all agree that competition is good for patient
safety and consumer choice, and drives savings for consumers
and the health care system at large.
There are a number of outstanding issues on how biosimilars
will be evaluated and treated by the FDA, including naming,
interchangeability, labeling and extrapolation.
The complexity of these issues is difficult to overstate,
and I thank FDA for their ongoing efforts to develop policies
on these questions.
However, decisions on these major issues should not be made
on a case-by-case basis, and it is time for FDA to articulate
clear guardrails and principles to industry and the public so
that the rules of the road are established and understood.
Public and provider trust in the safety of biosimilars is
vital to the success of this market.
Acceptance of generics did not happen overnight--only
through public, transparent processes of developing guidances
and rulemaking will the public trust be earned.
I look forward to hearing from FDA on the status of these
policies and how the agency is moving these efforts forward.
Recently, CMS detailed how biosimilars will be treated
under Medicare Part B, and I have serious concerns with the
final rule. While I appreciate the agency's desire to control
costs, I fear that in this instance, it could undermine this
infant market and create a race to the bottom.
If all biosimilars are in the same blended code, we
actually disincentive companies from investing in further
trials for additional indications, and will drive folks away
from this market we are trying to foster.
Robust competition will ultimately realize the most
sustainable, significant savings for the program and new
options for patients.
This rule seems in conflict with the efforts of FDA to
foster the biosimilars marketplace, and I look forward to
hearing from CMS about how this determination was made and
responses to concerns about the potential undermining of the
biosimilars market.
Thank you all for being here today, and I yield back the
balance of my time.

Mr. Pitts. Thank you. And I would like to ask unanimous
consent to submit the following documents for the record:
statements from the Global Healthy Living Foundation and the
National Association of Chain Drug Stores. Without objection,
so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
The Chair now recognizes the vice chair of the full
committee, Ms. Blackburn, for 5 minutes for her opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE

Ms. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to say
welcome. We are delighted to have you all here. And we do have
some questions about what is transpiring.
And Dr. Woodcock, I want to come to you first. As you have
heard from statements on both sides, we realize that this is
essential, that the biosimilars are going to fill a place. It
is an emerging component, but I want to go to one thing you
said in your written testimony. And that is this, ``Stakeholder
confidence is essential to the success of the biosimilar
program.'' This is something I am going to come back to you on.
When I talk to innovators that are in Tennessee, what they
are confused about is the lack of certainty. The chairman
mentioned to you about the documents and the lack of guidance,
where you all are in the process. So the hearing today is
important because of that. These innovators are looking to get
some certainty. These are complex decisions. We appreciate
that. We know that this is a new class of medicines.
And that brings me to my second point and Mr. Cavanaugh, I
will discuss this with you as we move forward with the hearing.
Looking at the realization, biosimilars and generics are not
the same thing. And we want to be certain that you all are
addressing this in the appropriate manner. We appreciate your
written testimonies. We look forward to digging down with you
on some questions and maybe some things that we are going to
request for a written answer.
And Mr. Shimkus, I am going to yield the balance of the
time to you.
Mr. Shimkus. You are so kind. Thank you. Because I want to
make sure that we submit for the record, Mr. Chairman, I have
two surveys both by--for the Alliance for Safe Biologic
Medicines and one is a physician survey. One is a pharmacist
survey. If our goal is to ensure access to these products and
to the marketplace, shouldn't we enact a transparent labeling
policy that creates confidence in the healthcare market? So if
you would share these with the minority and accept these, I
would for the record appreciate it. And that is all I have.
Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. All right, they will take a look at them and we
will come back to that.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member, Mr. Pallone,
for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you
for holding this hearing and also thank Dr. Woodcock and
Director Cavanaugh for being here to discuss the implementation
of the Biologics Price Competition and Innovation Act.
Biosimilars hold enormous potential to offer patients with
serious and life-threatening diseases access to more treatment
options and potentially lower cost options. And I look forward
to hearing your testimony today about how FDA and CMS are
working to establish a clear pathway for approval, as well as
an appropriate reimbursement structure. These are both critical
elements to ensuring the success of this market.
The use and sale of biologics continues to rise here in the
United States and elsewhere. By 2017, sales of biologics are
estimated to be between $205 and $235 billion, approximately 20
percent of the global pharmaceutical marketplace. And this is
why encouraging and facilitating competition is so critical.
While biosimilars have been available in Europe for some
time, Congress did not establish an abbreviated pathway here in
the U.S. until the passage of the act as part of the Affordable
Care Act in 2010. And I supported the creation of the pathway
for biosimilars and for empowering FDA with the authority and
resources to ensure that biosimilars are safely available here
in the United States for the patients that need them most.
I was pleased when FDA approved the first biosimilar,
Zarxio, in March 2015. And this action demonstrated that the
approval process is working. But I have also heard that greater
clarity is needed from the FDA.
Since 2012, FDA has issued important guidance meant to
inform industry sponsors that they consider developing
biosimilar products including scientific and quality
considerations. Additional guidance is still needed though,
particularly in the areas of developing and marketing
biosimilars, guidance on interchangeability, labeling, and
naming are still outstanding. And FDA's thinking in this area
will be vital to companies looking to enter the biosimilars
market.
We have seen how our healthcare system has benefitted from
the competition that comes with a robust market. Competition
has helped to lower healthcare costs for small- molecule drugs,
saving the U.S. health system $254 billion in 2014. And it is
my hope that we continue to do all we can to lay the foundation
for these types of savings.
Our Federal health programs will also play a large role.
CMS has the ability, through both Medicare and Medicaid, to
encourage this new marketplace and that is why I was concerned
that CMS finalize the Part B payment policy for biosimilars
last year combining all biosimilars into one average sale price
calculation and payment code. I worry that this inappropriately
treats biosimilars like generic drugs and will disincentivize
manufacturers from entering the biosimilars marketplace because
biosimilars are not generics. Each is its own unique product.
And biosimilars go through a much more stringent approval
process. In fact, Medicare Part D and Medicaid both acknowledge
this in their respective programs.
This marketplace is only just emerging with only one
approved biosimilars, so it is important that we hear from both
FDA and CMS, not only about what they are doing in the space,
but how they are coordinating to ensure that the biosimilar
marketplace is both safe and robust.
I just wanted to add one thing. I think all of you know
that the issue of drug pricing continues to rise in terms of
the concerns of the American public. Our Democratic Steering
and Policy Committee actually had a hearing on drug pricing.
And at that hearing, I was concerned to hear--I think I asked a
question about generics and I was told by the witnesses there
that generics increasingly are not a way of reducing prices
because of the changes that are occurring in the marketplace.
And so I do worry that it is important in the case of
biosimilars or generics that that continue to be a way of
reducing drug pricing. If it isn't, then we are going to have
even more of an outcry that prices are too high and that there
should be some kind of intervention by Congress or by the
Federal Government in the marketplace.
So I think that this is an issue. Even though we are
talking about biosimilars today, Mr. Chairman, this is part of
a larger issue of Americans being very concerned about drug
pricing. And of course, it has entered into the presidential
sweepstakes or whatever, as well. So you know, this is an
important hearing, not only in terms of what is happening to
biosimilars, but just the larger issue of drug pricing. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Good morning. Thank you Mr. Chairman for holding this
hearing today, and thank you to Dr. Woodcock and Director
Cavanaugh for being here to discuss the implementation of the
Biologics Price Competition and Innovation Act.
Biosimilars hold enormous potential to offer patients with
serious and life-threating diseases access to more treatment
options, and potentially lower cost options. I look forward to
hearing your testimony today about how FDA and CMS are working
to establish a clear pathway for approval, as well as an
appropriate reimbursement structure. These are both critical
elements to ensuring the success of this market.
The use and sale of biologics continues to rise here in the
United States and elsewhere. By 2017, sales of biologics are
estimated to be between $205 and $235 billion, approximately 20
percent of the global pharmaceutical marketplace. This is why
encouraging and facilitating competition in this space is so
critical.
While biosimilars have been available in Europe for some
time, Congress did not establish an abbreviated pathway here in
the U.S. until the passage of BPCIA as a part of the Affordable
Care Act in 2010. I supported the creation of a pathway for
biosimilars, and for empowering FDA with the authority and
resources to ensure that biosimilars are safely available here
in the U.S. for the patients that need them the most. I was
pleased when FDA approved the first biosimilar, Zarxio, in
March 2015. This action demonstrated that the approval process
is working, but I've also heard that greater clarity is needed
from FDA.
Since 2012, FDA has issued important guidance meant to
inform industry sponsors as they consider developing biosimilar
products, including scientific and quality considerations.
Additional guidance is still needed, though, particularly in
the areas of developing and marketing biosimilars. Guidance on
interchangeability, labeling, and naming are still outstanding,
and FDA's thinking in these areas will be vital to companies
looking to enter the biosimilars market.
We've seen how our health care system has benefited from
the competition that comes with a robust market. Competition
has helped to lower health care costs for small-molecule drugs,
saving the U.S. health system $254 billion in 2014. It is my
hope that we continue to do all we can to lay the foundation
for these types of savings.
Our Federal health programs will also play a large role.
CMS has the ability through both Medicare and Medicaid to
encourage this new marketplace. And that's why I was concerned
that CMS finalized its Part B payment policy for biosimilars
last year combining all biosimilars into one average sales
price calculation and payment code. I worry that this
inappropriately treats biosimilars like generic drugs and will
disincentivize manufacturers from entering the biosimilars
marketplace. Biosimilars are not generics; each is its own
unique product, and biosimilars go through a much more
stringent approval process. In fact, Medicare Part D and
Medicaid both acknowledge this in their respective programs.
This marketplace is only just emerging, with only one
approved biosimilar. So it's important that we hear from both
FDA and CMS not only about what they're doing in this space,
but how they are coordinating to ensure that the biosimilar
marketplace is both safe and robust.
I look forward to hearing more today. Thank you.

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. That concludes
the prepared opening statements. As usual, all members' written
opening statements will be made a part of the record.
Without objection, the two documents that Mr. Shimkus asked
to enter in the record are ordered to be entered into the
record. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at  http://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=104408.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We have one panel today. On our panel, we have Dr. Janet
Woodcock, Director, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research,
Food and Drug Administration; and Sean Cavanaugh, Deputy
Administrator and Director, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services. Thank you very much for coming today. Your written
testimony will be made a part of the record. You will each have
5 minutes to summarize your written testimony.
And Dr. Woodcock, you are recognized first for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JANET WOODCOCK, M.D., DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR DRUG
EVALUATION AND RESEARCH, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION,
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND SEAN CAVANAUGH,
DEPUTY ADMINISTRATOR AND DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR MEDICARE, CENTERS
FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID SERVICES, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND
HUMAN SERVICES

STATEMENT OF JANET WOODCOCK

Dr. Woodcock. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members for
allowing me to be here today and testify.
Biological products are used to treat patients who have
serious and life threatening medical conditions such as
rheumatoid arthritis, cancer, serious gastrointestinal
diseases, and so forth. It is important for the health of the
public to have access to safe, effective, and affordable
biological products. Biosimilars can provide more treatment
options to patients and possibly lower treatment costs
resulting in better access.
FDA, in general, and I personally have long supported
getting the availability of a biosimilar pathway and we were
very pleased when Congress enacted this pathway. I have been
involved in the developing of biological therapeutics myself
for about 30 years, and I have seen the transformation they
have caused in healthcare in some areas.
I am a rheumatologist, and biologics have totally changed
the face of rheumatology. We used to have patients in
wheelchairs lined up in our clinics. And we were talking about
joint replacements. We were talking about nursing home care.
And now instead of talking about that, we talk about treating
to remission, how to make the disease go away, how to make
those folks function as if they weren't sick. It has been a
miraculous transformation. But this needs to be accessible to
all Americans, not inaccessible to some because of cost.
Since the biosimilars pathway was created in 2010, we have
actually seen a lot of progress. Now much of this progress is
under the hood, so to speak, because the law required that
biosimilar drugs be found biosimilar to a reference U.S.
product, which meant that they had to study it to the products
that were on the U.S. market, and it takes an amount of time.
But we did approve the first biosimilar in 2015.
We have an advisory committee coming up next week for
another biosimilar for the advisory committee to consider, and
there are almost 60 programs under development in various
stages. They have talked to us and we know of perhaps several
dozens of others where they have reached out to us, but haven't
engaged in our process.
I know people are anxious to see more progress and more
certainty. I do understand that about the pathway.
Now, if you look at small-molecule generics, as we just
said, they have been successful. Over 88 percent of dispensed
prescriptions in the U.S. are generic drugs and actually they
are continuing to save a lot of money. There are a small number
of products that do not have generic competition still and they
may have price increases. But this has been a very successful
program, the generic program. But if we compare it, we did not
have success overnight in that program. It took a while to
establish the parameters, to get the industry to the state they
need to be and to get the acceptance of the clinical community.
So I think maturity of the industry and gaining confidence of
the healthcare community was really critical to this 88 percent
of dispensed prescriptions being generics.
To earn and to sustain both physicians' and patients'
confidence in biosimilars and interchangeable products, we must
apply a scientifically rigorous review process and approval
standard that people believe in and trust because these
products have been life changing for many people and they don't
want to sacrifice any performance. And we don't intend that
they would sacrifice any performance if they take a biosimilar.
Although the first biosimilar is now marketed, there are a
lot of legal, technical, and policy challenges ahead. Some of
them you have raised, about various policy issues that must be
resolved. We fully recognize that and intend to do it, but I
will assure you that there is a bright future ahead for our
biosimilars program and I believe it is going to provide the
same access to important medications that our current generics
program is doing and really a benefit of the health of the
public.
I am happy to answer questions.
[The statement of Dr. Woodcock follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
I now recognize Mr. Cavanaugh for 5 minutes for your
summary.

STATEMENT OF SEAN CAVANAUGH

Mr. Cavanaugh. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and members of the
subcommittee. I appreciate you inviting me here today to talk
about Medicare Part B payment policy for biosimilars.
As you know, the Affordable Care Act created an abbreviated
pathway for approval of biosimilars by the FDA and it created a
provision for the establishment of Medicare payment policies
for these products. Biosimilars hold great promise for all
Americas including Medicare beneficiaries and we are committed
to policies that will provide fair payment in a healthy
marketplace.
In 2014, Medicare Part B spent $21.5 billion on
prescription drugs with the top 15 products accounting for
$11.5 billion in its total. Eleven of those 15 products were
biologics and the top 6 products were all biologics and each
one of those contributed over $1 billion in spending.
CMS has an obligation to make sure taxpayers' dollars are
used responsibly. This includes creating good payment policy
and making appropriate coverage decisions that provide access
to innovative services and treatments while incentivizing these
treatments and delivery models that are efficient.
When the first biosimilar entered the market last year, we
quickly assigned a billing code to facilitate Medicare
beneficiaries' access to this new therapy. And we began an
outreach process to the provider community to make sure we
could share with them guidance on how to submit claims for the
new biosimilar product.
Also as several of you have noted, last year in our annual
Physician Fee Schedule rulemaking, we proposed and finalized a
policy that promotes fair payment in a healthy marketplace. It
was important that we implement a Medicare payment policy for
biosimilars now before the second biosimilar for any reference
product becomes available to provide certainty for providers
and suppliers who will be billing Medicare for these products
in the near term.
The statute provides for payment for biosimilar products in
the same manner as the statutory methodology for multi-source
drugs where more than one drug product is included in the same
billing code. We are confident that our interpretation of the
law is sound and it represents good policy that will facilitate
innovation and competition in the market.
We implemented this new policy through our normal
rulemaking process. We solicited, thoroughly reviewed,
responded to, and in some cases modified our proposed policy
based on comments from the public. For example, in
collaboration with our colleagues at the FDA and in response to
public comments, we implemented a requirement for claims for
biosimilars to include a modifier that identifies the
manufacturer of the specific product. We recently published
guidance on the use of this modifier on our Web site. This will
allow us and others to track which specific biosimilars a
beneficiary receives.
Overall, the availability of generic drugs in competition
with each other and with branded products, has improved price
and availability of drugs. Competition among biosimilars can do
the same for Medicare beneficiaries. Like multiple-source
drugs, CMS sees biosimilars competing for market share with
each other as well as competing with the referenced product.
Encouraging this competition reflects a top priority at CMS.
The field of biosimilars holds great promise for future
improvements in health, value, and outcomes. We believe
patients, manufacturers, providers, insurers, and Government
all share a common goal to foster a healthcare system that
leads in innovation, delivers affordable high quality
medicines, and results in healthier people. CMS policies will
continue to ensure Medicare beneficiaries have access to
biosimilars and other innovative treatments.
As more biosimilars are approved, we will monitor
developments in the market and consider refinements to our
policy as needed based on experience with this new segment of
the market. We look forward to continuing to work with this
committee, to gathering information from providers, suppliers,
and other stakeholders to better inform our guidance and
regulations in the future.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The statement of Mr. Cavanaugh follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. Thank you for
your opening statements. I will begin the questioning. I
recognize myself for 5 minutes for that purpose.
Dr. Woodcock and Mr. Cavanaugh, can you please explain how
your two agencies have been coordinating on implementation
efforts and discussing policies that could impact each of your
agencies' decisions?
Dr. Woodcock.
Dr. Woodcock. Yes. We work very closely together on those
matters where our jurisdictions may interact with one another
or where they impact. We certainly have had long conversations
about the need for safety tracking of these products and I
think CMS was very helpful to us in enabling this identifier so
that claims data will have some sort of identification so that
we can track these products that are paid for by Medicare.
We have worked together on numerous activities where
needed, but generally, we are on a scientific track and they
are taking care of beneficiaries.
Mr. Cavanaugh. Yes, I would add to that that as the FDA has
worked through its processes for the naming convention for
biosimilars, they have repeatedly kept us in the loop to make
sure we understood what was going on, solicited comments. We
actually don't take a position on the naming convention, but
they have been generous in their consultation.
And biosimilars, our collaboration really builds on a
legacy of work. We collaborate in the regulation of lab safety.
We recently implemented a process of parallel review, when the
FDA is approving products and we can do a coverage decision for
Medicare at the same time. So I am sure there are improvements,
but there is a history here of working together and a
commitment to continuing that.
Mr. Pitts. Has FDA ever sat down with CMS to walk through
the many fundamental differences between biosimilars and
generic drugs?
Dr. Woodcock. Yes. Yes, many times. Medical staff at CMS
are very well aware of all these and have been privy to many of
our discussions about them.
Mr. Pitts. Dr. Woodcock, FDA has spent several years now
grappling with policy decisions on how a biosimilar should be
named and labeled in relation to its reference product,
particularly if it is approved for different indications and if
there are other biosimilars for the same disease or condition.
Are you concerned that these nuanced decisions could be
undermined by CMS' decision to lump them all together for
coverage and reimbursement purposes like they were generic
drugs?
Dr. Woodcock. Being able to track for purposes of safety
and attributability is different than the payment. So the issue
of tracking has been resolved by what CMS has done with the
modifiers. And I am not competent to talk about how
reimbursement is arranged.
Mr. Pitts. Mr. Cavanaugh, in its draft naming guidance, FDA
seems to make the case that distinguishing biosimilars from
their reference product and other biosimilars is critical to
patient safety. If this is the case, why did CMS not share this
view and take the opportunity to have different billing codes?
Mr. Cavanaugh. As Dr. Woodcock said, they have been very
generous in their time helping us make sure we understand
completely the clinical and therapeutic distinctions between
generics and biosimilars. What CMS has put policy out on,
though, is on payment and coding and physicians don't typically
look through billing codes in order to understand which product
they are ordering. It is a very different process.
So as Dr. Woodcock suggested, and I would agree with, there
is really no disagreement here and no conflict in that payment
policy which has to be informed by the clinical, but it doesn't
have to be entirely reflective of the clinical distinctions.
Mr. Pitts. Well, combining all products under one code
inherently removes some incentive for biosimilar companies to
develop data on specific indications or seek
interchangeability. Did CMS consider these impacts on
innovation?
Mr. Cavanaugh. We did. The purpose of our policy was to
spur innovation and we believe it will do that. You know, the
fact that there are multiple products under the same billing
code in the generic market has not, I think, depleted
innovation or competition. In fact, the history of the generic
market is robust competition and a lot of products being
developed, not immediately as Dr. Woodcock said, but we think
it is a sound policy and we think it will spur innovation, not
hinder it.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes the
gentleman, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wanted to ask Dr.
Woodcock some questions. FDA has been criticized for not being
transparent in the development and implementation of the BPCIA.
FDA has also been criticized for not releasing guidances more
quickly and not doing enough to educate patients and healthcare
professionals. Obviously, these critiques are significant,
given that the BPCIA was enacted in 2010. I guess we had an
estimate from the Congressional Budget Office of the $7 billion
savings in the first 10 years, OK? So a lot is at stake. And of
course, I talked earlier about the whole issue of drug pricing,
being sort of a national priority right now.
So how much money did Congress appropriate for the program
that has the potential to provide so much savings? And will the
funding FDA has received from Congress and industry be
sufficient to keep up with the growing interest in the
development of biosimilars?
Dr. Woodcock. Congress did not appropriate any additional
funding for us to do the biosimilar program.
Mr. Pallone. I didn't hear you, Dr. Woodcock.
Dr. Woodcock. Congress did not appropriate any additional
funding for the biosimilar program. They put in place the
ability 2 years later for us to enact a user fee program. When
that user fee program was put in place, it was stipulated that
we take $20 million out of our existing BA budget and put it
into the base. But that was not additional funds. Those were
the funds we had to take from other activities such as OTC
monographs, compliance activities, and so forth.
And of course, when we put the user fee program into place,
there really wasn't an existing market, unlike the prescription
drug user fee.
Mr. Pallone. Right.
Dr. Woodcock. Or the MDUFA or GDUFA, and so we couldn't
bill an industry that didn't exist. So we put in place a
staggered fee structure for development meetings that we have
been enacting and we have collected monies from that to help
build the program. But of course, that has been only in the
latter parts of the program.
Mr. Pallone. Well, then I guess the larger question which I
am trying to get at is to what extent is this funding or lack
of funding not working and making it more difficult in terms of
having a backlog of applications, increasing review time lines,
and contributing in some way to some of the criticism? And what
do you need? What do you suggest we do so that you have enough
money?
Dr. Woodcock. We have begun to collect more monies under
the user fee program. In FY13, we finally had collected $6
million, so that was the extent of the program. In fiscal year
'14, we collected $13 million; and last year, FY15, $23,
million, $23.8 million. So we are beginning to build. And as
drugs get on the market, biosimilar drugs, we will be able to
have a different, perhaps more robust funding for this program.
But this program was not funded by appropriations.
Mr. Pallone. OK, but I guess what I wanted to ask and I
don't have a lot of time, specifically, to what extent, because
you don't have this money, is that contributing to the backlog,
you know, the not releasing guidance, not having enough
education, development implementation of the program? And what
do you suggest we do in order--we are getting all these
criticisms, and it sounds to me, although you haven't said so,
that part of it is a lack of funding?
Dr. Woodcock. Well, you know, what has been is water under
the bridge. Going forward, we do expect to release drafts or
many finals of this guidance in this current year, this coming
year. So hopefully, some of these criticisms will be addressed,
although these are controversial issues.
Clearly, had we had more staffing and funding at the get-
go, and we could have set up a program in 2010, then we would
have been better off now. However, what I am concerned about is
that this program is going to explode, that we are going to
have--we are seeing multiple entries potentially for many of
the existing biosimilars. Those top 6 or 11 or whatever.
Naturally, there are people who would like to have a part of
that market or compete into that market. And I am concerned
that we will not have the staff because we are always waiting
to catch up.
Mr. Pallone. All right, well, this sounds--I have got 3
seconds left. Sounds to me like you need some kind of
appropriation and having the industry pay a fee is not good
enough. But I guess you are not going to tell me you need the
appropriation.
Dr. Woodcock. I can't comment on that.
Mr. Pallone. I know you can't. But that is what it sounds
like. Thanks.
Mr. Pitts. All right. The gentleman's time has expired. The
Chair now recognizes the chair emeritus of the full committee,
Mr. Barton, 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, And I wish that
Congresswoman Eshoo was a member of the subcommittee because,
while I know a little bit about this, Anna is really the expert
on this issue. She and I are the authors of the bill that got
put into the Affordable Care Act.
It looks to me like we have two issues here. We have an FDA
issue, you are right, seeing Ms. Woodcock. We have an FDA issue
about how to approve them and then we have a CMS issue on how
to charge for them. If you don't get the approval process
right, it doesn't matter what you charge for them because there
is nothing to be used. But if we can get the approval process
right, it doesn't matter unless we get the charging
reimbursement process right because if you set a reimbursement
process that there is no incentive to create the drug in the
first place, the biosimilar, nobody is going to do it.
And on the approval, I would give the FDA a C+, maybe a B-.
I think your heart is in the right place. I know you, ma'am,
based on my interchanges with you in the past, plus what you
said in your opening statement, you want to get it right and
you want to get it done.
With regard to CMS, I would give you a D-minus. The only
reason I won't give you an F is because at least you are
trying. You have got something out there. I guess to go back to
the FDA, we need some labeling guidance.
The first biosimilar, Ms. Woodcock, that the FDA has
approved, the labeling is just not as complete as it should be,
as transparent as it should be. Could you comment on that? Does
your agency plan to address the labeling issue and try to get
it better?
Dr. Woodcock. Yes. We do plan to issue draft guidance. We
have many opinions on how the label should be. We have received
much input from stakeholders and that is one of the guidances
that we would like to get out this year as a draft.
Mr. Barton. So to clarify, you do plan on changing that
specific label?
Dr. Woodcock. We will issue a draft and then we need to
issue a final and get a policy together. And then the labels
will conform, all labels would conform to that. If you recall,
the statute that was enacted was considered to be self-
implementing, as I understand, without guidance.
Mr. Barton. But you still have to do it.
Dr. Woodcock. Well, we are approving, as they become
available, we will approve biosimilars regardless whether we
have final guidance out or not. That does create more ambiguity
and so perhaps the language in the statute that considered, it
was a self-implementing program, was a little optimistic in the
sense that----
Mr. Barton. That is true. I will accept that.
Dr. Woodcock. There were a lot of policy issues that we
needed much more detailed discussion and settling on to move
forward with the robust program, and I think that always
happens with these types of complex programs. But we do plan to
get labeling. I have been personally involved in many
discussions about this. We understand the issues and the
positions of the various parties and we will put something out
that people can comment on.
Mr. Barton. OK, now I need to ask Mr. Cavanaugh a question,
but before I get off of FDA, can you comment on the
interchangeability that basically nothing has happened with
regard to interchangeability and what the FDA's plans are? I am
talking to the FDA representative.
Dr. Woodcock. Yes. We also plan to put out guidance on
interchangeability, draft guidance. We have discussed
interchangeability in our scientific considerations and our Q&A
guidances already that are out there. So there is quite a bit
of discussion because companies may need to do the scientific
work during their development program. But we plan to put out a
specific guidance on interchangeability and we hope to get that
out this year as well as a draft.
Mr. Barton. And finally, Mr. Cavanaugh, I apologize for
lack of time here, but I understand where CMS is coming from.
You want to have a fair pricing scheme, reimbursement scheme,
but biosimilars are different than generics. You understand
that and your agency understands that?
Mr. Cavanaugh. We do.
Mr. Barton. If you don't allow for some differentiation
since it is more expensive to create, you are not going to
create an incentive to do the drug and to do the biosimilar in
the first place. Does your agency have any plans to go back and
revisit their initial decision on how these are priced?
Mr. Cavanaugh. Thank you for the question. In the
regulation we published last year, we did indicate that we
would monitor the market closely and that we would do
rulemaking in the future. We thought that our payment policy
was not accomplishing what we were expecting it to. So there is
that possibility.
I want to return to your point, though. From a clinical
perspective, you are right and CMS knows biosimilars are not
the same as generics. However, from a regulatory and market
perspective, there are some similarities. These similarities
were pointed out in the Senate Committee Report that they are
approved in similar processes and that they refer to an
existing product's evidence. They are going to compete with a
reference product and against each other. So from a market and
a regulatory perspective, there are similarities. From a
clinical therapeutic perspective, there are similarities and
differences. And we recognize all of that and we think that
translates into the payment policy.
We created similarities to how generics are priced, but
there are differences as well. We don't have the original
reference product in the same code with the same ASP. So there
are differences, but we did think the analogy to generics from
a payment perspective was reasonable.
Mr. Barton. My time has expired. I thank the Chair for the
courtesy.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentleman from Oregon, Mr. Schrader, for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that. I
appreciate the witnesses being here.
I am concerned about the market developing. You have
testified, both of you, to that effect and it seems to be a
nascent market that has yet to be mature and don't want to
stifle the competition, don't want--and you are struggling with
payment policy, trying to figure out what is the best way to
encourage good competition, hopefully to build the market and
ultimately at the end of the day, drive down prices safely for
people. It is nice that the ACA allows this opportunity and we
are able to get this type of legislation and apparently it has
been on a dais, if you will, for a long, long time. So that is
good.
Dr. Woodcock, you are not in the payment policy business
particularly, but could you talk a little bit about interaction
between you and CMS in terms of how to interpret the previous
generic policies and since this is not a generic situation, how
you came about working with Mr. Cavanaugh, your contemporary on
the other side, to develop the best payment policy for the
biosimilars?
Dr. Woodcock. CMS consulted us more on what the biosimilars
were medically and clinically rather than how they should be
paid for because that is not our expertise. And we interact
with their medical staff who have a very clear understanding, I
think, of the parameters of how we are analyzing the
biosimilarity, what the standards are for biosimilarity and
what the standard is going to be for interchangeability and the
clinical performance that is expected from both of those. And
the fact that in some cases we may not include all the
indications in a biosimilar's label that are in the innovator
label for various reasons. So they are aware of all of the
scientific and clinical parameters in the course of making
their decisions.
Mr. Schrader. I guess for Mr. Cavanaugh, you talked a
little bit about these modifiers. Could you elaborate? I am
concerned by lumping all the biosimilars together that if there
is adverse reactions and stuff that can happen to any product,
for goodness sakes, how are you going to tease that out? Could
you elaborate a little bit?
Mr. Cavanaugh. Certainly, and thank you for the question.
This is an issue that we were sensitized to through our
conversations with the FDA which is when they are trying to
monitor adverse reactions, they often look in large databases
of claims to try to figure out which patients receive which
product and then look in future claims or in other databases to
see whether they had adverse reactions. And they made us
sensitive to if the only indicator of multiple biosimilars was
a common number, they would not be able to distinguish between
the product which is important here.
So what we did was, working with them, say, well, we will
keep the same billing code, but we will have a modifier that is
specific to each manufacturer so that when you do query our
databases and you see a patient that had an adverse
consequence, you will know which manufacturer's product they
got. And so that is how we expect it to work and we have
confidence that it will work.
Mr. Schrader. Biosimilars are paid for by the Government in
several different programs, such as Medicaid Part D and Part B,
apparently. Why do we have different methodologies in each of
those? I understand some are intrinsic to the programs
themselves, but there is enough variation. Biosimilars are
treated, frankly, very differently in the other two programs
than they are here. And they are kept individual. One
biosimilar is not treated the same as another biosimilar. Why
have you chosen to do it differently in Part B?
Mr. Cavanaugh. Thank you for that question. The answer is,
as you were suggesting, there are different programs, but more
importantly than being different programs, there are different
statutes behind each of the programs. I have responsibility for
both Medicare Part B, but also Part D.
The statute that created the payment methodology for
biosimilars in Part B is Section 1847A, large A. That is very
specific to Part B and has nothing to do with Part D and
rebates and payment prices there. So I think it all derives
from very different statutes. In an ideal world, you would have
harmonization across these, but occasionally we find that there
are not consistencies across programs and that is not always a
bad thing. I think here it created an opportunity for good
policy.
Mr. Schrader. I think the policy is being put ahead of the
marketplace right now, maybe down the line as you alluded to,
but that might be appropriate. But I am very worried that with
all the differences that we currently have, it is confusing and
makes it difficult for drug manufacturers to step up and try
and create these wonderful drugs for our citizens. With that, I
will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. I now recognize
the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Guthrie, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you both for
coming. I guess my questions are similar to what Mr. Pitts has
said and what Mr. Barton asked Mr. Cavanaugh. And it is the
payment policy. We are using a similar policy for generic
small-molecule drugs are you said for biosimilars. And you
said, I think to Mr. Barton, there are similar market
characteristics you are looking at and you recognize there are
different clinical characteristics that the FDA is concerned
with. And that gets to all biosimilars are not tied--not all
biosimilars are tied to the same product or the same reference
product.
And so my question is this. It is the concern about the
payment policy and the clinical differences that you recognize
exist? And we have heard from physicians. We have heard from
patient groups, biosimilar manufacturers, a lot of different--
at least one insurer, that this policy could lead to a couple
of unintended consequences. One would be inappropriate
switching between biosimilars, switching to a lower cost that
is not the same, and as well as a less vibrant biosimilar
market altogether.
I believe some of these were stakeholder concerns that were
raised during the process and wonder why you moved forward and
did you consider these warnings?
Mr. Cavanaugh. Thank you for these questions. We did
consider these because we received these in the public comment
process and we thought very deeply about each of those issues.
First of all, the concern about a less vibrant market. I
mentioned some statistics earlier, but in Part B the top six
drugs that we spend money on are all biologics. We spend over
$1 billion on each of them. I think that alone creates the
opportunity for a very vibrant market in biosimilars and I
think that is why you are seeing the level of interest that the
FDA is seeing in approving products.
As far as inappropriate switching, first and foremost,
physicians do not order biologics or other drug products by
billing code. And Dr. Woodcock is a physician and can
extrapolate on that. And similarly, pharmacists do not derive
what switching they are allowed to do based on billing codes.
There are other conventions in place. So we fought long and
hard about that concern. We talked to our pharmacists. We
talked to our physicians. We talked to the FDA and thought that
we had heard that publicly that that was not a concern.
Mr. Guthrie. So FDA is not concerned that that could come
to pass, those--the two things I just mentioned could happen?
Dr. Woodcock. Well, again, what we are seeing would be that
a biosimilar would be either written by a physician, by the
name, right, or it would be switched. If it were
interchangeable, it would be switched at the pharmacy level
based on our Purple Book where we said it was interchangeable.
So those are the processes we see and with the e-prescribing
and so forth, there are menus that come up and those have to do
with the name of the product.
Now I don't know, I have been out of practice too long to
know how this reimbursement loop which has really gotten very
complex recently, how that would impinge. But that is how the
ordering would be done.
Mr. Guthrie. Well, thanks. I have another question. So Mr.
Cavanaugh, I noticed that you treat biosimilar as a multi-
sourced product for the purpose of payment. However, they are
treated as a single source for the purpose of the Medicaid
rebate. Can you explain the contradiction or apparent
contradiction, I guess?
Mr. Cavanaugh. Certainly. It all derives from these being
different programs and different statutes that authorize
payment. I am on the Medicare side of CMS so I am not as
conversant in the Medicaid statute, but as I mentioned earlier,
the statute that created the authority for payment for
biosimilars is very specific to Part B drugs. And so it by
definition would not apply to Medicaid or Part D and so I think
any difference is derived from the statutory differences.
Mr. Guthrie. It is kind of a contradiction to have multi-
source one way and single the other. Something needs to be
corrected or fixed. Maybe it needs to be fixed statutorily?
Mr. Cavanaugh. They are not consistent, but again, the
statutory authorities are different.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. Well, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the
balance of my time.
Mr. Pitts. I thank the gentleman. I now recognize the
gentlelady from Illinois, Ms. Schakowsky, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Ms. Schakowsky. It is really exciting that in recent years
that we have seen such breakthroughs in drugs entering the
market that creates such hope for treatment or cure for
illnesses of millions of Americans. But the cost of these
drugs, I want to focus on that because I think it is simply
unaffordable for far too many people.
In 2013, the average cost of specialty drugs was over
$53,000, an increase of 193 percent from 2005. And this average
drug cost is greater than the median U.S. household income,
more than double the median income for Medicaid beneficiaries
and nearly time and a half--as much as the average Social
Security retirement benefit. And a recent Kaiser poll found
that 73 percent of Americans believe the cost of prescription
drugs is just simply unreasonable.
And so it is clear that we need additional Federal
authorities to combat this growing problem and that is why I
introduced the Medicare Fair Drug Pricing Act which would
require HHS to negotiate the price of biologics and sole-
sourced drugs covered by Medicare Part D, one possible
solution.
The high drug costs are a problem for both Medicare Part D
and Part B. Mr. Cavanaugh, you well know, in 2010 biologics
accounted for $8.3 billion or nearly 43 percent of all Part B
drug spending and that number is likely to rise. High-cost
biologics are continued to enter the market. I am happy that
the biologics are entering the market. Medicare beneficiaries
are also struggling to afford the copays that are associated
with these drug prices.
In addition to enhancing HHS's ability to control drug
costs, we need to ensure that we have a robust marketplace for
biosimilars. Several studies estimate the projected savings
from the approval of biosimilars for current high-cost
biologics to be anywhere from $44 billion to $250 billion over
10 years. We have an opportunity here to expand access to life-
saving drugs and lower costs for patients.
Dr. Woodcock, as a rheumatologist, you were talking about
the exciting new drugs, but you were also talking about the
cost. Are you aware of people who have been actually turned
down, in other words, walking away from the pharmacy? I have
talked to some pharmacists about people who do walk away.
Dr. Woodcock. Yes, I am aware of it. And I am aware of what
my colleagues currently go through now to try to get their
patients drugs that are indicated for the condition by FDA.
Ms. Schakowsky. It is a huge concern. Mr. Cavanaugh, how
have biologics, I know you talked a bit about that, contributed
to the increase in Part B spending on drugs, Medicare Part B?
Mr. Cavanaugh. So Part B, like the rest of the drug world,
has been going up faster than the rest of the healthcare
economy. It has put a strain on the Medicare program. The
biologics in Part B are the vast majority of the spending. I
mentioned that the top six drugs in total spending, each
individually is over $1 billion, and they are all biologics.
And so the Agency shares your concern and I think you have
expressed the right balance which is as Dr. Woodcock said,
therapeutically some of these are terrific products and they
change lives and improve lives and we don't want to lose that
at all. But we want to balance it with making sure everybody
has access and that comes through affordability.
Ms. Schakowsky. I just want to say in some ways I feel like
the feelings of an individual that is almost worse and more
painful to know that there actually is a treatment or a cure
out there that they can't afford and thinking there isn't one.
It is right there, I can see it, I can feel it, I know it would
help me, but I simply can't afford to get that. And I think
that we have to address that problem.
What are the solutions so that Part B, Part D is not going
to go bankrupt, that insurance companies will be able to afford
to provide the help that people are going to get. What are we
going to do? Either one, both.
Mr. Cavanaugh. Again, I just want to reiterate that we
share your concerns. As you may know, last year, Secretary
Burwell and Administrator Slavitt convened a listening session.
So we have been hearing from patients, from pharmaceutical
manufacturers, from pharmacies and others about ideas they
have. And we are hopeful that some of those ideas can come to
fruition. I don't know that the silver bullet has been
discovered yet, but I think there is a conversation going on
that could produce something that we could all support and
achieve that balance that we are looking for between
affordability, but still have access to these life-changing
drugs.
Ms. Schakowsky. Well, I know that members want to be part
of that conversation, so I appreciate that. I know you
recognize the problem and I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady and now
recognizes the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Whitfield, for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank both of
you for being with us today. We all recognize the important
responsibility that you have, both of you.
I am going to touch on something a little bit different.
Certainly, it is my understanding that biosimilars are many
times more complicated to consistently produce than generic
drugs, but a couple of days ago I was reading an article and
there have been many articles about drug shortages. And the
American Society of Health System Pharmacists currently lists
inadequate supplies of more than 150 drugs and therapeutics for
reasons ranging from manufacturing problems to Federal safety
crackdowns, to drug makers abandoning low profit products. As a
result of that, doctors and hospitals are doing rationing and
sometimes they make decisions about who gets a drug based on
weight, sometimes on the age of the patient. And in this same
article, it talks about that in a survey of cancer doctors, 83
percent of them said over the last 6 months that they had had
to--they were unable to provide the preferred chemotherapy
agent at least once during the last 6 months and that a third
of them said they had to delay treatment and make the difficult
choice of which patient they are going to give it to, so
rationing these shortages,
So both of you are well respected in your field. Would you
just make a brief comment about this shortage problem and
whether or not you all are working with manufacturers because
biosimilars is even more complicated than generics?
Dr. Woodcock. Clearly, this situation is unacceptable, that
people with cancer or others would not be able to access life-
saving treatment. We have had a very robust shortage program
for many years where we try to anticipate and respond. I think
the fundamental problem is the number of drugs that have a
single source or perhaps maybe only one competitor.
If you look at this chart, this shows all the drugs, and I
can put this in the record, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection.
Dr. Woodcock. And you can see that, for the 99 drugs that
we have, there is only one generic competitor. All right? So
there are only two on the market.
And then we have another chart here that shows for 125
innovator drugs, they have no patent or exclusivity protection,
there are no generics. And this isn't a result of FDA's backlog
or anything. Nobody sent in any applications.
So there is a problem in the market that other entrants
don't come in and sometimes we get generic entrants and they
don't market the drug. And so then if the single manufacturer
has a problem or they decide to raise the price greatly, there
is no competition there.
Now our generic user fee program is accelerating the
approval of generics overall to a 10-month clock for review. So
that will help somewhat with new entrants, but in the meantime
it may be that no one is interested in entering that market
even though it is a critical shortage of a life-saving drug.
And I can't tell you why that is. I don't understand those
factors, but that is the reality that we are facing.
Mr. Cavanaugh. I would concur with everything that Dr.
Woodcock said and just add that if folks believe that there are
CMS policies that are contributing to shortages, I would like
to know and I would like to think about what we could do to be
part of the solution. The reason many of us came to work at CMS
is to help our beneficiaries. And if they are being denied
because of market failure, because of policies, we would like
to be part of that solution. So I appreciate you raising the
issue. It is of concern to me.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. I yield back my time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. I now recognize
the gentleman, Mr. Butterfield, for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Chairman, let me first talk about my district and then build
out from there. The health disparities that face African-
American communities in my district in eastern North Carolina
and across the country are absolutely alarming. The FDA knows
that. Anyone who watches this, knows it for sure. We could just
talk endlessly about the chilling statistics that show black
Americans are more susceptible to serious illnesses than
another demographic. Serious diseases such as HIV, diabetes,
and cancer more frequently occur in African-American
communities. Rare diseases like sickle cell anemia occur more
often in African Americans. The sooner that affordable, safe,
and reliable treatments are discovered, the better we are all
going to be.
Like most, I see the potential that biosimilars can have in
combatting health disparities. The Affordable Care Act is
helping to make that possibility a reality. And so the
Biologics Price Competition and Innovation Act which is part of
the ACA has helped set up a framework to enable the development
of new biosimilar drugs. Since 2010, the FDA has worked
diligently to implement the program. Biosimilars are complex
and we have heard that testimony today. And I agree with Dr.
Woodcock that their regulation must be bullet proof. It is
critical, therefore, that the public can depend on approved
biosimilars and that we encourage the development of new
treatments. And so it is my hope that the creation of new
biosimilars can make safe treatments more affordable for those
in need.
I thank both of the witnesses for their testimony today.
Dr. Woodcock, it is my understanding that current FDA
guidance allows biosimilar applicants to extrapolate efficacy
information based on the reference product. I don't fully
understand that, but I am sure that you do. If you would expand
on that, please.
Dr. Woodcock. Well, basically, the biosimilar pathway
itself is an extrapolation, all right? What is done is, it is
an abbreviated pathway. So if you can show your product is
biosimilar through various means that we have established to
the reference product, then you may be able to, depending on
what you have shown, have a label that looks exactly like the
innovator label. Or you may only have some of the indications,
depending on what you have shown.
So there are two kinds of extrapolations people are talking
about. One is the basic abbreviated pathway which means we find
the evidence that is submitted by the biosimilar and we say
yes, this means that you have the same properties as an
innovator drug. And then many of the brand drugs have multiple
indications. For example, next week it would be ulcerative
colitis, Crohn's Disease and rheumatoid arthritis, all right?
Those are different diseases. And so what many people are
talking about is extrapolation across from one disease to
another.
What amount of data that we need to grant all those
indications is a scientific matter and may be of some dispute,
obviously, because there is a lot at stake there. But I will
tell you, we are not going to approve biosimilar drugs that we
don't think have the same performance as the innovator. That is
what we are going to do. If a patient is started on a
biosimilar, they should expect the same results as if they had
started on a brand drug.
Mr. Butterfield. Now there are a lot of stakeholders and a
lot of people have an interest in this subject. I am beginning
to appreciate that and I see the room full today and I am sure
there are a lot of people here who are listening very
carefully.
Are there concerns that stakeholder groups have? And are
there any concerns that have been shared about extrapolating
clinical safety and efficacy data for biosimilars which treat
special populations including children or certain fields
including rheumatology?
Dr. Woodcock. Certainly. People have concerns still about
generics and there are certain groups such as the neurology
community still isn't convinced they should do generic
substitution. Recently, we have sponsored studies to show that
there is no outcome difference between a generic and an
innovator drug for seizures. So there is going to be concern
and there is going to be ongoing concern regardless of what we
do. But right now we do extrapolate often for regular drugs,
for the brand drug. We may extrapolate to children based on
dosing information if the disease is similar enough, rather
than subjecting children to randomized clinical trials. If we
have enough scientific data, we will extrapolate after finding
out what the right dose with the equivalent doses are in
children of different ages.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. I now recognize
the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, for 5 minutes for
questioning.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I know we are getting
close to calling of votes, but I want to first of all address
Mr. Cavanaugh.
I appreciate your answers, but I don't think they are
totally accurate because I think under the law and especially
the report language of the bill passed, the report language and
the congressional intent was that there would be separate
billing codes for reimbursement at the ASP of biosimilars. So I
mean your comment saying I can't do this because of statutory
intent we feel is inaccurate. So I am going to move most of my
comments to there and I hope you would take that back because
we think you do have the authority to do that.
And the other thing just as a comment, listening to
testimony, biosimilars, the efficacy and the ability, the cost
benefit, the return on investment, Dr. Woodcock, as you
mentioned earlier as a rheumatologist and wellness versus
treatment, there is a great return on that investment that
somehow has to be put into this pricing decision, right?
But I want to get to a couple of questions in this whole
process.
Let me start, Dr. Woodcock. I understand the FDA has not
provided details on specifics of interchangeable products. Is
it possible that FDA might approve an interchangeable product
without first issuing guidance or interchangeability?
Dr. Woodcock. Yes, it is. As an interchange with Mr.
Barton, the statute allows us to execute the statute without
guidance, is my understanding.
Mr. Shimkus. Under current law, a new biologic product can
be brought to market either by being approved as a new drug or
being licensed a biological product. How, if at all, does a
manufacturer's decision to use one pathway or another affect
pre-market review of a product?
Dr. Woodcock. The body of evidence that is submitted for a
biological license application, a standalone, right, is
different than the body of evidence that is submitted for a
biosimilar.
Mr. Shimkus. So how?
Dr. Woodcock. OK, a biological----
Mr. Shimkus. So what is the answer?
Dr. Woodcock. I am sorry. A biological product, stand-
alone, must demonstrate free-standing safety and efficacy of
that product. A biosimilar must demonstrate biosimilarity to a
reference listed, already approved biological product. Those
are conceptually, fundamentally, two different things.
Mr. Shimkus. So really the question is if they choose one
pathway or the other--I mean right now, how are they making the
decision which pathway to choose or how can they?
Dr. Woodcock. We have around----
Mr. Shimkus. Let me just go to the next question because
they are all kind of in line. What about the post-market
obligations if they choose one pathway or another?
Dr. Woodcock. It is unlikely a biosimilar product would not
have additional questions that would be post-market
commitments, but they have the same safety surveillance
requirements as other marketed products.
Mr. Shimkus. Let me just go to another one then and I will
tell you why I am asking these specific questions. Does the FDA
consider the Purple Book to be part of a biological product's
labeling?
Dr. Woodcock. Does it consider what?
Mr. Shimkus. Do you consider the Purple Book to be a part
of the biological products labeling?
Dr. Woodcock. No.
Mr. Shimkus. OK, so these are all questions asked by U.S.
Senators in your testimony in November which they still have as
they have asked me to restate these questions. Do you know why?
Because you all haven't responded to their questions in
writing.
Dr. Woodcock. Well, OK. Well, we will certainly do that.
Mr. Shimkus. And the point being is there is great
confusion out there in the healthcare sector on how we are
going to move forward. And this hearing is going to have
follow-up questions and they just need to be answered. And so
again, all these are follow-up, and there was a lot more. I
have got four or five pages of them from bipartisan questions
that need to be addressed so we can help--that is actually the
same questions that you are being asked by the stakeholders.
And so I would ask you to respond timely to the questions posed
by my colleagues. And I yield back my time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. I now recognize
the gentleman, Mr. Cardenas, for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Dr. Woodcock and Deputy Administrator Cavanaugh, for joining us
today.
Dr. Woodcock, under BPCIA, interchangeable biologic
products must demonstrate that they can be expected to produce
the same clinical result as the reference product in any given
patient. A biosimilar determined to be interchangeable can be
substituted. So therefore my question is will you discuss
generally the types of questions the Agency is thinking through
as they are considering guidance to industry in this space?
Dr. Woodcock. Certainly. This issue was before us even
before the statute was passed, which is one of the differences
between biologics and most generics, is something called
immunogenicity. In other words, the ability to stimulate an
immune response in a patient, a reaction. And this can be
insignificant or it can cause serious problems. And one of the
concerns is under a scenario of interchangeability, what we see
in the generics world people get all different kind of
products, generics, they switch at the pharmacy based on their
plan. And the concern is if you are switching back and forth
could you set up an immune response that would be negative to
the person? And how you have to address that concern for
interchangeability is contingent on a number of factors. A
number of these drugs are not--biologic drugs--are not that
immunogenic. And some of them they are, but the consequences
have not been severe. Others, the consequences could be
catastrophic. So we take all those factors in in talking to
companies about how much evidence they have to show that
switching back, people back and forth, wouldn't cause terrible
harm.
And the problem we have is the science isn't far enough
advanced for us to predict this from, say, test tube
experiments. We have to look in people because we don't
understand the immune system well enough. So there has to be
some human testing of switching ordinarily to give confidence
that, in fact, if you switch the people back and forth, they
are not going to have some unprecedented problem.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you. This question is to Deputy
Administrator Cavanaugh. I would like to reiterate the concerns
voiced by my colleagues on both sides of the aisle and the
final rule for the physician fee schedule, which places
biosimilars that reference the same biologic into a single
HCPCS code. Biosimilars are not generic drugs because they are
not the same copies of one another, and I appreciate how hard
you and your colleagues at CMS are working to create a robust
biosimilars market.
However, because biosimilars are so complex, I fear that
this may discourage manufacturers from entering the biosimilars
market. How do you feel about those dynamics?
Mr. Cavanaugh. So thank you for the question. I think it is
important to recognize a couple of things. As I said, the
important therapeutic differences which the FDA has educated us
about and we recognize them, but there are also regulatory and
marketplace similarities. And in fact, the congressional
history here shows that the approval processes were mirrored or
paralleled off of generic approval processes. We expect them to
work in the marketplace much like generics in that there will
be a low-cost alternative to a higher cost innovative product.
And for that reason and also for statutory reasons, the statute
said that for products where there are multiple products under
the same billing code, they should have the ASP average.
I want to emphasize why we think this is a successful
policy. One, to Congress' credit from the physician perspective
when they are ordering the drug, Congress created a payment
where they are still getting the 6 percent markup from the
innovative product. So the physician is not invested in a
higher cost product. They are made whole either way, and I
think that was a terrific policy that Congress made.
But secondly, they are going to choose the therapeutically
successful product at a fair price and we will have these
biosimilar products competing on price with each other. So the
last thing I would say is even though they are using a
methodology similar to generics, that doesn't mean the
resulting price will be similar to generics. The biosimilar
companies set their own average sales price. So they can set it
at a market-bearing price that results their costs whether it
is research or other input costs. So I don't think the fact
that they are the same methodology means you will end up with
the same price.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you. With my 5 seconds I just want to
remind the American public that what we are talking about here
cannot be put in one page, so I want to thank my colleagues and
also the process for understanding that laws aren't necessarily
one or two paragraphs. These are very important issues, and
protection of the public is very important to our country.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. We are voting on
the floor, so we will continue as long as we can. The Chair
recognizes Mr. Collins for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Collins. I want to thank the chairman and I know we are
now trying to hold the votes down so thank you for letting us
cut into this just a bit. I thank both the witnesses, Dr.
Woodcock, Mr. Cavanaugh, for coming.
I think what I have heard is some 30,000 foot Cliff Notes
discussions on biosimilars, generics, biologics, etcetera.
And Dr. Woodcock, as you are sitting there, I know you must
have some level of frustration because we are under time
constraints to get the point out. And so in my time, I think we
have pretty much established that generic is for all practical
purposes, 99.999 percent the same as the brand name. It is a
compound. It is usually a pill. It is the same and therefore
doctors prescribe that.
But Dr. Woodcock, in what testimony you have given, in
thinking about the differences in a biologics and a small-
molecule which are two different worlds and a biosimilar which
will never, ever, ever be the same, and while you have
explained and I think it is true, the FDA's emphasis is safety
and efficacy and I guess you would say safety, safety, safety,
safety, safety. And we have got to know it works as well. But
safety is always first.
In 2 or 3 minutes, for the purpose of this committee
educationally, what would you like to add as far as how the FDA
is looking at and even maybe explain to the committee the basic
difference in why a biosimilar will never be a generic and even
the manufacturing process of a biologic, the sterility process
or give us 2 or 3 minutes of education which I think would be
helpful to this committee having heard already some of the
questions.
Dr. Woodcock. Well, the biologics are very large molecules.
In other words, it would be like maybe a little house compared
to the Empire State Building as far as the comparative size of
a regular drug to a biologic. And if you just think about the
brand biologics, most of them are not exactly the same from
batch to batch. I know that is very disappointing, but they are
made by cells, usually.
Mr. Collins. The manufacturing process is unique.
Dr. Woodcock. Yes, they are biosynthesized by cells and
those cells are subject to conditions we don't understand very
well fully or can't fully control. And so they are slightly
different from batch to batch to batch. Our job in regulating
them is to make sure that those variabilities in the brand
product, I am still talking about, don't affect safety, safety,
safety or effectiveness, OK? So that they stay in a band where
from the clinic, if you are a doctor treating patients, it
doesn't make any difference. But it isn't like the small
molecule where, every tablet, we know exactly what is in there.
Mr. Collins. And to interrupt, isn't it also true that in
the intellectual property protection, etcetera, a manufacturer
is not required to tell the world exactly how they are making
it?
Dr. Woodcock. Never, and that is true with the generics as
well.
Mr. Collins. And that is what I think some people miss. You
have to put enough information in your intellectual property to
say I can replicate it, but you don't--a manufacturer is going
to protect his price point.
Dr. Woodcock. Well, it is considered trade secret.
Mr. Collins. Right, and it will always be trade secret. So
when a generic or a biosimilar comes out, they don't know the
16 steps that the brand name is doing to make that product.
Dr. Woodcock. Right.
Mr. Collins. And hence, in the case of a biosimilar, it can
never be the same.
Dr. Woodcock. What they do and what we found, OK, is for
the generics does this too. They have to buy the reference
product on the market and reverse engineer it and then develop
a process of their own that will replicate that avoiding any
patents that might be preexisting that may be on process and so
forth.
Mr. Collins. And it is just like reverse engineering
anything. You don't know and don't have the prints of the
original company to know the tolerances of every item and how
they interact.
Dr. Woodcock. That is correct.
Mr. Collins. So I think in defense of the FDA and what they
are doing in the safety, safety, safety, but also looking at
efficacy, the folks making a biosimilar don't have the prints.
They don't have the process.
Dr. Woodcock. That is correct.
Mr. Collins. They are trying to reverse engineer it and yet
the FDA has to make sure in reverse engineering it safety is
not compromised, efficacy is there. And that is why it is--you
have got a very, very, very difficult job in bringing
biosimilars to market knowing that the person making it doesn't
have the benefit of the drawings, the process. They are
guessing. They are reverse engineering. They are hoping they
get it right and you have to make sure at the end of the day it
is safe and the efficacy is there.
Dr. Woodcock. And also what we found to your point, it is a
very good point, what we found as we work with these companies
they are going to have to get more lots of the reference drug
because generics usually----
Mr. Collins. The variation.
Dr. Woodcock. Because they have to be within the variation.
If you just pick a small sample, it might be outliers.
Mr. Collins. My time is up. I thank you for that. I think
the education piece is very valuable.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you. I am sorry to rush you. We have 8
minutes left. So we are going to have to try to hurry as much
as possible. Dr. Bucshon, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bucshon. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I will be brief and just
make a comment and maybe a brief question. I am glad that you
are both here. Thank you very much for your work.
That said, Mr. Cavanaugh, this is kind of directed at CMS.
It appears to me, as a physician--and I was a practicing
cardiovascular surgeon--that CMS has become the rate-limiting
step in getting innovative products to the marketplace and to
patients. A brief example, a treatment for glioblastoma for
brain tumors, for example; a bionic prosthetic to benefit
veterans and others. And it also seems to me that frequently on
reimbursement decisions that comments and recommendations of
experts outside of CMS have been ignored. And unfortunately in
my view, decisions are being based on financial reasons, not
based on medical benefit of the products.
I am talking about products that have been approved by the
FDA and other organizations around the world and subsequently
are also reimbursed frequently by the private sector insurers
and then are not reimbursed by CMS or it has been dragged out
so long that some of the innovative companies have almost gone
bankrupt because CMS hasn't approved their payment.
So the question I have is is it the role of CMS or the FDA
to determine the safety and efficacy of medical products
including biosimilars?
Mr. Cavanaugh. To me, sir?
Mr. Bucshon. Yes.
Mr. Cavanaugh. No. It is the role of the FDA to determine
that.
Mr. Bucshon. OK, so once these are proven to be safe and
show efficacy for patients, why is frequently CMS dragging its
feet on reimbursing it? What is the reason?
Mr. Cavanaugh. Is the question specific to biosimilars or
broadly?
Mr. Bucshon. Broadly.
Mr. Cavanaugh. First of all, as I said, on the first
biosimilar, we acted very quickly and in fact, we had a billing
code and coverage guidance before it was actually even
marketed. You have raised other examples though that are
broader than biosimilars.
Mr. Bucshon. I was just throwing those out there. Let me
just tell you as a physician, many, many people talk to me
about medical issues, right, because I was a practicing
physician. And it is not just--I mean I have literally heard
from hundreds of people frustrated with CMS because there have
been--and these are coming from patients, from physicians, from
companies, everywhere, telling me that these products are
approved by the FDA. They are frequently reimbursed by the
private sector and that CMS has either decided to not reimburse
them or dragged their feet or put up a price that is not
competitive for the production and maintenance of a company or
the product to be actually on the market place at all. And it
is very frustrating for me as a physician to know that there
are products out there to benefit patients.
And I know you have a tough job. I am just on my soap box a
little bit here. But I just don't get it because if things are
approved by the FDA, they are frequently approved by the same
organizations in the European Union and around the world, and
these patients are not available to people in the United States
because not that they are not proven to be effective and safe,
but Medicare hasn't decided how they are going to pay for it.
And so if you are not making decision on safety and
efficacy, how can you decide not to pay for it?
Mr. Cavanaugh. Sure. I think it is a terrific question and
allows me to talk about the Medicare process. FDA approves
safety and efficacy. When it comes to Medicare, there are two
standards they need to meet, any product or service. One is, it
has to meet one of the statutorily defined benefit categories.
So the statute has to say this falls into a category that
applies to Medicare coverage.
Mr. Bucshon. I am going to briefly interrupt you. That has
already been determined by the FDA. There has been clinical
studies that they have gotten that have shown efficacy, that
have shown benefit to patients. So that seems like reinventing
the wheel to me.
Mr. Cavanaugh. With all due respect, the benefit category
is not about safety and efficacy. The Medicare statute
specifies the covered services and benefits. And what I am
saying is, no matter how safe and effective FDA finds it, it
can only come into Medicare if it meets the statutory
definition of something that Medicare covers. And after it
makes it past that criterion, the secondary criterion is, is it
reasonable and necessary for----
Mr. Bucshon. Understood. Since I only have 10 seconds, I
just want to say that, in my view, every product that is
approved by the FDA should be available to America's seniors
and the limiting factor should not be the ability of CMS to
stonewall and not pay for it. And I am just telling you it is a
very frustrating situation. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. There are 3
minutes left on the floor clock. The Chair recognizes Ms.
Ellmers for questioning.
Ms. Ellmers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I will be very
brief. I want to thank the panel. Thank you, Dr. Woodcock, for
being here again, and Mr. Cavanaugh.
I actually just have two letters that I would like to
submit and ask unanimous consent to do so.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
Ms. Ellmers. One is actually from our Doctors Caucus.
Twelve members of the Doctors Caucus submitted a letter on
December 21st to the acting Secretary, excuse me, Commissioner
Ostroff. And we have not yet received a response to those
questions.
And so Dr. Woodcock, we will be submitting questions for
you, and I know that this is an interim, but we would look
forward to some of the answers. You both have answered many of
the questions that we have already had.
Now, the other letter that we have that I would like to
submit under unanimous consent is from the Coalition of State
Rheumatology Organizations. This is a letter that I would like
to submit.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The letters appear at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. Ellmers. Thank you very much. And again, thank you to
our panel. This is a very, very important issue to all of us,
and I know that we all agree that we need to get to the bottom
of this so that we can help those folks out there that need the
help. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady. That concludes
the questions that we have here. We have follow-up questions.
We will submit those to you in writing. We ask that you please
respond promptly. Members have 10 business days to submit
questions for the record, so members should submit their
questions by the close of business on Thursday, February 18th.
A very important hearing, thank you very much for your
testimony today. Without objection, the subcommittee is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:02 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Dr. Woodcock's response has been retained in committee
files and also is available at  http://docs.house.gov/meetings/
IF/IF14/20160204/104408/HHRG-114-IF14-Wstate-WoodcockJ-
20160204-SD005.pdf.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
