- 21ST CENTURY ENERGY MARKETS: HOW THE CHANGING DYNAMICS OF WORLD ENERGY MARKETS IMPACT OUR ECONOMY AND ENERGY SECURITY

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

21ST CENTURY ENERGY MARKETS: HOW THE
CHANGING DYNAMICS OF WORLD ENERGY MARKETS
IMPACT OUR ECONOMY AND ENERGY SECURITY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 3, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-16

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

___________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
95-342 PDF                      WASHINGTON : 2015

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

7_____

Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               JERRY McNERNEY, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        PAUL TONKO, New York
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREGG HARPER, Vice Chairman          GENE GREEN, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     LOIS CAPPS, California
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             KATHY CASTOR, Florida
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   PETER WELCH, Vermont
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILL FLORES, Texas                   FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma               officio)
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Jerry McNerney, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     3
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     7

Witnesses

Adam Sieminski, Administrator, Energy Information Administration,
Department of Energy...........................................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Scott D. Sheffield, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Pioneer
Natural Resources Company......................................    23
Prepared statement...........................................    25
Charles T. Drevna, President, American Fuel & Petrochemical
Manufacturers..................................................    52
Prepared statement...........................................    54
John Kingston, President, McGraw Hill Financial Global Institute.    65
Prepared statement...........................................    67
Additional information submitted for the record \1\
Amy Myers Jaffe, Executive Director, Energy and Sustainability,
University of California, Davis................................    82
Prepared statement...........................................    84
Brad Markell, Executive Director, AFL-CIO Industrial Union
Council........................................................    95
Prepared statement...........................................    97
Graeme Burnett, Senior Vice President for Fuel Optimization,
Delta Airlines, and Chairman of the Board, Monroe Energy.......   106
Prepared statement...........................................   108

Submitted Material

Letter of March 2, 2015, from Shawn Bennett, Executive Vice
President, Ohio Oil and Gas Association, to Mr. Whitfield,
submitted by Mr. Johnson.......................................   145

----------
\1\ Additional information submitted by Mr. Kingston has been
retained in committee files and also is available at  http://
docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/ByEvent.aspx?EventID=103071.

21ST CENTURY ENERGY MARKETS: HOW THE CHANGING DYNAMICS OF WORLD ENERGY
MARKETS IMPACT OUR ECONOMY AND ENERGY SECURITY

----------

TUESDAY, MARCH 3, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 1:31 p.m., in
room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed Whitfield
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Whitfield, Olson, Barton,
Shimkus, Pitts, Latta, Harper, McKinley, Pompeo, Kinzinger,
Griffith, Johnson, Ellmers, Flores, Mullin, Hudson, Upton (ex
officio), McNerney, Tonko, Green, Castor, Sarbanes, Welch,
Loebsack, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Nick Abraham, Legislative Clerk; Charlotte
Baker, Deputy Communications Director; Leighton Brown, Press
Assistant; Allison Busbee, Policy Coordinator, Energy and
Power; Tom Hassenboehler, Chief Counsel, Energy and Power;
Brandon Mooney, Professional Staff Member, Energy and Power;
Tim Pataki, Professional Staff Member; Chris Sarley, Policy
Coordinator, Environment and the Economy; Christine Brennan,
Democratic Press Secretary; Jeff Carroll, Democratic Staff
Director; Michael Goo, Democratic Chief Counsel, Energy and the
Environment; Caitlin Haberman, Democratic Professional Staff
Member; Meredith Jones, Democratic Director of Outreach and
Member Services; Rick Kessler, Democratic Senior Advisor and
Staff Director for Energy and the Environment; and Timothy
Robinson, Democratic Chief Counsel.
Mr. Whitfield. I would like to call the hearing to order
this afternoon and certainly want to thank our panel of
witnesses. We look forward to your testimony and your insights.
And also we will appreciate the opportunity to ask you
questions after you finish your opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Today's hearing is entitled ``21st Century Energy Markets:
How the Changing Dynamics of World Energy Markets Impact Our
Economy and Energy Security.'' And I would like to recognize
myself for a 5-minute opening statement.
When it comes to energy markets, the transformation over
the last decade has been dramatic. In fact, several
longstanding energy trends have completely reversed themselves.
America has gone from declining oil and natural gas production
to unprecedented increases that now make us the world's largest
energy producer and a potential exporter.
As a result, fears about rising import dependence and
skyrocketing energy prices have been replaced with surging
domestic supplies that are driving down prices so low, in fact,
that they are now discouraging additional drilling in the U.S.
The downstream changes have been every bit as dramatic.
Domestic refineries, a number of which were optimized to handle
imported crude, now have the option of transitioning to use
more North American oil. And for manufacturers, the offshoring
trend has stalled and, in fact, some of the manufacturing
capacity that has been forced overseas by competitive pressures
is now returning to America because of low energy prices. And
North America's new energy supplies have necessitated a major
infrastructure build-out in order to deliver this energy to the
consumers and businesses that need it.
The changes also have significant geopolitical
implications. Many of our energy-importing allies were resigned
to growing dependence on OPEC and other unfriendly exporters,
like Russia, but now they see America as a potential new source
of reliable and affordable energy supplies. As a result,
America has the opportunity to influence the geopolitical
situation of these countries that used to dominate global
energy markets and assert our own influence instead.
There is no question that America's oil and natural gas
boom has been very good news for America, but that is not to
say that it doesn't bring new concerns. We have simply traded
one set of challenges for another. Unfortunately, our energy
policy is largely based on old laws rooted in assumptions of
scarcity and may no longer be up to the task of addressing
these new challenges and taking full advantage of emerging
opportunities.
So with these changing times, we think it is essential that
we visit these laws, look at new opportunities, and whether or
not it is in the best interest of America to bring about these
changes or not. So today we are going to continue that
discussion by exploring current and evolving energy markets. We
hope to be able to better assess where we are and what new
policies may be needed. Our existing energy policy was not
created overnight, nor will any changes to it happen overnight.
This will be a thorough and deliberative process and one in
which all affected parties will be heard.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Ed Whitfield

Today's hearing is entitled, ``21st Century Energy Markets:
How the Changing Dynamics of World Energy Markets Impact our
Economy and Energy Security.'' I welcome this diverse and
knowledgeable panel to discuss these issues.
When it comes to energy markets, the transformation over
the last decade has been dramatic. In fact, several
longstanding energy trends have completely reversed themselves.
America has gone from declining oil and natural gas production
to unprecedented increases that now make us the world's largest
energy producer and a potential exporter. As a result, fears
about rising import dependence and skyrocketing energy prices
have been replaced with surging domestic supplies that are
driving down prices--so low in fact that they are now
discouraging additional drilling in the U.S.
The downstream changes have been every bit as dramatic.
Domestic refineries, a number of which were optimized to handle
imported crude, now have the option of transitioning to use
more North American oil. And for manufacturers, the offshoring
trend has stalled, and in fact some of the manufacturing
capacity that had been forced overseas by competitive pressures
is now returning to the U.S. because of the low energy prices.
And North America's new energy supplies have necessitated a
major infrastructure buildout in order to deliver this energy
to the consumers and businesses that need it.
The changes also have significant geopolitical
implications. Many of our energy-importing allies were resigned
to growing dependence on OPEC and other unfriendly exporters
like Russia, but now they see America as a potential new source
of reliable and affordable energy supplies. As a result,
America has the opportunity to fight back against the
geopolitical influence of the countries that used to dominate
global energy markets, and exert our own influence instead.
There is no question that the America's oil and natural gas
boom has been very good news for America, but that is not to
say that it doesn't bring new concerns--we have simply traded
one set of challenges for another. Unfortunately, our energy
policy is largely based on old laws rooted in assumptions of
scarcity, and may no longer be up to the task of addressing
these new challenges and taking full advantage of emerging
opportunities.
We explored one such landmark law, the 1975 Energy Policy
and Conservation Act, in a hearing last December. At the
hearing, we learned more about the energy policy context under
which this 40-year-old statute was enacted, and how its
provisions may no longer be relevant.
Today, we continue the discussion by further exploring
current and evolving energy market dynamics. We hope to be able
to better assess where we are and what new policies may be
needed. Our existing energy policy was not created overnight,
nor will any changes to it happen overnight. This will be a
thorough and deliberative process, and one in which all
affected parties will be heard.

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much. I yield back the
balance of my time. And I recognize the gentleman from
California, Mr. McNerney, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JERRY MCNERNEY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. McNerney. I want to thank Chairman Whitfield and
Ranking Member Rush for holding this hearing. Oil markets are
changing rapidly. We have reduced oil and gasoline prices,
increased domestic oil production. At the same time we have
seen oil prices plummet from $100 a barrel to under $50 a
barrel, and this has led to great savings for the American
consumers.
But we have learned in California that prices at the pump
don't always track the price of crude. For example, in my State
we have seen the steepest increase in gasoline prices in
history. It went from 20 cents a gallon overnight in San
Francisco and Los Angeles last Thursday to Friday, and prices
in Sacramento rose over 40 cents per gallon in 1 week.
So soaring wholesale gas costs are prompting higher retail
prices at service stations and State refineries are switching
over to pricier seasonal blends, while at the same time
refinery problems have effectively lowered capacity.
Given that we are experiencing these spikes at a time the
rest of the Nation is enjoying lower gasoline prices, I think
it is important to mention the dangers of depending on just one
source of fuel for our transportation needs.
We should consider carefully the potential problems that
could arise if we decide to alter our approach to managing
crude oil resources. When we talk about exporting crude oil, we
are mainly taking about the light sweet crude that comes from
tight shale formations. To extract this resource requires a
tremendous supply of another very precious resource, especially
in California, namely, water. In my State, in my region, we
know all too well how important water conservation is and how
dwindling water resources can really harm our economy and our
way of life.
I am concerned that until we develop new, more efficient,
and environmentally protective ways to use and conserve water
in hydraulic fracturing, we will be wasting an endangered
resource mainly to ship another resource abroad for the
financial gain of a few. I think we need to carefully weigh the
safety of our drinking water and irrigation supplies before we
begin to extract crude and bypass U.S. refineries in order for
producers to obtain slightly higher prices abroad.
Low oil prices, combined with additional domestic
production, decreases our reliance on foreign oil, which often
comes to us from unstable regions of the world. I believe a
major factor in this equation should be on supporting and
enhancing our efforts at conservation.
And this brings me back to the hazards of being dependent
on one source of fuel for our transportation needs. It is time
we diversify our fuel sources. We have made great strides in
improving our fuel economy in the last 5 years. It is time to
start improving our fuel options. We should be looking more
toward plug-in hybrids, fully electric vehicles, natural gas,
and even hydrogen-based transportation.
I know that in recent years a barrel of crude oil produced
in the United States has sold for less than a barrel of crude
oil in the world market. I am interested to hear both sides of
the debate on how allowing export of U.S. crude will affect
both the global and the U.S. oil and gasoline markets, and
equally important, how regional markets in the U.S. could be
affected.
We should also consider whether rushing into short-term
production of as much oil as possible is the best strategy for
our long-term national security. In the wake of the 1973 oil
embargo, we created the Strategic Petroleum Reserve so that in
the event of a worldwide unrest we would have petroleum to
continue operating and to protect our national security. We
should consider whether our oil fields in North Dakota and
Texas might serve a similar purpose in the future.
Finally, I want to consider the threat of climate change
and how increased production, refining, and export of the new
American oil fuels will impact the Earth's future climate.
Mr. Chairman, I look forward to hearing the witnesses, and
I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much.
At this time I recognize the chairman of the full
committee, Mr. Upton, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Energy markets are changing, and they are changing for the
better. America is producing more while using and importing
less, and the energy boom is translating into a jobs boom, and
that is not a bad thing, not just in energy production, but
also energy infrastructure and manufacturing.
The combination of increased domestic oil supplies and
decreased demand not only strengthens our energy security, but
it also presents new opportunities for energy diplomacy. The
days of energy-exporting aggressors like Russia exerting
uncontested geopolitical influence may be numbered now that
America is emerging as an energy superpower.
And while the overall effects of our domestic energy
abundance are overwhelmingly positive, yes, they do create some
challenges and complications when viewed under the lens of our
existing Federal energy policy. For example, the recent drop in
oil prices has been great news for consumers in Michigan and
across the country who are finally getting a break at the gas
pump after several years of prices above $3 and $4 a gallon.
But at the same time, current prices pose a challenge for
producers, their employees, and their communities in which they
live, and in fact some energy workers, thousands of them, have
already lost their jobs.
Couple these changes with a new global petroleum landscape
of enduring complexity and emerging volatility, it only further
reinforces the point that the time to examine these issues is
now.
Clearly, the changes in energy markets affect different
parties in different ways, and Congress needs to be aware of
all of the impacts before considering any modifications to
energy policy. That is why we took a very careful and
deliberate approach on the issue of natural gas exports in the
last Congress. For more than a year before we proposed
legislation to expedite LNG export approvals, we thoroughly
studied the potential impacts on natural gas producers and on
users like manufacturers and consumers. We acted only after
listening to all the interested parties and concluding that LNG
exports would be beneficial for the economy and a net jobs
creator, and we passed it in a bipartisan way.
We also heard from many foreign policy experts and embassy
officials about LNG exports and concluded that they promised
significant geopolitical benefits. And I would note that with
Russia once again threatening to cut off Ukrainian natural gas
supplies, I believe that enactment of our LNG bill can't come
soon enough.
When it comes to revisiting the 40-year-old restrictions on
oil exports, we will take the same deliberative approach. We
recognize that the export of oil and other liquid hydrocarbons
presents different issues than natural gas. That is why we
again are undertaking a thorough review and will consider all
the perspectives, including producers, refiners, and consumers.
That is the purpose of today's hearing and why we are
soliciting public comments on changing energy markets. If we
choose to change the law on exports of oil and other liquids,
it will only happen after an open review of the current policy.
Our energy abundance has greatly changed energy markets and
presents a wonderful number of new opportunities, and we will
consider carefully our approach to all of them.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Energy markets are changing, and they're changing for the
better. America is producing more while using and importing
less, and the energy boom is translating into a jobs boom--not
just in energy production but also energy infrastructure and
manufacturing.
The combination of increased domestic oil supplies and
decreased demand not only strengthens our energy security, but
also presents new opportunities for energy diplomacy. The days
of energy-exporting aggressors like Russia exerting uncontested
geopolitical influence may be numbered now that America is
emerging as an energy superpower.
While the overall effects of our domestic energy abundance
are overwhelmingly positive, they do create some challenges and
complications when viewed under the lens of our existing
Federal energy policy. For example, the recent drop in oil
prices has been great news for folks in Michigan and across the
country who are finally getting a break at the gas pump after
several years of prices above three bucks a gallon. But at the
same time, current prices pose a challenge for producers, their
employees, and the communities in which they live. In fact,
some energy workers have already lost their jobs.
Couple these changes with a new global petroleum landscape
of enduring complexity and emerging volatility, and it only
further reinforces the point that the time to examine these
issues is now. Clearly, the changes in energy markets affect
different parties in different ways, and Congress needs to be
aware of all of the impacts before considering any
modifications to energy policy.
That is why we took a very careful and deliberative
approach on the issue of natural gas exports. For more than a
year before we proposed legislation to expedite LNG export
approvals, we thoroughly studied the potential impacts on
natural gas producers and on users like manufacturers and
consumers. We acted only after listening to all interested
parties and concluding that LNG exports would be beneficial for
the economy and a net jobs creator.
We also heard from many foreign policy experts and embassy
officials about LNG exports and concluded that they promised
significant geopolitical benefits. And I would note that with
Russia once again threatening to cut off Ukrainian natural gas
supplies, I believe that enactment of our LNG bill can't come
soon enough.
When it comes to revisiting the 40-year-old restrictions on
oil exports, we will take the same deliberative approach. We
recognize that the export of oil and other liquid hydrocarbons
presents different issues than natural gas. That is why we
again are undertaking a thorough review and will consider all
perspectives--including producers, refiners, and consumers.
That is the purpose of today's hearing and also why we are
soliciting public comments on changing energy markets. If we
choose to change the law on exports of oil and other liquids,
it will only happen after an open review of the current policy.
America's energy abundance has greatly changed energy
markets and presents a number of new opportunities, and we will
carefully consider our approach to all of them.

Mr. Upton. And I yield to the chairman emeritus of the full
committee, Mr. Barton.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, I want to compliment you on the statement
that you just made. I appreciate what you said about
deliberative process and keeping an open mind and having
hearings like this so that we can get all the facts.
The United States is probably the most blessed Nation in
the world in terms of energy resources. Some of the people at
the table before us have helped to develop those resources.
Others have helped to conserve them and make sure that they are
produced in an environmentally safe fashion.
As we go forward in this Congress, we need to work
together, hopefully in a bipartisan fashion, to craft an energy
policy that is acceptable to all sides and is acceptable to
this great country. We have a tremendous opportunity in the
world markets today because of our abundance of energy and the
way we are producing it in an environmentally efficient
fashion, and I look forward to hearing the testimony of the
witnesses, Mr. Chairman.
And I will yield 30 seconds to anybody who--Mr. Flores, if
he wants it, or Mr. Johnson. Anybody?
Then, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentleman yields back.
Some of the members are leaving because we do have one vote
on the House floor, but before that I would like to recognize
the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Pallone, ranking member, for
a 5-minute opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Whitfield.
Our energy picture is rapidly evolving. Worldwide crude oil
prices are at their lowest level in 5 years. U.S. gas prices
have been hovering around $2 per gallon and domestic oil
production has increased dramatically in recent years, while
the growth of demand has slowed noticeably. And all this is
good news for consumers in the near term.
These changes reflect in part the all-of-the-above energy
strategy that this administration has pursued, ranging from
additional exploration and production of fossil fuels to
development of alternative energy sources and increased fuel
efficiency standards for our cars and trucks. The
administration has also recently taken steps to facilitate the
export of liquefied natural gas and other petroleum products.
The current low oil prices benefit us all in many ways.
Overall, low oil prices increase our GDP and decrease the
amount Americans spend on energy, particularly at the pump. EIA
projects that U.S. households will spend about $750 less in
2015 than in 2014 and about $450 less in 2016 than in 2014, and
the increase in U.S. production is meant to decrease imported
oil with significant geopolitical implications. For the first
time in decades, we have some ability to be partial price
makers rather than price takers.
However, these conditions are but a snapshot in time and
there are many factors that could change the energy picture
dramatically in the future. Lower oil prices can impact the
economics of additional domestic production. Geopolitical
instability can adversely affect our allies and our Nation.
Crude oil prices can fluctuate based on global and domestic
market forces. Although it is possible that we experience
sustained low oil prices, it is also possible that oil prices
and gasoline prices will rise over time.
Last December this subcommittee held hearings on the
decades-old crude oil export ban. I believe it is entirely fair
to consider the merits of a policy that was enacted in the wake
of the 1973 oil embargo. This is a very different world than it
was in 1973, but I do not believe a clear picture has yet
emerged as to what policies we should pursue. Therefore, while
this is a topic worthy of our examination, we need to act
carefully and act based on fact. That is the essence of good
policy and of regular order, which I will continue to insist on
before we take legislative action.
Last year the administration issued guidance that certain
petroleum condensates could be exported without the typical
restrictions reserved for crude oil exports. While these
rulings remain controversial, it is clear that the
administration retains the authority to authorize crude oil
exports in specific circumstances, and some companies have
already started to export petroleum condensates, but the extent
of such exports remains uncharted.
If we are to consider a more wholesale listing of the ban
on exports, there are numerous questions that need to be
answered.
First, how would lifting the ban affect the short- and
long-term price of crude oil, and, therefore, the price of
gasoline? I don't believe there is a consensus on that point.
Second, how would such a change affect both our refinery
capacity and the balance of jobs. Refinery capacity is a
critical element of our infrastructure and can be an important
source of middle-class jobs. In fact, both parties have long
bemoaned the lack of new refineries in this country.
How would exporting crude oil instead of refining and
exporting finished petroleum products affect potential job
growth in the years ahead? Is the rush to export crude oil
beneficial to small refineries, as well as to large, integrated
oil companies?
And, finally, what are the environmental and climate
impacts of lifting the export ban? In 1973 we did not yet have
the Trans-Alaska Pipeline or widespread use of horizontal
drilling techniques, we did not have large-scale domestic oil
production in North Dakota, and we had not yet tapped into the
oil and gas from other shale plays. But we also had not
experienced the Exxon Valdez or the BP Deepwater Horizon oil
spills. The term fracking was not in the common vernacular. Oil
and gas pipelines weren't sprouting up in backyards, parks, and
farmland the way they are today. And most importantly, the
concentration of CO2 in our atmosphere had not yet topped 400
parts per million.
In today's world it is no longer wise to consider energy
policy as distinct from environmental policy. They are linked.
Each is a facet of the other. Increasing crude oil exports
means increasing domestic production of crude oil with
attendant impacts on climate change, on public and worker
safety, on property owners, and on protection of our above- and
below-ground water supplies. Too often we eagerly embrace
short-term profits and benefits without understanding the costs
of our actions. We should not make such a mistake again here.
Instead, we should take the long view to ensure we fully
understand the enduring consequences of our actions and choose
the cleanest and most sustainable path forward, and that is the
essence of commonsense energy policy.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to hearing from
the witnesses, I guess when we return from the vote. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Pallone, thank you very much.
And I want to apologize to our panel of witnesses once
again. We think we only have one vote. There may be a second
vote. But we have a five-star cafeteria downstairs, and it is
open until 2:30. But we hope to be back here by 15 or 20 after
2 at the latest. So thank you all for your patience, and we
look forward to your testimony as soon as we come back.
They told me to tell you to stay close. So don't go too
far. So we will adjourn until that time.
[Recess.]
Mr. Whitfield. Call the hearing back to order. Rather than
introduce all the witnesses at once, I am going to simply
introduce you and then recognize you for your opening
statement.
Our first witness will be Adam Sieminski, who is the
Administrator, United States Energy Information Administration.
Certainly no stranger to testifying before the Energy and
Commerce Committee.
So, Mr. Sieminski, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF ADAM SIEMINSKI, ADMINISTRATOR, ENERGY INFORMATION
ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY; SCOTT D. SHEFFIELD,
CHAIRMAN AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, PIONEER NATURAL RESOURCES
COMPANY; CHARLES T. DREVNA, PRESIDENT, AMERICAN FUEL &
PETROCHEMICAL MANUFACTURERS; JOHN KINGSTON, PRESIDENT, MCGRAW
HILL FINANCIAL GLOBAL INSTITUTE; AMY MYERS JAFFE, EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR, ENERGY AND SUSTAINABILITY, UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA,
DAVIS; BRAD MARKELL, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, AFL-CIO INDUSTRIAL
UNION COUNCIL; AND GRAEME BURNETT, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT FOR
FUEL OPTIMIZATION, DELTA AIRLINES, AND CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD,
MONROE ENERGY

STATEMENT OF ADAM SIEMINSKI

Mr. Sieminski. Chairman Whitfield, Mr. McNerney, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
be here today to address changing dynamics in the world energy
markets. The Energy Information Administration is the
statistical and analytical agency with the Department of
Energy. By law, EIA's data analyses are independent of approval
by any other Federal office or employee, so the views expressed
here today should not be construed as representing those of the
Department of Energy or any other Federal agency. My testimony
focuses on EIA's oil market outlook and its economic
implications and it draws heavily on our short-term energy
outlook. I want to talk a little bit about prices, demand, and
the overall outlook.
Since the middle of last year, the global supply of oil has
exceeded global consumption, leading to growth in oil
inventories and a major decline in prices. In January, the
monthly average price for West Texas Intermediate crude was $47
a barrel--that was kind of down towards the bottom or at least
the most recent bottom--down from an average of $106 a barrel
in June of 2014. Prices turned up in February with WTI, West
Texas Intermediate, and Brent, respectively, averaging $51 and
$58 a barrel. The recent rise likely reflects some optimism
regarding the pace of market rebalancing, including lower rig
counts, drilling, and capital expenditures on the supply side,
and some positive news on the global economy that impacts
demand.
Global supply of crude oil and other liquids grew more than
2 million barrel per day in 2014, 75 percent of that from the
United States alone. In 2015 and 2016 EIA sees non-OPEC supply
continuing to grow under our price forecast, but more slowly.
Lower costs should help support activity in the lower 48 State
shale oil plays that have contributed to the majority of the
recent U.S. oil production growth.
The trend of slow decline in Alaskan production is expected
to continue, while Federal offshore production, especially in
the Gulf of Mexico where development projects have long lead
times, grows due to projects recently brought online and
startups that are scheduled for 2015 and 2016. Net, in 2016, we
still see U.S. production rising close to the historic high in
1970.
EIA expects economic growth to drive a pickup in global
consumption through 2016, led by China and the non-OECD Asian
countries. Consumption in Japan, Europe, and Russia, on the
other hand, is expected to continue to decline. The rest of the
OECD countries, led by the United States, is expected to grow
modestly, and lower oil prices should add to demand growth.
Recent prices of futures and options contracts suggest an
unusually high level of price uncertainty with the implied 95
percent confidence interval for market expectations for WTI
prices at the end of this year ranging from $32 to $108 a
barrel. Mr. Chairman, I remember back in December when I was
here, one of the members said, ``That is a really big range you
are talking about,'' and I said, ``Yes, it is.'' And that is
what the market is saying, that is what investors are saying.
There is a huge amount of uncertainty, and I think during the
opening remarks some of those uncertainties were mentioned:
geopolitical events, what is happening with the economy, and so
on. Absent further sanctions or unplanned disruptions, EIA's
average price forecast for this year is $55 a barrel and for
next year about $71 a barrel.
Now, there is some good news, and the good news is that
consumers are receiving a direct benefit from lower oil prices.
U.S. regular gasoline retail prices, which were $3.36 a gallon
average in 2014, are now more than $1 below that. The average
household is expected to spend $750 less for gasoline this year
than in 2014. If that household has more than one vehicle or if
you live in an area where you are on oil heat or propane heat,
you will even be saving more.
Mr. Chairman, I want to take the last few seconds and just
mention some of the things that we are doing at EIA that I know
members here in this committee have been very interested in.
EIA has undertaken a huge effort to improve the quality and
timeliness of our data and analyses. We just launched a monthly
survey to improve estimates of both the volume and quality of
oil production, that should help with this question of oil
exports, related to which we are working with the producing
States through the Groundwater Protection Council, which is
developing a national database of well-level data.
Next month, EIA plans to begin publishing monthly
information on movement of crude oil by rail, another important
topic. We have also begun working with our counterparts in
Canada and Mexico on validating cross-border flows of energy,
improved infrastructure mapping, and energy trade.
Recognizing the growing connection between the U.S. and
global energy markets, we are redeploying resources to extend
our international data analysis capabilities. And one key focus
area is global oil demand growth, that has significant
implications for future oil prices, and petroleum product and
crude oil exports. Another is world supply and demand for
natural gas, which we will determine the extent of
opportunities for the United States given everything that is
happening with LNG and LNG exports.
Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you again for the opportunity
to testify here, and I will look forward to the rest of the
day.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sieminski follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much, Mr. Sieminski.
Our next witness is Mr. Scott Sheffield, who is the
chairman and chief executive officer of Pioneer Natural
Resources.
And, Mr. Sheffield, you are recognized for 5 minutes, and
the red lights will come on when the time is up. So thank you.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT D. SHEFFIELD

Mr. Sheffield. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Whitfield,
Mr. McNerney, committee members, it is great being here today.
I represent Pioneer Natural Resources and its 4,000 employees.
We are one of the most active independents in the U.S. I have
40 years experience as a petroleum engineer, 30 years as CEO of
Pioneer.
What is interesting today, listening to Netanyahu's speech,
what brought home to me is that I was raised in Tehran, Iran.
That was the big topic today. I spent over 10 years traveling
to Tunisia as we had an office in North Africa. What hasn't
changed in the last 40 years, the world is very still very
dependent upon Middle Eastern and North African crude.
What has changed in the U.S. is this piece of rock--which I
left one at your table--is that we have actually found six
world-class oil fields. This represents the Wolfcamp field in
west Texas. It is now the U.S.' largest oil field that we have
found, over 75 billion barrels. We used to get 50 barrels a day
out of this. Now we are getting over 2,000 barrels a day out of
this rock with new technology.
The shale revolution has been a game-changer for this
country. We now are the largest liquids producer in the world,
surpassing Saudi Arabia and Russia. We have almost doubled
production from 5 million barrels a day to 9.3 million barrels
a day since 2008, reduced imports from 60 percent to 30 percent
in a very short timeframe. We have been the largest job creator
in the country for over the last 6 years.
Also, we have reduced the trade deficit. Our industry $200
billion annually. A combination of less imports, but we are
refining and sending out over 4 million barrels a day of
refined products. In addition, one-third gasoline that we
refine is being exported.
This is my fifth downturn in my career since 1981. We have
seen over 900 rigs drop from a high of 2,000, almost 50
percent, we have seen 50 billion of CAPEX reductions by the
industry over the last 2 months going into 2015, industry
layoffs of over 50,000 workers and continuing, leading to
flattening to declining production going into 2016 at current
prices. The strategy of OPEC is to preserve and grow market
share. I can promise you, OPEC loves the export ban being in
place in the U.S.
Let me explain how oil is traded and how it works. For my
entire career sweet crude internationally, sweet crude
domestically traded at the same price. Over the last 3 years we
have seen a big variance of $10 to $15 per barrel in those
prices. Today it is $11 a barrel in those prices.
There is no benefit for consumers. Consumers are paying
world gasoline prices. Through studies that Adam has done at
EIA and other independent studies, that has been proven, that
the U.S. Consumer is paying a world gasoline price based on
international oil prices.
Allowing U.S. crude to be sold overseas would increase
global supply, causing gasoline prices to decline. So, for
instance, if you lifted the ban today, we put 300,000 barrels a
day on the market, it would compete with OPEC, it would lower
the price of the international crude. The domestic price would
move toward it, like it has over the last 30, 40 years.
Removing the crude ban allows U.S. Producers to compete.
Just a $10 swing in price makes a difference of this country
growing or declining $2 million barrels a day. A great example,
Pioneer was the first company to export processed condensate
last summer through a Commerce Department confirmation. We are
actually realizing $8 a barrel higher price by exporting to
Europe, Japan, South Korea. We are taking that cashflow,
drilling more wells, more production, more jobs in this
country.
With the ban lifted, U.S. remains the largest producer,
lowers gasoline cost, adds U.S. jobs, increases Government
revenues, and what is most important, is selling oil to our
allies in Europe, Japan, South Korea, reducing dependence,
their dependence on Iran and Russia.
It is important to act now. If you lifted the ban today, I
can promise you Pioneer would add more rigs today, more jobs,
more U.S. investment, and the other 7,000 independents in this
country would do the same.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sheffield follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Sheffield.
At this time, I would like to introduce Mr. Charles Drevna,
who is the president of the American Fuel and Petrochemical
Manufacturers.
Welcome, and you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CHARLES T. DREVNA

Mr. Drevna. Chairman Whitfield, Mr. McNerney, and members
of committee, thanks for the opportunity to provide AFPM's view
on trends in today's energy markets.
I want to leave you with a couple of key messages today.
First, I think we can all agree it is incredible that the U.S.
is at a point where we are able to have a real conversation
about lifting the crude export ban. Seems like just yesterday
when the committee was hearing testimony from a trove of peak
oil alarmists, and I was cautioning against market-interfering
and counterproductive initiatives, including the RFS.
Now, 7 years later, over the same time, we are producing
more than 70 percent of our oil and it is projected to go
higher. Imports are down, 66 percent to about 45 percent. But
when you take out Canada and Mexico from that equation, we are
down to around 20 percent of imports. This is nothing but great
news for our economy and the consumers, with the noted
exception that 7 years later the assumptions used to promote
the RFS have been proven invalid and the RFS continues to
inhibit free markets and consumer choice.
Takes me to my second key message. The distribution and
refining systems are undergoing significant and rapid changes.
These changes are happening for the most part because new
production is not connected to the refinery delivery
infrastructure that existed prior to the shale oil boom. As a
result, upstream producers, midstream distributors, and
refiners are rapidly adapting existing infrastructure while
investing in new infrastructure, whether via pipeline or rail.
Changing market dynamics have also impacted the economics
of many refineries, including those along the east coast that
were literally days away from closure. The ability of these
refiners to utilize Bakken crude is a great example of this
revitalized energy industry.
The refining industry is also undergoing more significant
change. The U.S. is home to the largest and most advanced
refining complex in the world. That is a fact that should give
all concerned with economic growth and national security an
enormous amount of comfort. We produce about 20 percent of the
world's fuel and since 2009 we have been a net exporter of
petroleum products. With new domestic supplies coming on, the
industry is undergoing even more changes to accommodate this
vital resource.
Leads me to my third message. You may have been led to
erroneously believe that refiners are unable to process the
light crude being produced. I am here today to categorically
state that the refining industry is well equipped to handle all
the increased production expected to come online in the coming
years. Refiners already have significantly reduced imports,
increased utilization rates, changed their crude mix, and
invested in additional refining modifications to utilize more
light crude.
For example, Turner Mason estimates that if the economics
continue to be favorable, an additional 900,000 barrels per day
of capacity is possible with existing capacity and the
investments already planned. This would ensure refiners have
the capacity to use all new crude for at least the next several
years.
Of course, an adverse regulatory regime and changing market
dynamics could render this bright future moot. Whether it is
market-distorting legislation and regulations, the
manufacturing renaissance-destroying ozone NAAQS, or others in
a litany of uneconomic and conflicting regulations, U.S.
refiners continually face uncertainty in the way global
competition doesn't. As gasoline demand continues to drop in
the coming decades, refiners will be increasingly dependent on
export markets, which means competing penny by penny, gallon by
gallon with global competitors who are subject to a very
separate set of rules.
I mention all this to set up my final point, which is that
after AFPM believes that the right energy policy for America is
based in free markets, which lower cost and increased benefits
to consumers. As a result, AFPM does not necessarily oppose
lifting the crude export ban. However, AFPM strong believes
that a holistic energy policy that addresses other anti-free
market policies at the same time is essential. Going back to
what Chairman Upton stated, we have to get this thing right in
a holistic approach, not do it piecemeal in a vacuum. We have
done that for too long in this country on energy policy, such
as it is.
For instance, with the restrictive Jones Act shipping
requirement in place and the world without the crude export
ban, it would be cheaper to ship a barrel of crude from Houston
to a European refiner than it would be to ship it to the Monroe
facility. This makes zero sense.
As Congress debates lifting the ban, I urge you not to make
the mistakes of the past by narrowly focusing on one issue and
leaving it in a wake of unintended consequences in the market.
We have time to gather the facts and develop a more holistic
approach.
Thank you. I would be happy to answer any of your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Drevna follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Drevna.
Our next witness is John Kingston, who is the president of
McGraw Hill Financial Global Institute.
Great to see you again, and you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOHN KINGSTON

Mr. Kingston. Thank you. Chairman Whitfield, Congressman
McNerney, and members of the subcommittee, good afternoon and
thank you for inviting me to share the views of the McGraw Hill
Financial Global Institute. I am the newly appointed president
of the institute.
We are McGraw Hill Financial's thought leadership platform.
MHFI provides independent benchmarks, credit ratings, portfolio
and enterprise risk solutions and analytics, and is home to
some of the most iconic brands in U.S. finance, economics, and
business, including Standard & Poor's Rating Service, S&P
Capital IQ, S&P Dow Jones Indices, Platts, and J.D. Power.
Prior to being appointed president of the institute, I
spent more than 29 years with Platts, the MHFI brand that
provides the energy industry with independent news, analysis,
and benchmark price assessments that are used as the basis for
billions in energy commerce throughout the globe. I hope to
provide you with helpful insight from all of our brands, as
well as additional unique insights from the institute.
Over the last 30 years, oil prices have seen several booms
and busts. However, the price slide of recent months is like no
other. In 1998-1999 the boom-bust cycle could be attributed
mostly to the Asian financial crisis and the collapse in demand
from that region. The price collapse of 1985-1986 bears more
resemblance to the current cycle. Key producers like Saudi
Arabia were determined to recapture market share against a
backdrop of some increases in supply and some cuts in demand.
Despite the similarities, the mid-1980s did not feature the
enormous North American-generated increases in supply that we
are witnessing today.
While the Saudis and their Gulf allies are determined to
hang on to market share this time, this is not the immediate
reason for the price to climb. Instead, it is the growing
imbalance between supply and demand that finally combined this
year to send the market plunging. It would have happened
earlier had there not been so much disruption of international
supply lines due to various political reasons.
Once Libya came back toward 1 million barrel per day in
June and July, that tenuous balance could hold no more. It is
interesting to note that since that surge out of Libya, that
country's output has fallen back significantly, yet the price
remains at depressed levels. So while there are global factors
contributing to the drop in oil prices, none compare to the
scale of what the U.S. shale revolution has done in just a few
short years.
It is important to note that the amount of capacity in the
world that is on the sidelines because of political issues is
enormous. One recent estimate put it at about 4.5 million
barrels a day. It starts with small countries like South Sudan
and Syria, and it rises up to averages close to a million
barrels a day in Iran due to sanctions and Libya due to civil
war. And this does not even take into account where political
mismanagement of a country's industry can and sometimes has
given it a productive capacity far less than what it should be.
Venezuela is obviously in this category. If there was any sort
of significant move toward peace in these areas, since the cost
of production in most of those regions are all significantly
less than the U.S., oil prices would come under even greater
pressure.
The price slide has raised repeated questions just about
how cost competitive the U.S. industry can be in the lower
price environment and also raises the question of the
competitiveness of U.S. crude exports should they be allowed.
It is safe to assume that some, if not all refiners around the
world probably have some models about how U.S. crudes would
perform in their facilities if exports were allowed.
The rise in U.S. crude exports to Canada, mostly via rail,
indicates that Canadian refiners at least are finding U.S.
crudes to be attractive. If they weren't, those export numbers
would be falling, not rising.
So as to how U.S. crudes will do battle in an international
market if export bans were lifted, all we can say is we will
see. And I have some numbers to talk about later.
I will now turn my focus to the impact the current pricing
environment is having on U.S. producers. Based on earning
calls, MHFI's subsidiary S&P Ratings is seeing a 35 percent
CAPEX expenditure cut this year. Those numbers go up to 50
percent in some cases, down to 10 percent for the major
producers. And many are running capital expenditure budgets
that just hold on to maintenance levels.
This year S&P does not expect the price impact on companies
to translate to significant debt defaults, although reducing
CAPEX certainly affects the employment market. The oil and gas
sector has been aggressively adding jobs during the economic
recovery. During that period job growth for the oil and gas
industry was 39 percent, as opposed to the 8 percent growth in
the U.S. job market overall. However, the industry showed job
losses of 2,000 in January, and regions that are heavily
reliant on the energy sector could see a greater negative
impact on employment.
While the regional impact of oil prices will differ, in the
near-term low oil prices are a boon, though, for the overall
economy. According to S&P's U.S. economist, savings could tally
up to $87.6 billion for the national economy. That is $1,000
for the average household in 2015 alone.
Out in the State capitals, operating budgets appear safe in
the short term. In the long term, however, given a long-term
secular slide in oil prices, States will need to react by
altering their fiscal management. No two States are alike, even
ones with similarly sized oil-producing industries. Therefore,
many questions need to be answered, such as what oil price and
production level did the State assume in their budget.
I am glad to provide more information on any of these
issues discussed here today or any others offered by MHFI in
the question-and-answer session or any time in the future.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kingston follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thanks, Mr. Kingston.
At this time I recognize Ms. Amy Jaffe, who is executive
director of the Energy and Sustainability Program at the
University of California, Davis.
And you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF AMY MYERS JAFFE

Ms. Jaffe. Thank you very much, Chairman Whitfield and
Representative McNerney, for this excellent opportunity to
address the committee. I look forward to our discussions. I am
going to focus my remarks on the geopolitical aspects of the
questions at hand.
But before I turn to that, I just wanted to make the point,
also in the geopolitical context, that markets react to
stimulus. So we had a very high oil price artificially imposed
into the market by OPEC. That created opportunities for
companies like Mr. Sheffield's companies to pursue
unconventional resources, more expensive resources. As a
result, we are having this boom in the United States. Over time
we learn by doing so the cost of producing the expensive oil
comes down.
That put OPEC back in a bind, right? So they thought they
had the upper hand, Russia thought it had the upper hand, Iran
thought it had the upper hand, and all of a sudden the market
responded.
So now we are at a juncture where Saudi Arabia had an
opportunity. The markets responding, they have to come up with
a strategy, they have to decide what strategy to come up with,
and they have a unique opportunity to row the boat in the same
direction as the United States and use a lower oil price to put
geopolitical pressure on countries like Russia and Iran to come
to the peace table and have negotiations on serious conflicts
we are seeing in the Middle East and elsewhere. And I do
believe that our allies in the Gulf Cooperation Council had
those goals in mind when they set the policy to create a market
share war in the market.
We now have an opportunity as the United States to leverage
that opportunity and to lead from the front. And we know from
watching what is happened in the markets when OPEC tried to
hold the price up and we have other kinds of barriers into the
market that it is like the little boy with his finger in the
dike. You can put your finger in the dike in one place, but if
there is pressure from the water there will be a crack
somewhere else and the water will pour out somewhere else. That
is sort of how the export ban is, right?
We now have 430 million barrels of oil, close to historic
highs, sitting in storage in the U.S. southwest. At Cushing,
Oklahoma, alone we have 49 million barrels. That is near the
record high in history in the United States of 42 million
barrels, right? So to say that the refining industry feels like
over the next 3 years they will be able to refine those
barrels, that doesn't help us now. We have this giant stockpile
of oil that is sitting with no place to go.
And that is a market inefficiency. And we need to think
about the way that markets balance. Refineries have accidents,
and when we have a refinery accident all the crude oil that was
going to go through that refinery has to go somewhere else or
it has to sit in storage. We had put the ban in place at a time
when there was no futures market, there was no hedging, there
was no transparent pricing, right? We are in a totally
different market today and we need to think about the
inefficiencies that we create.
We are exporting gasoline. And we import gasoline, so we
are a major participant in the global market for gasoline. The
idea that somehow holding something in, like having our finger
in one part of the dike, is going to product consumers from the
global trends in gasoline is ridiculous because we are both an
importer and an exporter, so all our gasoline prices are
subject to international market prices.
We just had a refinery accident in California. The pressure
that that puts on the California market comes. And if we are
exporting gasoline from California, then that contributes to
the supply balance in the State, right? We cannot pretend that
exports of gasoline don't affect the price of gasoline but our
crude import costs do. That is sort of a ridiculous way of
thinking about a market.
So my point to you is, for the United States to hoard our
oil, for oil to be trapped now in inventory unnecessarily, I
mean, companies are scrambling around trying to find another
tank, and U.S. prices are depressed by $10 a barrel compared to
the international market. So we really need to think forwardly
about whether our export and import policies are consistent
with our desire to help our allies, Europe and in Asia, to be
able to remain independent of the energy weapon and the kinds
of things we see today in the market coming from Russia and
other countries, and we need to reconsider all of our policies
for trade and energy in that context.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Jaffe follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Ms. Jaffe, very much.
At this time I would like to recognize Mr. Brad Markell,
who is the executive director of the AFL-CIO Industrial Union
Council.
Mr. Markell. It is a mouthful.
Mr. Whitfield. Welcome. And you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF BRAD MARKELL

Mr. Markell. Chairman Whitfield, Mr. McNerney, and members
of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting the AFL-CIO to
share its views on the important topic of 21st century energy
markets.
Growing domestic oil production is providing the United
States with significant economic boost and a significant
reduction in our dependence on foreign oil. In July 2014, the
AFL-CIO Executive Council unanimously passed a policy statement
opposing lifting the existing restrictions on crude oil
exports, which I reference in my written statement.
Our view is clear: Easing restrictions on crude oil exports
threatens the long-run health of the refinery sector and the
high quality jobs it provides. Simply put, if we lift the ban
on crude oil exports, we will export both our oil and the jobs
and economic activity associated with refining that oil. The
threat of these job losses is concentrated in the Gulf of
Mexico States.
I want to raise a key point, one that I haven't heard
discussed. If the export restrictions are lifted, the amount of
oil exported will over time far exceed the amount needed to
balance the current refinery capacity that is optimized for
medium and heavy oil. Refinery workers and their communities
would be subject to the same offshoring trends that have
devastated domestic manufacturing, from textiles, to apparel,
footwear, autos, steel, electronics, and on and on.
And the jobs that could be lost are very good jobs.
According to the 2012 Economic Census, the average job in the
refining sector paid over $100,000 per year, supported by over
$1.8 million in value added per employee. These are exactly the
kind of jobs we should be striving to keep in the United
States.
Some of these jobs are threatened by the recent Department
of Commerce clarification of its policies regarding processed
condensate, which may have already effectively breached the
export restrictions, without a single hearing, public notice,
or public comment. It seems clear that lots of very minimally
processed oil will be exported.
Much of the discussion on oil exports focuses on the
mismatch in refinery capacity, and in this static view of the
industry the easiest fix for the problem is to reduce imports
of light crude oil and then export any remaining domestic light
crude unprocessed.
Rather than export domestically produced light crude oil
that refineries are not optimized to process, there is another
solution, one that emphasizes investment in America and
expanding employment opportunity for American workers. In 2014,
McKinsey examined the implications of increased domestic
production of light, tight oil on refineries under scenarios
where the crude oil export ban is not lifted. McKinsey believes
that, quote, ``The continued growth of light, tight oil in
North America has the potential to drive a fundamental
restructuring of the downstream industry in North America and
beyond.''
Domestic production of oil is projected to remain above 8
million barrels a day through at least 2035. The question is
not whether this oil will be produced, but where it will be
refined. It should be refined in the U.S. so we can reap the
full bounty of jobs, economic activity, and the energy security
that our increased production of crude oil makes possible.
As the American Petroleum Institute put it in 2011 when
making the case for domestic refining, quote, ``Because the
refining industry operates on a global basis, America faces the
choice of either manufacturing these products at home or
importing them from other countries.''
The position of the AFL-CIO is premised on the belief that
in the end markets win out. Economically exploitable fossil
fuels do not stay in the ground, they are produced when the
price is high enough. The simple question before us is, where
do we want oil produced in the United States to be refined and
made into products? Would we prefer that billions be invested
in the U.S. or overseas? Would we prefer to create management,
engineering, craft occupation and production employment in the
U.S. or overseas?
For the AFL-CIO, the choice is clear: We are unabashedly
for creating as many American jobs as we can from the increased
domestic production of oil. That means keeping the current
crude oil export restrictions in place, not sending crude oil
and the jobs it creates overseas.
Thank for your time and I look forward to any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Markell follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Markell.
At this time I would like to recognize as our final witness
Dr. Graeme Burnett, senior vice president for fuel optimization
at Delta Airlines and also chairman of the board of Monroe
Energy.
So, Dr. Burnett, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF GRAEME BURNETT

Dr. Burnett. Thank you. Good afternoon, Chairman Whitfield,
Ranking Member McNerney, and members of the committee. Thank
you for inviting me to testify before you today. I would ask
that my full remarks be included in the record.
I have been involved in the refining industry in locations
around the globe for over 30 years. I am currently the senior
vice president for fuel optimization at Delta Airlines, and in
this position I manage Delta's jet fuel supply, as well as
serve as chairman of the board of Monroe Energy, the company
that owns and operates Delta's refinery in Trainer,
Pennsylvania. Delta Airlines purchased and restarted the idled
Trainer refinery in 2012 in order to manage our largest
expense, jet fuel, and has created over 400 jobs.
We, like other airlines, participate in oil markets on a
daily basis. So we believe that as an end user of crude oil and
as a refiner we are uniquely positioned to comment on the
longstanding crude export law. We strongly believe the current
law remains a critically important policy that provides
significant benefits to American consumers.
As a result of increased domestic production, the U.S. is
importing less crude, which means that we are already directly
impacting the global supply-demand picture without the need for
exports and prices have tumbled as a result.
The EIA has projected the average American household will
spend about $750 less on gasoline in 2015 compared to the prior
year, in addition to equally significant savings on home
heating oil. Estimates have suggested that the total windfall
to American consumers could top $230 billion in 2015. These
savings go straight back into American consumers' pockets,
allowing them to use those savings on goods and services, thus
stimulating the economy.
On the other hand, the oil and gas production sector is
still less than 1 percent of GDP. Compare that with consumer
spending, which is 68.5 percent of GDP. Current crude oil
export policy has broad-based economic value.
So the question arises, why would any policymaker want to
risk jeopardizing the current consumer benefits we are
experiencing and institute a policy that would benefit only a
narrow sector of the economy? Oil producers want to export
crude to get higher prices. Producers claim that U.S.
refineries cannot absorb new U.S. production, and that is
simply a myth. Energy experts Baker O'Brien have conclusively
demonstrated that the U.S. refining industry has been investing
to absorb all the projected increase of domestic production
through the end of the decade, resulting in lower fuel prices,
creating jobs at home, and increasing energy security.
Let's not forget the U.S. continues to import 33 percent of
its crude oil needs from outside of North America. Unlike LNG,
there is no real excess requiring export as it can all be used
at home. Should Congress eliminate restrictions on crude oil
exports, lawmakers also risk endangering energy security
because repeal of current law would mean refineries in Europe
could buy U.S. crude at a lower cost than refineries located on
the east cost. Lower freight rates enable them to refine the
crude and send products back to the northeast at a lower cost,
leading to closure of domestic refining capacity.
Energy security is not just about producing enough crude
oil for the Nation's needs. Energy security is about
maintaining the domestic refining capability to transform that
feedstock into the products we consume here in America. Put
simply, lifting the ban will benefit European refinery workers
at the expense of thousands of American jobs while endangering
U.S. refining capacity that is critical to our national
security.
OPEC is a cartel and the global crude oil market is not a
free market. Crude oil price is ultimately controlled by a few
oil-producing states. Exporting crude oil will not reduce
OPEC's power, which represents about 60 percent of the total
petroleum traded worldwide. Saudi Arabia's decision last year
not to cut production and allow prices to crash clearly
demonstrates that they are the controlling factor for crude
price.
Furthermore, it is imperative to remember that public
opinion overwhelmingly supports leaving the crude oil export
law in place. Polls in New Hampshire and nationwide are showing
that large majorities of voters across party lines oppose
exporting more U.S. Oil to foreign countries.
So Delta's position is clear: There is no imperative to
lift the ban. If export restrictions are lifted, feedstock
costs will rise, U.S. Refining capacities will be reduced, jobs
will be lost, and the consumer will pay higher prices at the
pump. It is better for America to maintain present law and
export the refined products. Our Nation's economic and security
interests are best served by allowing American refiners to add
value to crude oil here and become less reliant on foreign
crude oil from unstable and unfriendly countries.
Thank you for this opportunity to testify before the
committee. I look forward to answering any member questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Burnett follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Well, Dr. Burnett, thank you.
And thank all of you for your statements. We appreciate it
very much.
As I said in the beginning, this is sort of an
informational-type hearing because we want to focus more
thoroughly on this issue of the pros and cons of lifting the
export of crude oil ban.
Let me just ask a generic question here. First of all, how
many other countries in the world that produced a significant
amount of crude oil prohibit the export of it? Are there some
countries that do prohibit the export of their crude oil?
Mr. Kingston. None that I know of, though Russia will have
an export tax that sometimes they will really ratchet up if
they want to keep the oil in-house. They would just raise that
tax so high that it becomes uneconomic to try to send it
anywhere else.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. OK. So I know that we are exporting a
significant amount of refined products, gasoline, diesel fuel,
condensates, and so forth. And do any of you feel like that
because we are doing that that it is putting pressure or
causing gasoline prices to go up? Gasoline prices have been
going down, and we are, I guess, exporting a large amount of
gasoline products today and diesel.
Did you want to make a comment on that, Mr. Drevna?
Mr. Drevna. I appreciate it, Mr. Chairman.
I think it is fraught with peril when you start talking
about what prices are going to do. Whether crude oil or product
prices, as Mr. Sheffield said, prices are based upon the
international market.
What we have been able to show by taking a crude oil
product, refining it here in the United States, and exporting
it is a couple of things. It shows we are globally competitive,
it shows we can keep jobs here, and keep those refineries
running at optimal levels. That is the benefit of the exports.
Without being able to export a finished product--mostly diesel
too, some gasoline, but mostly diesel--we are able to keep
those refineries up and running, and that is a national
security thing.
If I may say one other thing, sir, I think what we don't
need to have this devolve into is an upstream versus downstream
kind of debate. We are all in this together. And the only thing
that we are asking is that, whatever you do, you look at the
whole picture and just not one time perhaps when there is some,
because of some contango going on in the markets, that we have
an overflow of stored crude.
So let's take our time, take a breath, and look at this
think going forward and not just one snapshot in time. Thank
you.
Ms. Jaffe. I would like to also address that question. It
is obviously a ridiculous thing to say, but because we are
exporting gasoline it doesn't affect the price. Obviously, if
we banned gasoline exports we would get gasoline buildup in
storage and that would depress the price of gasoline. And we
have a particular problem in the State of California, for
example. In different refining areas in the southwest maybe
there is a little bit more flexibility, but in California where
there aren't a lot of pipelines to bring refined products,
whenever we have a refining accident or problem it immediately
hits consumers in the State. And there are difficulties because
you can't necessarily be cost effective to bring ships around
because of the Jones Act and so forth. Those things actually
are affecting California refiners exactly today.
And I don't know what the statistics are for how much
gasoline is being exported from California, but I can tell you
that when Chevron had their Richmond accident, and when it
caused this sudden burst in gasoline prices that were very
difficult for average Californians, the industry was still
exporting from California diesel fuel and gasoline.
So it is a market, and I think that is sort of what was the
point of my remarks, which is that if we are going to talk
about a market dynamic we have to look exactly, I agree with
Mr. Drevna, we have to look across the entire market. But it is
not clear to me why we would have a restriction on crude oil
but not a restriction on products. I mean, it seems to me that
we believe in free trade or we don't believe in free trade, and
I am not sure why we are picking one product over another.
Mr. Kingston. I want to kind of bring those two statements
together. Mr. Drevna talked about refineries, they are better
off operating at a high level. And then what Amy said was that,
yes, if you export, if you stop the exports you would have a
gigantic buildup of gasoline and it will push the price of
gasoline down. The problem is it would also push down the
economics of running those refineries.
So at a certain point you can't make the refineries run. So
if you have some kind of restriction that floods the market and
you don't have demand to meet, and demand is not going to rise
that fast, you are going to have terrible economics and you are
going to have refineries start to cut down.
This is why we all benefit from letting these refineries
run at the highest level they can. If that means that they are
going to export some, that is great. You know, in this country
we have had minimal growth in gasoline consumption, minimal
growth really in energy consumption, and there have been some
year-to-year comparisons where we are down for the year. That
is kind of a good thing. I think almost everybody agrees that
unless it is being brought about by a weak economy, that is
generally a good thing, it is a function of efficiency, et
cetera.
So you have got this world-class refining sector. If you
want it to run, if want to create the jobs that the gentleman
from the AFL-CIO talks about, let 'em rip. Let this great
refining sector run at a high level. And if that means exports,
so be it.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, my time has expired. At this time I
recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. McNerney, for 5
minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank the witnesses for your statements. I appreciate Mr.
Drevna's comment about looking at the big picture and taking
our time to make the decision correctly to benefit our country
the most.
I want to sort of paint a broad picture here. For opening
up exports I see two big benefits. One is geopolitical. We can
help Ukraine and the Baltic countries and a lot of the
countries that are having problems because of their suppliers.
Another benefit is it is going to create jobs in drilling, it
is going to create profits for companies. Those are significant
benefits.
On the other hand, my concerns are right now the domestic
prices are pretty low for natural gas and for petroleum, and
that gives our manufactures a real leg up. And I see a
manufacturing renaissance, an opportunity for a manufacturing
renaissance in this country. So I don't want to give that away.
I mean, we have the potential to create millions of jobs in
manufacturing with a current price differential that gives our
country an opportunity to create those manufacturing jobs.
The other concern I have is environmental groundwater
contamination, a big problem potentially in California where
the groundwater is so valuable. And also climate change. I
mean, encouraging more production, encouraging more
consumption, it is going to create more greenhouse gas, it is
going to put us farther down that dangerous path.
So that is sort of a broad brush. Does anyone want to
comment on my observations here? Mr. Sheffield.
Mr. Sheffield. Yes, Mr. McNerney, a couple on the water
side. We are having droughts out of west Texas too, just like
California. We started focusing on brackish water zones, we are
going below the water table out in west Texas. We found a lot
of water that we can use from the brackish standpoint. We have
also signed major agreements with the cities of Odessa and we
are working on Midland to use effluent water. Our goal is to
use no fresh water after a period of time of about 5 years.
On the environmental issues, we are going all out to
install vapor recovery units to capture all the methane. We are
working with EDF at Fred Krupp. I visit him all the time in
regard to looking at ways to again capture all methane at the
sites when we frack wells and so on. So the industry is going
all out on both methane emissions and also using other sources
of water besides fresh water.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I appreciate that, and I think most of
the players are willing to go down that path. They are willing
to make the extra investment. There may be a couple of bad
players out there, and it is going to be up to the way that we
regulate that market to make sure that the bad players don't do
much damage and hurt the reputation of the industry as a whole.
So that is something I hope to work with my colleagues on
in the future to make sure that we do that.
Mr. Kingston. I would like to address the gasoline price.
You know, this is not just theoretical. We had a Brent-WTI
spread that for years and years WTI was over Brent. And then as
the boom got going in the U.S. and crude stocks built up, not
just in Cushing but everywhere, that price plummeted, and I
think at its widest WTI was $27 below Brent.
There was no evidence at all that that lowered the price of
gasoline in the U.S., because as numerous commentators,
including the recent Brookings Institute study have shown, the
price of gasoline in the U.S., because the U.S. is a gasoline
importer and an exporter, as a result of that we are tied to
the world market. The world market is therefore ultimately tied
to the price of Brent crude oil.
Mr. McNerney. So there is no differential between American
gas prices and the world gas prices? There is a differential--
--
Mr. Sheffield. Ultimately, on a spot wholesale level, I
mean, yes, there is a difference, but ultimately if one gets
too cheap to the other they will just gather it up and export
it to the other place. So they stay within a range. But the
crude price, because a lot of that crude was stranded at
Cushing, dropped significantly below the price of Brent and the
price of gasoline did not follow.
If the case is to be made that keeping a large supply of
crude here in the U.S. lowers gasoline prices, it would have
happened. It is not just theoretical. We had the experiment.
Nobody set out to have the experiment, but we had it, and there
was no evidence at all that that kept the price of gasoline in
check.
Mr. McNerney. Mr. Markell.
Ms. Jaffe. Let me just add one thing about our relationship
with the Europeans.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I recognized Mr. Markell first.
Mr. Markell. So this focus on gas prices is something I
wish we could get off the table. It is important. I own two
SUVs, I am very concerned about gas prices. But it is very
clear that U.S. gas prices are set internationally based on
those spot markets. There is a small swing from market to
market and as the gap gets too wide then it closes. From my
point of view, it kind of takes the focus off the jobs and
economic angle that I think we are not paying enough attention
to.
So there is a lot of talk about gasoline prices. To me, the
question is settled. U.S. gas prices are set on the
international market and whether we export crude or don't
export crude, that is going to be the truth in the future as
well.
Mr. McNerney. I have run out of time.
Mr. Olson [presiding]. The Chair now recognizes himself for
5 minutes of questions. Welcome to our experts.
December 22 of 1975, Gerald Ford signed the law that
created the export ban we are talking about today. To show you
the change in America that has happened since that time, that
very next day he signed a bill to try to make our country adopt
the metric system of measurement. The metric system. That world
has been turned upside down and our energy world has been
turned upside down since that time.
We have seen a boom in oil production that means some parts
of America are seeing some tremendous benefits, places like my
own State of Texas and North Dakota. Energy means amazing
opportunities for these small towns. But we have also seen the
impacts on the global economy. Our reliance on foreign oil is
slipping away faster and faster and faster, more than we could
ever have dreamed 5 years ago. This benefits our trade balance,
our energy security, and our economic growth. These are huge
benefits and they are real.
Growing supply has slashed the price of oil. That is great
for Americans at home because the price is so low at the pump,
but for my hometown of Houston this has meant good people have
lost thousands and thousands of good-paying American jobs. It
is a simple fact that fewer rigs are working and less money is
being invested.
Market forces and global politics are hitting my hometown
hard, but this town, Washington, is adding to the trouble. In
this environment we shouldn't be making it harder to drill. And
that is why it is time we fix pipeline permitting. Energy means
nothing if we can't get it to the markets. And further, the
Endangered Species Act should be a protection, not a weapon.
And we should be more open to safe offshore development. And we
need to keep our rules on our refineries reasonable. And that
is why I am an unspoken critic of the ethanol mandates.
Lastly, today I agree that is important to consider the ban
on most crude exports, but exported oil won't be a cure-all.
But free trade is very important and no law should be above
scrutiny, and this committee is at a very point in this early
conversation.
My first question is for every panelist. I hear from the
oil producers that their oil is trapped. They say its unfairly
marked down compared to global prices. I hear from refiners who
say the opposite. They argue there is plenty of capacity and
they are expanding every day to take more and more American
crude.
Which statement, one of three, best sums up your views
about these two opposing views? Number one, we have enough
refining capacity to absorb light oil. We are there. Number
two, we have more light oil than can be refined reasonably or
absorbed currently. And number three, we have the right amounts
of oil and capacity in our refineries, but not enough pipelines
to get from A to B.
So three choices. Mr. Sieminski, you are first, sir, one,
two, or three, with some comments if you want to.
Mr. Sieminski. Chairman Olson, thank you. Well, I think
your number three, that we don't have enough pipelines, I think
that was the case for oil from Cushing, Oklahoma, 3 or 4 years
ago. But the infrastructure to bring oil south from Cushing to
the Gulf Coast I think is now in a lot better shape. So that
leaves me with one or two.
I would say, sir, that it is a combination. I think that
the capacity to refine the crude oil is probably there, but not
at an equal price between Brent and WTI. So in other words, if
the West Texas Intermediate price is discounted enough, then
refiners would be happy to take a lot of it.
Mr. Olson. I am sorry, sir, my time is up.
One-point-five for you, Mr. Sheffield, one, two or three,
please. I am pretty sure you are probably going to be a one,
you have the capacity.
Mr. Sheffield. Yes, I think what we are not hearing from
the refiners is the economic penalty. They invested $85 billion
to redo their refineries because they all thought light sweet
crude was declining and we would never find it again. It was
all going to be heavy crude from Canada, heavy crude from
Mexico, heavy crude from Venezuela. They invested $85 billion.
So to refine light sweet crude, they have to charge an economic
penalty.
Secondly, they are keeping the $10. They are not passing on
the $5 of it back to the producers to create jobs or $5 back to
the American consumer. So I think it is obvious for me.
Also, I left out a key point, you brought up pipelines, is
that what is interesting about the law in 1975 is that Canada--
I love Canada, we had an office there--Canadian producers, they
can use our storage, they can use our refiners, and they can
apply for a license to export their crude oil.
Mr. Olson. And I have used my time as the chairman overly.
So I will yield back the balance of my time and give my time
now to Mr. Barton--or are we going to go--I am sorry. Oh. Gene.
I am sorry.
Mr. Green from Texas is recognized.
Mr. Green. Well, I think it is appropriate that you have
four Texans left over while we have that one vote on the House
floor. So Congressman Flores and Joe Barton and I.
I want to thank the Chair for doing the hearing today and
thank our witnesses.
We are here to discuss an important issue in the district I
represent. Because I have at any given time--our district lines
change in Texas all the time. I have had five refineries in my
district, from Exxon in Baytown to Valero in the City of
Houston. And so this is a balancing act.
I am looking at our refineries now having the best margins
that they have had that I can remember, and the price of gas is
reasonable, $2.15 a gallon, $2.10, in Houston. But I also have
a whole bunch of jobs that come from the Baker Hughes, the
Halliburtons, and everyone else who are actually so--and I
understand the problem. We are trying to balance it. We want
the refinery margins, but we also want to keep those folks
working in the oil patch. And so that is where the balance come
from.
And, if we can, we will see how it works. But,
Administrator Sieminski, it is good to see you again, and thank
you for the good work you all do.
You mentioned that EIA is composing a study that would
discuss crude oil in exports. Where are you at on that study?
Mr. Sieminski. Congressman, we have done this study on what
drives gasoline prices, and I think you heard a number of
people talk about the results of that. Gasoline in the U.S.
seems to be set more in the international market rather than
elsewhere. We are looking at options for petroleum refineries
to process additional light sweet crude oil. We will have that
study out in about a month.
We have also a study underway to look at the implications
of increased crude oil exports on the refining system, in
general, and we will have that out, I think, sometime in April.
We also published an oil import tracking tool that makes it
easier to see some of the changes that have taken place down in
Texas and Louisiana.
So I would say over the course of the next 6 to 8 weeks we
will have--we will have two or three more big studies out.
Mr. Green. Well, Congress doesn't move that fast. I think
we will probably be able to see those studies before they do.
Mr. Sheffield, first of all, thank you and Pioneer for some
of the things you are doing because it makes it easier--when I
drive through Eagle Ford, I hate to see the flaring for lots of
reasons, environmentally, but, also, I know somebody is not
getting paid for that product that they are producing. And we
have pipeline issues and transmission issues there.
What does the world condensate market look like for U.S.
exporters? I know the Department of Commerce is doing that. Is
that kind of a safety valve for what we need? Because we have a
current procedure for exporting condensate. Are we having some
success in that?
Mr. Sheffield. Yes. We are exporting 20,000 barrels a day
now at Pioneer of condensate, and it is going to Japan, South
Korea, and Europe. They need it.
About 8 weeks ago there were some articles written about
that the market is closed. That is because, for a period of
about a week, the international sweet price and the domestic
sweet price narrowed to about $2 for just a period of 2 or 3
days, and now it is widened back. And that will allow--most
experts are thinking that we can export about 200,000 barrels a
day out of the Eagle Ford.
Several other companies have been approved to be able to go
and export their process condensate. And so that process will
continue. And it will probably--it helps us for about 6 months
on this inventory so that the biggest issue is the sweet crude
from the Bakken sweet crude from Colorado in the Niobrara and
the sweet crude from the Permian Basin.
Mr. Green. OK. How long does it take Department of Commerce
to review Pioneer's application to export the condensate, the
regulatory delay, and the timeframe?
Mr. Sheffield. Yes. It took a few weeks.
Mr. Green. That's amazing. We are waiting for exporting on
LNG for years.
Mr. Sheffield. Obviously, we were very pleased.
Mr. Barton [presiding]. Keystone proposal. Let's----
Mr. Green. Oh, yes. Well, and I know there was some
testimony about--I actually have two of the huge tanks that
Keystone has built in Channelview, Texas. And you are right
about getting the Cushing crude oil down there, but we still
need it to come from Canada across the border.
But the export numbers you are talking about, 20,000 and up
to 200,000--you know, the five refineries off and on I have
represented because I am real familiar with them--they all have
been retooled in the 1990s to do the heavier crude--Venezuela,
Mexico--and we don't have small refineries in our area. In
fact, all of them have been expanded over the years.
We probably have the smallest, about 200,000, 250,000
barrels a day. And I remind people even from TransCanada, if
that is a 750,000-barrel-per-day, we use over a million just in
East Harris County to do it.
Charlie.
Mr. Drevna. Thanks, Congressman.
I would like to make a comment about the retooling and the
billions of dollars that we invested, which is true. But I
think there is another myth out there circulating that, you
know, the only thing those refiners do is just suck up all the
heavy crude and that is all they use. They use a mix.
And we are pretty good at what we do, just like Mr.
Sheffield's company is really good at what they do. We have--
you know, we use light crude, we use middle grade, and we use
heavy. And we can take more--more light by backing out the
middle, backing out some heavy.
So it is not one of those all-or-nothing kind of things.
Like I say, we have been doing this for a long time, and we can
take the extra crude.
And given what Adam Sieminski was talking about, I disagree
somewhat that--``OK. Well, we are OK. We have got some
pipelines going, and we are good and we can go home.'' No. We
were pretty good going north and south. We found out that we
weren't. We are awful going east and west, and probably always
will be awful for a long--you know, for a long time.
Mr. Barton. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Green. I am out of time. But, Ms. Jaffe, it is always
good to have you before our committee. I like to have a Texan
from out in California.
Mr. Barton. The Chair is going to recognize himself for 5
minutes because I actually think it is my turn. So I am going
to do that. We are doing the Pony Express. Yes. You know, we
have a vote on. So we are going to vote coming back and
changing the chairmanship.
Mr. Sieminski, could you tell the subcommittee how many
barrels per day of refined products we export and how many
barrels a day of refined products we import?
Mr. Sieminski. Well, I could get the exact numbers for you
for the record, Congressman, but the total amount of exports is
now up to 3 \1/2\, 4 million barrels a day of products.
[The information follows:]

When excluding crude oil, the United States exports 3,834
thousand barrels per day and imports 1,884 thousand barrels per
day of refined products. The United States is a net exporter of
refined products by 1,950 thousand barrels per day.

This data is based on 2014 monthly averages. EIA usually
considers all refined products that are not crude oil, as
opposed to just looking at Finished Petroleum Products.
Furthermore, HGLs (Hydrocarbon gas liquid) and other liquids
are included in the aforementioned refined products data.

Mr. Barton. But is it fair to say we are exporting more
than we are importing?
Mr. Sieminski. We are a net exporter of products.
Mr. Barton. Net exporter.
Mr. Sieminski. That is correct. By a small amount.
Mr. Barton. OK. Thank you, sir.
So if we were to eliminate the ability to export refined
products, that would not be a good thing?
Mr. Sieminski. I think Mr. Drevna said that refiners are
actually benefiting through capacity, and Mr. Kingston--that
having the ability to export products actually allows you to
run your domestic refinery system efficiently.
Mr. Barton. Better. Yes.
Mr. Sieminski. Yes. And that actually works to the
advantage----
Mr. Barton. We are for exports of refined products.
Mr. Sieminski. That is correct.
Mr. Barton. Now, Mr. Sheffield, I need--I mean, you all
know this, but I am the sponsor of the bill to repeal the ban
on crude oil exports. So I am pro crude oil exports. I think
you all know that, but I guess in full disclosure.
You testified, Mr. Sheffield, that, if all companies--all
producers were allowed to either sell in the domestic market or
sell in the world market crude oil, that while you would get a
slight increase in your price domestically, the overall world
price would at least be pressured to go down because you would
be competing against the Russians and the OPEC nations in the
world market and, since U.S. production is going up, that would
overall bring the world price down--or tend to bring the world
price down. Is that correct?
Mr. Sheffield. Exactly. Anytime you put more supply in the
international market, especially at this point in time, you are
going to bring the international price down.
Mr. Barton. So it may be counterintuitive to some, but if
we allow crude oil exports, at least over time we are going to
stabilize world prices and probably bring them down because we
are increasing U.S. domestic crude oil production. Is that
correct?
Mr. Sheffield. Exactly. And lower gasoline prices for the
American consumer.
Mr. Barton. Mr. Drevna, you and I know each other real
well. I was very gratified to hear your testimony that your
association is not automatically opposed to the repeal of the
ban on crude oil exports.
What would need to be done to expedite that? You had some
qualifications, and I just want you to be able to put those on
the record.
Mr. Drevna. Absolutely, Congressman.
When you look at--as I said earlier, if you look at just
lifting the ban on the exports of crude oil in a vacuum, there
are a lot of other tangential things that must be looked at so
we don't try to solve one problem and create two or three
others. And chief among them is the Jones Act.
Now, I know everyone is going to say you can't repeal the
Jones Act. Well, you can't even talk about it. Well, I think it
is time we talk about it.
Mr. Barton. Well, we can talk about it.
Mr. Drevna. Yes. In the context of the crude oil--you know,
we have had four or five refineries--some shut down, but we
have three or four or five others that were--I mean, days--I am
literally days away from shutting down on the East Coast.
Bakken crude--getting that Bakken crude there saved them.
So what all I am saying is, you know, for 40--ever since we
had this thing in 1975 and the Arab oil embargoes, we have been
having an energy policy here in the country that sort of goes--
it lurches from crisis to crisis, and we never look at anything
holistically.
Mr. Barton. So you just want to look at the whole picture.
Mr. Drevna. Look at the whole picture and see what it does
to the total economics. If the price of crude goes up somewhat
and it is still OK, fine. But----
Mr. Barton. I have got 30 seconds. I want to go to Dr.
Burnett--I am sorry, not Mr. Burnett.
Delta is the Delta Airlines. Correct?
Dr. Burnett. Correct.
Mr. Barton. But does the parent company own the Delta
refinery or are you a subsidiary of the----
Dr. Burnett. Yes. Monroe Energy is a wholly owned
subsidiary of Delta Airlines.
Mr. Barton. OK. Now, does Delta Airlines use the total
production of the Delta refinery?
Dr. Burnett. The way it works is that all refineries
produce gasoline, diesel, as well as jet fuel. So we use the
jet fuel directly into the New York Harbor to our airport hubs
there.
Mr. Barton. But some of your refinery capacity results in
refined products that you sell to others, and probably some of
that is overseas. Now, I don't know that.
Dr. Burnett. No. What we do is we actually swap with
Phillips 66 in traffic euro. We swap the gasoline and diesel
for jet fuel in other locations. So we have a virtual jet
refinery of about 170 barrels a day.
Mr. Barton. Your refinery would oppose us restricting your
refined products to only going to Delta. Correct?
Dr. Burnett. Correct.
Mr. Barton. I just want that on the record.
And my time has expired.
Mr. McNerney, have you asked questions already?
Mr. McNerney. Yes, I have.
Mr. Barton. You have.
Then we are going to go to--no, sir. I just--I remember
that you have to go minority, majority. That is all.
The Chair recognizes the distinguished gentleman from
Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Great hearing. It is a great discussion. And, of course, a
lot of us have been talking about this. And I do believe--and I
have mentioned this even in the last couple Congresses--you put
more crude oil on the world market, world market price should
go down. Pricing would be from Brent versus a captive West
Texas intermediary anymore.
I think the political concern is what Mr. Sieminski and I
talked about on California prices. If we do this, but then some
other variable raises the gasoline prices, not a supply and
demand debate, but, politically, people are going to say, ``See
what you did. You exported the crude oil and gas prices went
out.''
It is very hard for politicians to be able to--without a 5-
second sound byte, to be able to explain the macro- and the
microeconomic issues that we are involved with. So that is
probably why we are not going as fast on this as we are doing
with LNG issues, which makes a--it is an easier argument.
I want to talk just quickly--because Mr. Drevna opened the
discussion on the Jones Act. The Coast Guard Admiral Paul
Zukunft recently said--and I will just take one of the quotes--
``I think at the end of the day it would put our entire U.S.
fleet in jeopardy where our fleet of roughly 80-plus
international U.S.-flagged vessels will rapidly go to zero. And
then there is a time of crisis. Who are we going to charter to
carry out our logistics? Very difficult if we don't have U.S.-
flagged ships.''
And, you know, we are having this big internal Homeland
Security debate right now--I think the bill probably just
passed--and national security issues. U.S.-flagged vessels on
our inland waterway systems is a have-to. We are just not going
to have--especially in the inland waterway systems, which my
district borders the Mississippi, it borders the Ohio, it
borders the Wabash. Just the national security implications of
that I think is difficult to do.
So does anyone disagree with that analysis? Charlie.
Mr. Drevna. No. I don't disagree, Congressman. You have to
realize, though, what we are talking about from the refining
sector is solely the international fleet. You know, and we are
free-marketers.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes. But you are talking maybe from New
Orleans or Texas to New England--to the New England coast.
Mr. Drevna. Right.
Mr. Shimkus. Saying that that is international, but it is
really national.
Mr. Drevna. Well, but we have international ships coming in
and out of there every day.
Mr. Shimkus. But they are not going from U.S. port to U.S.
port.
Mr. Drevna. Exactly.
Mr. Shimkus. I mean, we are--so, anyway, I think it is a
very difficult proposition.
Ms. Jaffe, I have been involved--I am headed to Lithuania
next week for the 25th anniversary. I deal with Eastern
European issues. That is why the LNG--I am going to go visit
the LNG terminal.
Talk through the international security implications for
our allies, first of all, who are held hostage by extortionists
who are not our friends, and, also, the--and so I got it
confused.
Because in that we put more competitive crude oil on the
market, what does that do to our enemies and their ability to
do the things that they are doing?Can you talk to that a little
bit.
Ms. Jaffe. Yes. So I think you raise a very interesting,
important point. All of the oil that has been disrupted
recently--Libyan oil where we now have ISIS attacking near the
Kirkuk oil field--that would--when Iraq oil gets disrupted or
Libya's oil gets disrupted now, that hurts the supplies going
to Europe. That gives Russia a tighter stranglehold on the
supplies that they provide to Europe.
So our goal, as their ally and as a world leader and as a
believer in free markets, should be not only to make sure that
we have enough oil here in the United States, but, also, that
we are leading from the front on making sure that powers like
the Russians or Iran are not able to use oil and gas as a
geopolitical lever, as a weapon.
Mr. Shimkus. And the import terminals in, like, Europe as a
whole, there is more crude oil import locations than what you
would have on LNG east to west. Is that safe to say?
Ms. Jaffe. You know, I mean, Europe is a market. I mean, I
think the interesting thing about the LNG export question--I
mean, that seems obvious because we have this fear that the
Russians would cut off natural gas supply to Europe. That would
be----
Mr. Shimkus. Not a fear. A truth.
Ms. Jaffe. Yes. Absolutely.
So my point to you is, but on the crude oil side, Europe
has actually lost their supplies from Libya. And I think the
President a year, 2 years ago correctly released supplies from
the Strategic Petroleum Reserve to loosen up the light crude
market at the time we were importing still because we want to
help out our allies from Europe and we don't want to see Europe
having shortages.
So, ultimately, we have to concern ourselves. We need to
look at, if there is a refinery on the east coast of the United
States whose economics are questionable, you know, is that how
we are going to run our foreign policy. We are going to have
our foreign policy be orientated to keep one refinery open in
the United States because we have these allies.
And during Rita and Katrina--I will speak as a Texan for a
moment--you know, Europe lent us the gasoline that we needed to
be able to reevacuate people and bring them back and forth
safely to Texas, you know. And we are now telling them that we
don't want to provide them with any supply because there might
be a competitive advantage for one refiner? That doesn't make
sense.
Dr. Burnett. I would like to respond somewhat to that
because supply disruptions in Libya and elsewhere do affect the
price of crude oil, but there is plenty of crude oil supply
available in the world. That is why we have a low price today.
The issue for our friends and allies in Eastern Europe and
elsewhere is LNG and product availability, not crude oil.
Mr. Whitfield [presiding]. The gentleman's time is expired.
At this time I recognize the--who is next on the list? The
gentleman from Iowa, Mr. Loebsack, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Loebsack. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Sorry that we have had to run back and forth. I think
whoever is in charge of this institution wants to make sure we
get our 10,000 steps in today. And so I really appreciate--and
I haven't been able to listen to all of the testimony. I
apologize. Just back and forth. A lot of meetings in the
process, too. I have a lot of questions on this, as you might
imagine.
I do want to start out with Ms. Jaffe, if I could. First of
all, I got my PhD at UC Davis. So I am glad you are there. But
it was in political science. And the West Village, you know, is
quite an undertaking, being a net zero energy undertaking, and
I commend UC Davis for doing that. And I don't know if you
have--you must have some role in that. I know that you are in
the graduate college of management. But thank you for being
here today.
And I kind of want to explore maybe with not just you this
whole geopolitical thing that Congressman Shimkus brought up
and others.
First of all, which specific countries are we talking about
that we can help if we are allowed to do so? Which countries?
Ms. Jaffe. Well, I think that, ultimately, we are in a
global market. Right? But when we have disruptions, the
disruptions--and we are not out of the woods with international
disruptions.
The militias that are funded by ISIS have made a decision
that they are going to try to capture as many oil fields as
possible inside Syria and Iraq. You know, the response towards
that has been, you know, not 100 percent effective.
We have the civil war in Libya which is disrupting exports.
You could have a civil war, as we know, from watching events
around the Middle East and in Africa. There is many different
places where oil supply can get disrupted.
Mr. Loebsack. But what----
Ms. Jaffe. And the people that it is hurting is--that is
why the price of Brent crude, which is the global marker----
Mr. Loebsack. Right.
Ms. Jaffe [continuing]. Is now $10 higher than our prices
here in the United States. Because those are the countries--
Europe and those are the countries that are losing their
supply.
Mr. Loebsack. But are we talking about specifically Ukraine
or--I mean, where are we talking about where we can help folks
so that they are not being extorted by Russia and whatever--you
know, the arguments that are being made on that.
Ms. Jaffe. I think it is any country in Europe that has a
refinery. I mean, it is the whole continent. And it also
affects availability of supply to Asia as well.
Mr. Loebsack. So how does that--I mean, how do we then,
practically speaking, put into effect that kind of a policy
other than lifting the ban? How does it happen, then, that we
can help those countries? Because we never really hear sort of
specifically how that works.
Ms. Jaffe. Well, we have several different tools.
First of all, we now have this surge in light crude oil
production in the United States. We have light crude oil
sitting in the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. There is no----
Mr. Loebsack. I am sorry. But I just want to be more
specific. Maybe somebody here can be specific.
How does that oil then get to where we want it to go? You
know, how does that happen if we have a policy that lifts the--
--
Ms. Jaffe. Well, we have to lift the export ban to be able
to be an effective player in the global market.
Mr. Loebsack. Right.
That enables that to happen. But how does it happen
specifically?
Mr. Kingston. Well, I would like to point something out. It
is entirely possible that you could lift the export ban and
nothing happens.
Mr. Loebsack. Right.
Mr. Kingston. But that doesn't mean that it is an empty
gesture.
Mr. Loebsack. Right.
Mr. Kingston. I think back to the fight in the late 1990s
over the lifting of the ban on exporting Alaskan crude, and
there was a lot of effort put into this Congress to get that to
be lifted. BP spent a lot of money. At Platts, we wrote a lot
of stories on it, and they lifted it. And they made a lot of
effort at selling--and after about 3, 4 months, the Asian
refiners said, ``You know what? We don't really like this
stuff. It doesn't work that well.''
Mr. Loebsack. I mean, because things are happening in the
Ukraine that might not allow for this actually to happen. It
depends upon the situation.
Mr. Kingston. But there is really a kind of a positive
thing to it. Mr. Drevna mentioned Turner Mason before. They are
a very highly respected engineering consulting firm, and we
have a partnership with them for many years. And every day we
publish refinery yields and netbacks and refining margins.
And if you look at the domestic crudes, they are
consistently the biggest winners in refining margins and not
just because of the low price.
Mr. Loebsack. Right.
Mr. Kingston. So it is entirely possible that the export
ban could be lifted and still the refineries in the U.S., which
have certainly a big advantage in transportation costs and a
big advantage in fuel costs because they are using cheaper
natural gas to run it as opposed to oil in another part of the
world--they are just the winners in this battle.
But the fact that the possibility of exporting it is there
tends to keep things in check. So the advantages that you would
get from, let's say, maybe keeping a lid on the Brent price,
which affects gasoline price--that advantage still exists and,
meanwhile, the refineries are still operating. So the jobs that
the AFL-CIO is concerned about, they still exist, too. So the
refineries can still win this battle even if the export ban is
lifted.
Mr. Loebsack. Yes. I will just tell you for the record that
the concern I have--and you can say it is irrational that this
is nothing like what it was prior to 1973 and 1974. But go
back--we had a Drain America First policy. We all remember that
before the crisis back in the 1970s, the first crisis.
And just for the record, I have a lot of concerns that we
not get into a situation like that. I know it is completely
different in many ways. We have more sources of oil here
domestically and around the world, that sort of thing, and we
didn't even have North Sea oil back then. But I still have a
real concern about that. I just want you folks to be aware of
that from a national security perspective. I think we have to
be thinking about that.
I do want to ask Mr. Drevna and Dr. Burnett about oil
prices going down now, understanding how markets work.
Obviously, we know that oil prices aren't going to stay at the
current level forever.
So what strides is the industry taking towards future
energy investments instead of asking for us to lift exports in
terms of expanded drilling operations, et cetera? What are you
doing to prepare for future spikes? I guess that is the
question.
Mr. Drevna. Well, from the refining side, you know, we are
continuing to upgrade. We are continuing to--not a technical
term--we are continually changing the valves and making sure we
can use the abundance of supply that we have here in the
country today.
So that is why I say it--but are we there yet? We are
getting there very closely, again, because of what we talked
about earlier, you know, the--unfortunately, the midstream
distribution center was not built in this country to handle
what we have today.
It is going to take time for us to get caught up, but not
that much time. So, you know, we are putting lot of money and a
lot of effort into upgrading the refinery so they can use the
light sweet crude.
One last thing I would mention. We talk about the upstream
folks winning, the refining folks winning. This is not a win/
lose game. We should be talking about what is best for America
and the American consumer and whatis best for energy and
national security. Then everybody wins.
Mr. Loebsack. Thank you.
And thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Flores, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Flores. Thank you. Had an equipment malfunction.
Chairman Whitfield, thank you for holding today's hearing
on this timely issue.
Several major studies over the last year, including CBO,
Brookings and Columbia University, all agree on a key issue:
American consumers and households will benefit if we repeal the
outdated ban on crude oil exports.
Some have countered that, if we lift the ban, OPEC will
simply respond by cutting production, stabilize the price in
their favor. I think clearly that the most recent actions by
OPEC rebut that assertion, and I don't think it is appropriate
to try to reassert it at this point in time.
Also, we have seen in recent months OPEC wants to keep
market share by maintaining production even in a low-price
environment, and they hope to undercut U.S. shale producers,
thereby reducing the incentive to reinvest in a business.
The Brookings Institution, along with respected economic
consulting firm NERA, looked at different OPEC scenarios, cuts
of production and maintaining current production levels.
And here is what they concluded: ``The benefits of lifting
the ban depend on the energy market conditions and how other
oil suppliers, especially OPEC, respond.''
And then they go on and say--the key phrase they said is,
``What is most important is our finding that in all of these
modeling scenarios there are positive gains for U.S.
households.''
And so the shale revolution in the United States has
fundamentally altered the global energy picture, and I think we
owe it to hard-working American families and the consumers to
facilitate the continuing improvements that we are seeing in
this market.
Columbia University also reached a similar conclusion,
stating, ``While in the past market observers have generally
assumed OPEC will offset a large share of non-OPEC production
to defend prices, current OPEC behavior in response to the U.S.
Shale boom casts doubts on the cartel's ability or desire to
offset non-OPEC supply.''
Mr. Sheffield, like you, I went through five of these
downturns. I had counted four, but you are right. I recounted
after you said five. It is five.
Mr. Kingston, my first question is for you. What is your
view of OPEC's potential reaction if we were to lift the ban on
crude exports?
Mr. Kingston. Well, I think you said it in your answer.
OPEC is certainly not going to change its policy now, which
is to hold on to market share, just because the export ban is
lifted, particularly, as I mentioned earlier, I don't think you
can necessarily count on how much oil is going to go out the
door.
I think certainly, as Mr. Sheffield pointed out, you know,
the light condensate doesn't have a great market in the U.S. So
that would continue to flow. But that doesn't look like that
needs a change. The Commerce Department has clarified that.
So if you are talking about, you know, crude out of the
gulf coast or whatever, how much would OPEC cut, it doesn't
change really the global supply-and-demand balance.
Mr. Flores. Thank you. And try to keep your answers short
because I have several questions for each of you.
Would you agree that opening new markets for U.S. Oil
producers would be good for both the U.S. and our allies,
regardless of what OPEC does? I think you answered that
affirmatively. So yes.
Mr. Kingston. Yes. I would agree with that.
Mr. Flores. Mr. Burnett, given that the U.S. Shale
revolution and OPEC's recent response to keep market share, on
what basis can you assert unequivocally that OPEC will respond
by cutting production if U.S. Crude oil can be bought and sold
in the global marketplace?
Dr. Burnett. Historically, Saudi Arabia and OPEC have cut
production to maintain market prices.
Mr. Flores. But they haven't this time.
Let me move on to the next question.
You make more products than just jet fuel. Right?
Dr. Burnett. Yes.
Mr. Flores. You refine the full distillation scheme. So do
you export any jet fuel?
Dr. Burnett. We do not export jet fuel.
Mr. Flores. OK. Do you export any other refined products?
Dr. Burnett. We occasionally export some diesel and some
gasoline, but it is mostly swapped for jet fuel in other
locations.
Mr. Flores. Would it be appropriate to stop you from
exporting those other refined products?
Dr. Burnett. I am sorry?
Mr. Flores. Would it be appropriate to stop you from
exporting any of those other refined products?
Dr. Burnett. Of course not.
Mr. Flores. OK.
Dr. Burnett. It is a free market. Products are in a free
market.
Mr. Flores. If we said that you could no longer sell those
refined products and you were forced to sell them only in the
U.S., what would happen to pump prices?
Dr. Burnett. What would happen if refineries are not
allowed to export gasoline or diesel is that you would start
cutting back refineries and closing refineries.
Mr. Flores. OK.
Mr. Sheffield----
Dr. Burnett. So, ultimately, the prices will go back up.
Mr. Flores. That is perfect. That goes right to where I
want you to go.
Mr. Sheffield, if we keep the ban on crude oil and keep
prices depressed, what does that do to reinvestment in the
upstream industry?
Mr. Sheffield. I think you will see the drop of 900 rigs go
to a drop another 1,000 rigs. It will lead to significantly
declining production, and this country will be importing 60
percent, 70 percent, 80 percent of our oil from the Middle
East.
Mr. Flores. And so, Ms. Jaffe, if that happens, who gets
hurt?
Ms. Jaffe. All I can say, sir, is I am in the same
direction as you. In either case, when you ban and try to do
something to twist the market around, the consumer is the one
that gets hurt.
Mr. Flores. That is exactly where I am going.
So does anybody disagree with me that, if you put--well, I
am out of time--if you put artificial constraints on the market
of any kind, whether it is upstream, downstream, midstream, or
anywhere else, you hurt the American consumer and hard-working
families who have been crushed under this economy for the last
6 years?
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentleman yields back.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Tonko, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I don't think there is any doubt that there are competing
private interests at stake as we attempt to answer the question
of whether or to what extent we should allow exports of
domestically produced crude oil. The real question is whether
it is in the national interest and the public interest, for
that matter, to do so.
Even with new drilling technologies, the United States has
lower proven reserves and higher production costs than many
other oil-producing countries and we still use a lot of
petroleum products.
Mr. Sieminski indicates in his testimony that--and I
quote--``The implied 95 percent confidence interval for West
Texas intermediate crude oil calculated for the current short-
term energy outlook ranges between $32 per barrel to $108 per
barrel.''
Now, there is no insult intended here for the Energy
Information Agency. That doesn't seem very helpful. Basically,
EIA is saying that, ``We have no idea what the price per barrel
is going to be.''
So, Dr. Burnett and Mr. Drevna, how do you or your member
companies make investment decisions in the face of this price
volatility? Does the price matter less than other factors?
Perhaps is demand for specific refined products the controlling
dynamic? Just how do you make those decisions?
Mr. Drevna. Sir, you make them on what you think the demand
is going to be. The refiners are somewhat different than our
friends and colleagues in the upstream segment. We operate on
demand. You know, if the price of crude is here or here or
somewhere in the middle, it is going to depend on what the
demand is and what we see that demand.
As Mr. Sieminski will tell you, since a theory back in
2007, when we connected two dots and drew the demand through
the roof, that has collapsed over the years. So we have had to
scramble. We have had to do some different things. So it all
depends on what we call that spread.
So we make decisions based on what we think the demand is
going to be, what we think the regulations are--or what they
are, and what we can do to adjust that spread to, A, provide
the product, B, pay our employees, C, keep the equipment going,
and, D, make a profit.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
Dr. Burnett.
Dr. Burnett. Yes. What we do is we look at the
fundamentals, supply-demand balance, to set what we expect the
crude oil price to be over a longer term. Refinery investments
are done over many years.
So we have to try and take a forward position on what the
crude oil price is going to be based on fundamentals and then,
as Mr. Drevna said, look at the demand side of products and try
to get an estimate of what those differentials or what we call
cracks are and look at the economics of each project based on
those assumptions.
Mr. Tonko. Does the fact that we have an export ban
increase or reduce the uncertainty that you will see a return
on refinery investment?
Dr. Burnett. I think what the industry needs is certainty
on what the legislative outlook is going to be. The problem is
uncertainty.
Mr. Tonko. And Mr. Drevna?
Mr. Drevna. Yes. I mean, we do, as most industries in this
country do, a really good job of handling economic uncertainty.
What we don't do a good job and can't do a good job is handling
regulatory and legislative uncertainty because that just
creates paralysis.
Mr. Tonko. So some order of predictability as to what that
operating climate is is important?
Mr. Drevna. Absolutely. Because, as Dr. Burnett mentioned,
these investments aren't made on a 2- or 3-year basis or on an
election-cycle basis. They are made on a long-term basis.
Mr. Tonko. And if a low oil price sends a signal to slow
production of domestic oil, what is the problem with doing that
from a national perspective? Anyone?
Mr. Sheffield. We actually gave an exhibit to our testimony
that we filed the last Friday by PIRA, and it shows a wide
range of prices, from $40 up to about $100, and the effect of
$10 swinges.
And $10 swings is the difference between 2-million-barrel-
a-day loss in this country or a 2-million-barrel-a-day gain. So
it is a great chart to look at that is filed in our testimony.
Mr. Tonko. Does anyone else have a comment on any of that?
Dr. Burnett?
Dr. Burnett. Yes. I think that I need to go back and say
that, if you lift the ban right now, the effect on the global
supply and demand really is a zero-sum gain because you export
more, but you will be importing more.
So the issue is: Whenis the demand cycle going to pick up
enough to support prices and enable domestic production to
increase again?
And so we are looking at--you have to look the world growth
and GDP over the next few years to make that determination.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you so much.
I see my time is up. So I will yield back. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Olson [presiding]. Gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Johnson,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You caught me off
guard there for a second. Let me move my chair.
Well, thank you, gentlemen, for joining us today.
Mr. Chairman, before I get started with my questions, I
would like to ask that a letter from the Ohio Oil and Gas
Association expressing their members' support for lifting the
crude export ban be submitted for the record.
Mr. Olson. Without objection, so submitted.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Johnson. Gentlemen, as you know, I live in energy-rich
eastern and southeastern Ohio. You have all heard of the
Marcellus and the Utica shale. You can't turn a corner there
without seeing the renaissance in energy production.
As you know, we passed a bill here in the House dealing
with streamlining and quickening the liquid natural gas export
permitting process.
I would like to hear from each of you. What are the most
significant differences, both pro and con, domestic and
geopolitical, to LNG exports versus crude exports?
The folks back at home, where we have a wealth of that
resource, both of them, would like to know. And we will just
start down at the end.
Sir, if you would like to take a first crack at it.
Mr. Sieminski. Sure. Probably the most important thing in
looking at the future prospects for LNG exports is what the
price of oil is going to be because, internationally, the
reason the U.S. can export LNG into the global markets is we
had a big spread between the U.S. price of natural gas and the
world price of natural gas because, in most places outside of
the United States, natural gas prices are tied contractually to
oil prices.
So as oil prices came down or have come down, that is
actually going to put some pressure on the idea of exporting
LNG from the U.S. So it would make it less profitable to do
that.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Sheffield. Yes, Mr. Johnson. We both have ample
supplies of natural gas. We have too much of it in this country
now. We have a 150-, 200-year supply of natural gas, and we
have got a long supply now, finding over 100 billion barrels of
recoverable oil in several key fields, in addition to liquid-
rich plays in the Utica and the Marcellus, which is where
people are focused.
We need to lift the ban on oil. We need to be able to
export it and expedite LNG so there is plenty. Europe needs it.
The rest of the world--Japan, South Korea--they all need it.
How can you ask Japan and South Korea not to take Iranian
crude when we will not export them oil? Europe is taking 40
percent of their needs from Russia oil. They need exports from
the U.S. in addition to LNG.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Thank you.
Sir.
Mr. Drevna. Congressman, it is interesting because, you
know, when you look at the LNG, you know, we have an abundance.
We have more than we need. And, you know, this body did the
right thing in passing the legislation to export it.
We are still in that ``maybe we are here, maybe we are
there'' stage. Mr. Sheffield mentioned we have got a lot. But
do we have a lot right now? And how long would that last?
You have to look at the oil export. And, again, I am not
saying we shouldn't export. I am saying just look at everything
in total.
The world supply, you know, is a big barrel and everybody
takes what they want. The more we produce here, the less we
have to export. That will have an impact on prices, just like
the shale boom has already had an impact on global prices.
Imagine what prices would be today--and I am not the, you
know, fortune teller--but imagine what prices would be today if
we hadn't had the entrepreneurs like Mr. Sheffield and his
company to get this stuff to market. With all the stuff that is
going on in the global market, we would still be 40, 50, 60
percent. So we have had an impact on global prices.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Drevna. One thing we are saying is let's do it the
right way.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Mr. Kingston.
Mr. Kingston. Two things.
One area where I see the big difference is that allowing
crude exports would affect an international benchmark, Brent,
to which we are tied, because our gasoline market is ultimately
tied to Brent. It would work to probably push down the Brent
price. Therefore, there is a benefit to us.
In the case of LNG, you are not going to be pushing down--
you would be pushing down an international benchmark that
doesn't affect us. As Mr. Sieminski noted, there are other
prices out there. They would be affected. Our Henry Hub price
would probably rise.
But I think where it is a benefit to the U.S. is I get very
concerned about the problem of stranded gas, where the U.S.
just simply has so much gas that you start to see a rollback in
production, you start to see wells shut in, you start to see
workers go somewhere else. And you just need that safety valve
to make sure that industry can keep running.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Ms. Jaffe.
Ms. Jaffe. So I agree with what Mr. Kingston said, but I
would add the following thing. And I respect the other
panelists who have made this point. We are really arguing about
who gets the margin. Right?
We are not really arguing about, if you put a lot of
gasoline in the market, that eventually lowers the price that
refiners in other locations can pay for crude oil and
eventually brings the price down. So, either way, when you are
having oil exit the United States in any form, it will
eventually bring the price down.
So we are arguing about who gets the margin. And what I
would say to you--and, you know, it would take a careful
study--is that, if a refinery operates at 88 percent of
capacity or 85 percent of capacity, that doesn't affect how
many people get employed there. If Mr. Sheffield lays off 100
rigs, a lot of people lose their jobs.
Mr. Johnson. Ms. Jaffe, I am sorry to cut you off, but I
know I am out of time.
Mr. Chairman, can Mr. Markell and Dr. Burnett respond to
this? Can you indulge me?
Mr. Olson. Without objection.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Markell.
Mr. Markell. So the big difference is that, in crude oil,
there is a lot of downstream processing and a lot of jobs. And,
with all due respect, it is not just about the margins. It is
about who gets the paycheck, how much overtime they get and,
ultimately, how many people are employed.
With LNG, there is minimal downstream processing, minimal
downstream jobs. We are not importing it. And, from our point
of view, we are looking for a price that is somewhere in the
middle where we can keep the manufacturing competitiveness that
we have. But certainly we have got a lot of stranded gas, and
we need to find a way to build the pipelines to get it out.
Mr. Johnson. Thanks, Mr. Markell.
Dr. Burnett.
Dr. Burnett. I think there are two major differences
between crude and LNG. One is, as you heard, LNG is a real
excess in the U.S. Crude oil is not. We are still importing 33
percent.
The other major difference is that LNG is sold into an
absolutely free open market. Crude is still controlled by OPEC,
whether you like it or not. They still can impact the price up
or down. So there are two major differences.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Thank you.
Thank you, gentlemen.
I yield back.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman's time is expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr.
Mullin, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I would like to thank, you know, our panel that is in
front of us today because this is a very important topic. It is
something that probably we should have discussed a few years
back. But for Congress' point of view, we are right on time.
I want to talk to Mr. Burnett for just a second. I am kind
of confused here why you would be so worried about our crude
oil exports when, apparently, you are not too worried about
exporting gas and diesel.
When we are talking about you thinking the prices are going
to go up, we haven't seen that happen while your company, I am
assuming, as you said a while ago when Mr. Flores was talking
to you, that you export oil and diesel. Don't you?
Dr. Burnett. OK. The issue is that, if you lift the export
ban, you are going to enable European refiners who are
currently struggling to have a more sustained life and you----
Mr. Mullin. So can your company not compete with them?
Dr. Burnett. And the problem is that we cannot compete with
them because they can buy their U.S. crude oil cheaper than I
can in Trainer. They can then refine it and send it back to the
Northeast cheaper than we can make it because of freight rates.
So they can put us out of business.
Mr. Mullin. Well, we are not hearing that from the other
refineries. I mean, your other companies--there is other
refineries that actually support this.
So I am saying that your company can't compete with them?
Dr. Burnett. The people that are supporting this are
probably integrated oil companies. All of the independent
merchant refiners like ours are part of the crude coalition,
are against crude exports.
Mr. Mullin. Are you not buying that same crude to be able
to produce gasoline and diesel?
Dr. Burnett. We are buying domestic crude----
Mr. Mullin. Are you not bound to compete with those
refineries at that time?
Dr. Burnett. I am sorry?
Mr. Mullin. I mean, are you not bound to compete with your
oil and gas--I mean, your diesel and gasoline?
Dr. Burnett. What you have heard, I think, repeatedly is
that product prices on the Northeast are set by Brent price.
Mr. Mullin. Sure.
Dr. Burnett. And so the European refiners are selling
gasoline and diesel at a Brent price, but they can export it to
the Northeast lower than we can produce it because of freight
rates.
Mr. Mullin. Well, I guess I am just not quite wrapping my
head around it just yet. Hopefully, I will because, to me, it
is kind of contradicting yourself. And, I mean, I appreciate
business. So the last thing I want to do is put any businesses
out of business.
But you have 400 jobs, and we have roughly 350,000 jobs,
using a rough figure, that supports the idea of bringing that
crude oil to you to begin with. And I think your company could
possibly--I am not in the business--but could compete, maybe,
without have to be--and just indulge me here for a second. And
I don't mean to be frank, but it almost sounds a little bit
selfish.
Dr. Burnett. We want to compete on a level playing field.
By lifting the export bans without dealing with other issues,
it makes us uncompetitive.
Mr. Mullin. Well, I obviously don't know your business as
well as you do, but there is other refineries that are saying
they can compete with it.
Mr. Sheffield, can you enlighten me a little bit. You
talked about storage capacity and the buildup, about the
capacity running out. Can you expand on that.
Mr. Sheffield. Yes. Cushing storage--I know Amy Jaffe said
it is around 50 million barrels--is at an all-time high. There
is recent pipelines installed by Enbridge called the Flanagan
South, and that is bringing a lot of oil down from Canada.
So at the same time our sweet crude from our shale plays,
some in Oklahoma, the School play, and, also, the Mississippi
Lime play, everything, Niobrara Play, the Bakken play, they are
all moving toward Cushing before it gets to the gulf coast.
So storage is at a high. I know the Plains All American
CEO, Mr. Armstrong, stated that we have about 60 to 90 days of
storage left at Cushing.
Gulf coast, what we called PADD 3, it is filling up, too.
It is over 210 million barrels, and it could be filled up
shortly also over the next several weeks.
So it is a big issue. It is what Turner Mason says: The
wall is coming, and it is coming faster. And that is why we
have wide crude prices today.
Mr. Mullin. So if we were to lift exports, you would feel
like there would be a little bit more stability in the markets,
not necessarily being able to--I am switching gears with you
and going from storage capacity to stabilizing the market with
the big swing that we see right now in the prices. I mean, they
will jump up $10 and they will go down $10.
Do you think, if we were to be able to control our own
destiny, by having the exports out, by being able to compete
and have a competitor against OPEC, would we be able to see
more stability coming to the market?
Mr. Sheffield. Yes. Like I said, a $10 swing, we would put
more rigs to work. I know 7,000 other independents would put
more rigs to work. They would do it in Oklahoma.
That would help stabilize U.S. production and actually
increase it over the next several years. OPEC loves the fact
that we have an export ban, I promise you. We are playing right
into their strategy.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you.
My time is out. I appreciate your time.
Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield [presiding]. Thank you.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Kansas, Mr.
Pompeo, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pompeo. Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you all for bearing with us today.
Mr. Burnett, you said that you want the ban on crude oil
exports, but not on condensate, not on other products you
produce. Right?
Dr. Burnett. No. That is not quite what I said.
Mr. Pompeo. All right.
Dr. Burnett. Crude oil.
Mr. Pompeo. Crude oil. Right.
Now, Delta sells airplane tickets. So should we put an
export ban on not allowing foreigners to purchase airplane
tickets?
Because that would help consumers, too, because American
consumers would have that empty seat out there. There would be
less competition for the seat. Prices would be lower. Right? Be
good.
Dr. Burnett. We want an open playing field both in refining
and in airlines.
Mr. Pompeo. Right.
What you really want is you want the things you sell to be
available to be sold on the marketplace at the highest price
you can get and the things that you purchase to be price-
controlled. That is what you are really advocating for here
today.
And I have heard lots of different comments. Mr. McNerney
says $50 is pretty low for crude. Mr. Drevna, you said you are
not a fortune teller. I have got reports from Goldman Sachs not
24 months old that said crude is going to be at 200 bucks a
barrel.
Truth is we have no idea, none of us collectively, and we
shouldn't worry about that. It shouldn't trouble us that we
don't know.
You know, Mr. Markell, you said we have got to keep the
price in the middle. The middle of what? I mean, that is not a
question. That is a rhetorical. I do have a question for you
for you, though.
Mr. Markell. LNG. Not crude.
Mr. Pompeo. So where should we keep crude oil prices? High
or low? You want middle for LNG. Where do you want crude oil
prices?
Mr. Markell. I don't have an opinion on where crude should
be.
Mr. Pompeo. Yes. None of us should have an opinion. This is
the unstated joke from so much of what I have heard from the
folks in----
Mr. Markell. It is in the boost of our economy and low oil
prices is----
Mr. Pompeo. Yes. Maybe that is is right.
Goldman now thinks oil might go to 20 bucks a barrel, by
the way. These are smart people who are putting their own money
at risk, which is very different than us. We are putting
everyone else's money at risk.
The person who has the best chance to get it right is them,
and they are just wrong a lot. And that is OK. That doesn't
trouble me. But we shouldn't put a set of policies in place
that feign any knowledge on our part about what is really going
to go on.
Let's go the other way. Mr. Sheffield, your export product
is price-controlled. We have an export ban. Right? That is a
price control. Would you agree? Crude?
Mr. Sheffield. Crude.
Mr. Pompeo. Right? We can't export it. It is a ban. It is a
price control.
Your inputs--steel, labor, all kinds of chemicals that you
use--are any of those price-controlled or are you subject to
market forces? Do you have to compete globally to purchase your
inputs?
Mr. Sheffield. It is market forces. Then what is
interesting by the comments about the--from the laborers is
that we have added over 2 million jobs over the last several
years with this shale boom, and a lot of that is in the steel
industry, too.
Mr. Pompeo. You bet.
Union employees. Right?
Mr. Sheffield. Yes.
Mr. Pompeo. In the steel industry. Good union workers
getting paid good salaries. Yes. No. I think that is right.
Mr. Sheffield, you had a chart, and I want to make sure I
understood it. You had a chart that I think disagreed with what
Mr. Markell said. He said that this oil will be produced
anyway. Right?
The idea was, even if we leave the ban in place, you are
going to go ahead and produce this crude. And your chart seems
to suggest otherwise, and I am just trying to reconcile these
two ideas.
Mr. Sheffield. Yes. This is from a group, PIRA, out of New
York. At roughly $50 a barrel, we will lose about 2, 2\1/2\
million barrels a day.
And so what is going to happen? They are not going to get
it from us. They are going to get it from Saudi Arabia, Iran if
they can, or other countries in North Africa. They are going to
import it again.
Mr. Pompeo. I appreciate that.
Mr. Drevna, you said in your testimony, if we were to move
forward with lifting the export ban, that your organization
would want to see other anti-free market policies addressed at
the same time. You mentioned RFS. You talked a little bit about
the Jones Act.
I assume it is the case that, if we got to the Jones Act
and we got to RFS, you would be thrilled to see the crude oil
export ban lifted as well.
Mr. Drevna. Congressman, as I said, we are basically free-
marketers. As a matter of fact, if I look up and down the
panel, we are probably the most free-marketers sitting here
because----
Mr. Pompeo. You are not including up this direction here.
Mr. Drevna. No. No. No. No. No. No.
No. We want a free market and a level playing field for all
U.S. industries.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Griffith, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that
very much.
In January, the Department of the Interior released a draft
Offshore Leasing Plan covering 2017 to 2022, which proposed
opening part of the Atlantic, including areas off the coast of
Virginia, my home State.
Although I represent the mountains and the coal territory
and don't have the coast, I do obviously care about what
happens in Virginia very much, and they would open that up for
oil and gas leasing.
Mr. Sieminski, I would have to ask: They have made it 50
miles off the shore of the coast. DOD had some concerns there,
and I am just curious.
Does your organization have any idea of whether or not
DODhas had problems in the Gulf of Mexico dealing with oil
exploration or natural gas exploration?
Mr. Sieminski. Well, I am from the Department of Energy.
Mr. Griffith. I understand.
Mr. Sieminski. The opening of those leases--I mean, I think
that we are now seeing production rising in the Gulf of Mexico,
and that is, you know, in the aftermath of the Macondo spill.
I think the issues associated with offshore leasing tend to
be environmentally oriented. There are some people that are
concerned about the impacts on water and the environment and,
generally, climate.
Mr. Griffith. And, generally, we believe, if you open up
the mid-Atlantic, you would agree--or the data indicates that
there is an abundant energy source out there even though we
don't have any recent data----
Mr. Sieminski. Yes. From time to time EIA has looked at
what the resource base is around the United States, and there
is a possibility that there are both oil and gas resources in
the mid-Atlantic.
Mr. Griffith. And the last time any real research was done
was back in, I believe, about 1980, and it takes about 10 years
to go from start to finish and we are just now getting started.
But we are 50 miles out, which it would be better, I think, if
we were closer in. I find that interesting.
And you all wouldn't have any way of knowing this, but I
voted on my first resolution as a member of the Virginia
legislature in 2004, requesting that we go down this road. And
am I not correct that it takes about 10 years to go from start
to finish and that, if we had started in 2004 when the
legislature first----
Mr. Sieminski. In the offshore area, that is very typical.
Mr. Griffith. And so, if we had started then, we would
already be seeing both tax revenues and jobs and all kinds of
things in the eastern part of the State. Wouldn't that be
accurate?
Mr. Sieminski. I think the first thing that would happen is
we would probably end up updating all of that geologic
information with modern 3D seismic technology and that kind of
thing.
So the up-front part is actually spending money. Now, there
are jobs associated with that. Whether the revenues come in
depends on what you find and how quickly you can produce it.
Mr. Griffith. There is a pretty good indication that we
have got a fair amount of natural gas and at least a little bit
of oil.
Even based on the older technologies, that showed up; did
it not?
Mr. Sieminski. Yes. I mean, we know that there is oil and
gas in eastern Canada and--and those trends tend to move right
down the coast.
Mr. Griffith. And the Canadians are already--they have
already got their straw dipped into that pool, don't they?
Mr. Sieminski. That is correct.
Mr. Griffith. Yes. So one might argue that the Canadians
are getting fuel out of that source and selling it back. It
might actually be flowing up to Canada from----
Mr. Sieminski. Well, it is a pretty long way from----
Mr. Griffith. I agree. I agree.
Mr. Sieminski. That would be a big straw.
Mr. Griffith. I just want to see my folks getting some
advantage out of all this.
I will open this up for anybody who wants to take it. I
think I already know the answer.
But if the United States is getting more oil and more
natural gas, what impact would that have on, say, Russia, Iran,
ISIS, even China? Who wants to take that?
Mr. Sieminski. Well, my microphone is turned on. I usually
try to avoid answering questions.
But let me comment that, when you listen to the panel here,
Congressman Griffith, I think that more production on the
market, regardless of its source, is going to tend to lower
prices and benefit consumers.
So, you know, that is true whether it is natural gas or oil
or airline tickets. I mean, the more that you can put out
there, the better off consumers are.
Mr. Griffith. But when a country is basing a big part of
its liquidity on energy and all of a sudden a new giant rises
up or gets extra strength, that, in essence, would mean that at
least for the Chinese, the Russians, and maybe even ISIS, that
it will negatively impact their ability to do things that we
might be opposed to. Would you not agree?
Mr. Sieminski. That certainly--I mean, one of the factors
that is out there--one of the--very quickly, on looking at the
time, this question of why there is this wide range of views of
oil prices, whether it is, you know, $20 or $30 or $100 and
over, a lot of that has to do with not being able to pin down
answers to many of these geopolitical questions.
Is Venezuela going to have a problem in the near term
producing their 2 million barrels a day of oil? What about
Iraq? And because of ISIS, what about production outages in
places like Libya?
And then, on the downside, it is things like the economy in
China and whether or not Libya's going to return to the market.
And it is true. Nobody has the--it is not--EIA doesn't have the
answers to that.
Mr. Griffith. Nobody does.
Mr. Sieminski. Nobody has the answers.
Mr. Griffith. If I might, Mr. Chairman, indulge.
But aren't we better off if the United States is
controlling more of that by having more production? Because
then, if the Venezuelans do something or if there is a problem
somewhere else, at least our own internal economy is not
negatively impacted as much.
And aren't we in a much better position today than we were
just 5 years ago? And, hopefully, we will be in an even better
position 10 years from now.
Mr. Sieminski. I suspect that everybody on this panel would
agree with you.
Mr. Griffith. And I would say to you that, when this first
started, our new boom in energy, which we can continue to use,
particularly if we open up the mid-Atlantic and keep looking
for ways to do this--I used to feel that maybe my children
wouldn't have the economy that we had.
Now I believe, if we don't screw it up here in Washington,
our children and our grandchildren and our great-grandchildren
can live in the United States, where we are still the number
one economic Nation in the world.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Kingston. Can I just say one thing? I just want to
separate one country that you mentioned.
This is a benefit to China. I mean, you mentioned Russia,
Iran, ISIS, this hurts. This helps China. Huge net importer.
Mr. Griffith. OK.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentleman from
Mississippi, Mr. Harper, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thanks to each of you for being here and taking time to
discuss what is a very important issue.
And, if I may, Mr. Drevna, I wanted to ask you a couple of
questions in the time that I have, since Mr. Griffith used up
most of my time.
Mr. Griffith. I am sorry.
Mr. Harper. Hey, you needed some more time. That is it.
First of all, I want to say, you know, we appreciate each
of you being present. But particularly, Mr. Drevna, I thank you
that you are here to share AFPM's insight on this issue.
I would like to focus my time on your testimony. In your
written statement, you noted that your organization is not
opposed to lifting the ban on crude exports, but you mentioned
two public policies, two areas in particular, that should be
considered during this debate.
So I would like for you to elaborate a little bit more on
the RFS and the Jones Act and how they are related in this
debate on the crude oil export ban.
Mr. Drevna. Thank you.
And I only get 5 minutes to elaborate on the RFS. As the
chairman can attest to, it is probably not enough time.
But, in any event, if you are going to talk about a free
and open market, if you are going to talk about consumer
protection and consumer choice, if you are going to talk about
getting the economy moving, the RFS, as I said in my written
statement and my oral testimony, it is--in 7 short years, it
has become an anachronism.
All the assumptions that were made back in the day where
theESA 2007 was passed, where EIA had gasoline demand going
through the roof, and that has plummeted some 43 percent over
those years, where we have a volumetric and not a percentage
basis where we have, you know, 36 billion gallons, where the
thought was, ``Well, we are going to eliminate or reduce
foreign energy sources.''
We are doing that because of companies like Mr.
Sheffield's, not because we are producing ethanol. As a matter
of fact, we are producing ethanol and we are exporting it and
we are importing it. You know, what is the point?
The environmental benefits have shown to be, if not nil,
negligible--if not negligible, negative. So it is time to look
at that because it is not a free market. Let the consumer
decide. Do they want more ethanol or biodiesel in their gas
tank or they don't?
On the Jones Act--and, again, this is a--whose ox is going
to be gored is what you have to decide if you lift the ban
today without looking at the Jones Act. It will be a zero-sum
gain. There will probably be some job gains on this side. There
will be job losses on the other side. That is a fact.
So at least know the facts before you make the decision,
and that is all we are asking. Again, we are not opposed to it,
but, you know, for energy security and national security, let's
do it all. Let's have all the above and not what we have now
with all of the above and none of the below--or very little of
the below. So that is basically what we are trying to say,
Congressman.
Mr. Harper. Thank you very much. Out of mercy, I will yield
back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back. That concludes
the questions.
Once again, I want to thank the panel of witnesses. We do
appreciate your insights. This is an interesting question, and
certainly, with the changes taking place, we want to look at it
thoroughly. So we may be calling you again very soon.
We will keep the record open for 10 days. And that will
adjourn today's hearing.
And thank you all very much for your participation.
[Whereupon, at 4:09 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
