- REAUTHORIZATION OF THE FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION: THE FCC'S FISCAL YEAR 2016 BUDGET REQUEST

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REAUTHORIZATION OF THE FEDERAL
COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION: THE FCC'S FISCAL YEAR 2016 BUDGET REQUEST

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 4, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-19

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
95-451                      WASHINGTON : 2016
________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Missouri               JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                     Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology

GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                ANNA G. ESHOO, California
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BILL JOHNSON, Missouri               JERRY McNERNEY, California
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
CHRIS COLLINS, New York                  officio)
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Anna G. Eshoo, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     4
Hon. Robert E. Latta, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Ohio, opening statement.....................................     6
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     6
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................    43

Witnesses

Jon Wilkins, Managing Director, Federal Communications Commission     7
Prepared statement...........................................    10
Answers to submitted questions...............................    46

Submitted Material

Statement of Consumers Union, submitted by Ms. Eshoo.............    45

REAUTHORIZATION OF THE FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION: THE FCC'S
FISCAL YEAR 2016 BUDGET REQUEST

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 4, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:33 a.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Greg
Walden (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Walden, Latta, Shimkus,
Lance, Guthrie, Olson, Pompeo, Kinzinger, Bilirakis, Johnson,
Collins, Cramer, Eshoo, Clarke, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Ray Baum, Senior Policy Advisor for
Communications and Technology; Leighton Brown, Press Assistant;
Andy Duberstein, Deputy Press Secretary; Gene Fullano,
Detailee, Telecom; David Redl, Counsel, Telecom; Charlotte
Savercool, Legislative Clerk; Jeff Carroll, Democratic Staff
Director; David Goldman, Democratic Chief Counsel,
Communications and Technology; Tiffany Guarascio, Democratic
Deputy Staff Director and Chief Health Advisor; Margaret
McCarthy, Democratic Professional Staff Member; and Ryan
Skukowski, Democratic Policy Analyst.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. We will call to order the subcommittee on
Communications and Technology. And I certainly welcome our
witness, Mr. Wilkins, from the Federal Communications
Commission. We are honored to have you with us today.
We are here today to talk about the FCC's fiscal year 2016
budget request. Today, as we commence a series of hearings into
the agency's reauthorization, I hope to start with the basics
and take a close look at the Federal Communication Commission's
budget request for fiscal year 2016. This is similar to the
hearing we had last year on the FCC's budget request, and I
believe fully, as the oversight committee, we need to always
take this action.
This year is a request for $530 million in spending
authority that, if approved, would be the highest spending
authority in the history of the agency. When the FCC was last
formally reauthorized in 1990, its appropriated budget was a
little shy of $117 million.
Much has changed since the last reauthorization of the
commission. The industries and markets, certainly, that the
commission overseas have, without question, undergone dramatic
changes and continue to evolve at a rapid pace. But in the
intervening years the FCC has struggled to reflect the
evolution of technology that has brought about the integration
of voice, video, and data services and the significant shifts
in consumer consumption patterns that have resulted.
On the contrary, because it is structured in much the same
way as its governing legislation, the Communications Act of
1934, the agency continues to reflect a regulatory scheme
predicated on separate titles for specific network technologies
and services. Now, this siloed scheme is out of touch with the
convergence of technologies in the modern digital era and
deserves reform. Nowhere is the Communications Act's failure of
imagination more evident than in the FCC's decision to
reclassify broadband service under rules developed to regulate
the telegraph's heyday, by restructuring a regulatory scheme
that had been going the way of the single-use copper line
telephone network it was intended to govern, three FCC
commissioners repudiated years of light touch regulation of the
Internet under both Republican and Democratic administrations.
Now, all this is something some of have differing opinions
on in this subcommittee. Our purpose today is not to delve into
the issues of net neutrality, but rather to get into the issues
of the way the agency has operated and the budget they propose.
The FCC has requested an increase in its budget to $505
million, including $388 million in budget authority from
regulatory fee collections, and $117 million from auction
funds. That is an increase of $59 million from the fiscal year
2015 appropriation. Specific items noted in the request
includes the usual pay raises for personnel, but also includes
funds for the implementation of the public safety answering
points do-not-call registry, as required by the Middle Class
Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, $3 million in costs
for the National Broadband Map that the FCC inherited from NTIA
when it ran out of stimulus funds to pay for it, a $5.8 million
increase in recurring and a $11.7 million one-time increase in
IT costs, $51 million in additional funds as the agency
prepares to move or restack as their building lease expiration
date approaches.
One component of the request that resonates in particular,
and is in addition to the $59 million increase in funding, is a
request for a $25 million transfer from the Universal Service
Fund to pay the FCC's costs related to administration of the
fund, raising the total increase to $84 million.
In the past, Congress funded the FCC's Office of Inspector
General with a transfer of USF funds for the purpose of
bolstering audits and investigations to address waste, fraud,
and abuse in the fund following a GAO report, and those funds
have been expended by the Office of Inspector General over the
last several years. The request for $25 million is not for
audits and investigations by the Office of Inspector General
which, based on our last hearing, appears to have a rocky
relationship with the chairman's office, but to reimburse the
commission for the costs of performing the core function of
implementing section 254 of the Communications Act. This is a
disturbing proposal, I would tell you from my perspective. Mr.
Wilkins states in his testimony that recovering these costs
from the fund will relieve the burden on companies with no
relationship to USF that pay fees to the commission. However,
this realignment, as it is called, would create a separate
funding stream for the agency that comes directly out of the
pockets of consumers to implement and support a subsidy program
the size of which is determined by the FCC and that has become
so large and burdensome that it appears that it has outgrown
the FCC's capacity for adequate oversight. It is even more
disturbing when we recognize the fact that the Universal
Service Administrative Company, USAC, an independent
organization designated to manage the fund, already draws in
excess of $100 million a year from the fund for its
administration and oversight, and that the FCC's Office of
Inspector General dedicates a portion of its funding to USF
audits and investigations. According to its last report, USAC
had 356 employees at a cost of $41.6 million.
We have more work to do, obviously. We welcome you here.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden

Welcome to this morning's hearing on the FCC's Fiscal Year
2016 Budget Request. Today, as we commence a series of hearings
into the agency's reauthorization, I hope to start with the
basics and take a close look at the FCC's budget request for
Fiscal Year 2016--a request for $530 million in spending
authority that if approved, would be the highest funding level
in the agency's history. When the FCC was last formally
reauthorized in 1990, its appropriated budget was a little shy
of $117 million.
Much has changed since the last reauthorization of the
commission. The industries and markets the Commission oversees
have without question undergone dramatic changes and continue
to evolve at a rapid pace. But in the intervening years the FCC
has struggled to reflect the evolution of technology that has
brought about the integration of voice, video, and data
services and the significant shifts in consumer consumption
patterns that have resulted. On the contrary, because it is
structured in much the same way as its governing legislation,
the Communications Act of 1934, the agency continues to reflect
a regulatory scheme predicated on separate titles for specific
network technologies and services: this ``siloed'' scheme is
out of touch with the convergence of technologies in the modern
digital era and deserves reform.
Nowhere is the Communications Act's failure of imagination
more evident than in the FCC's decision to reclassify broadband
service under rules developed to regulate the telegraph's
heyday--By resurrecting a regulatory scheme that had been going
the way of the single-use copper line telephone network it was
intended to govern, three FCC commissioners repudiated years of
light touch regulation of the Internet under both Republican
and Democratic administrations. This action suggests an agency
seemingly illsuited to address the needs of the modern
communications ecosystem and aggressively expanding its
regulatory ambit to compensate for its growing obsolescence.
During my time as chairman of this subcommittee, we have
held several hearings focused on oversight of the FCC. The FCC
chairman and commissioners have joined us multiple times to
discuss agency process and the wide range of issues before the
commission, and just last fall, the Managing Director and
Inspector General were here to examine the agency's budget and
management. Today's hearing is an opportunity to continue this
work. In many respects, the budget request is like a window
into the agency itself. By following the money we can identify
the agency's priorities and those functions that have evolved
to define the agency.
The FCC has requested an increase in its budget to $505
million, including $388 million in budget authority from
regulatory fee collections and $117 million from auction
funds--an increase of $59 million from the FY2015
appropriation. Specific items noted in the request includes the
usual pay raises for personnel, but also includes funds for the
implementation of the public safety answering points do-not-
call registry, as required by the Middle Class Tax Relief and
Job Creation Act of 2012, $3 million in costs for the National
Broadband Map that the FCC inherited from NTIA when it ran out
of stimulus funds to pay for it, a $5.8 million increase in
recurring and a $ 11.7 million one-time increase in IT costs,
and $51 million in additional funds as the agency prepares to
move or restack as their building lease expiration date
approaches.
One component of the request that resonates in particular,
and is in addition to the $59 million increase in funding, is a
request for a $25 million transfer from the Universal Service
Fund to pay the FCC's costs related to administration of the
fund--raising the total increase to $84 million. In the past,
Congress funded the FCC's Office of Inspector General with a
transfer of USF funds for the purpose of bolstering audits and
investigations to address waste, fraud, and abuse in the Fund
following a GAO report--and those funds have been expended by
the Office of Inspector General over the last several years.
The request for $25 million is not for audits and
investigations by the Office of Inspector General--which based
on our last hearing appears to have a rocky relationship with
the chairman's office--but to reimburse the commission for the
costs of performing the core function of implementing section
254 of the Communications Act. This is a disturbing proposal.
Mr. Wilkins states in his testimony that recovering these costs
from the fund will relieve the burden on companies with no
relationship to USF that pay fees to the commission. However,
this ``realignment'' as it is called would create a separate
funding stream for the agency that comes directly out of the
pockets of consumers to implement and support a subsidy program
the size of which is determined by the FCC and that has become
so large and burdensome that it appears that it has outgrown
the FCC's capacity for adequate oversight. It is even more
disturbing when we recognize the fact that the Universal
Service Administrative Company--USAC, an independent
organization designated to manage the Fund already draws in
excess of $100 million a year from the Fund for its
administration and oversight and that the FCC's Office of
Inspector General dedicates a portion of its funding to USF
audits and investigations. According to its last annual report,
USAC had 356 employees at a cost of $41.6 million.
This proposed transfer of funds out of the Universal
Service Fund alone raises significant questions about the FCC's
budget and the ever increasing size of the Fund. Taken in
conjunction with the request for the first $51 million of an
estimated the $71 million in costs for the FCC's relocation and
other proposed increases there is much to discuss. We are
fortunate to have the individual responsible for managing the
Commission's budget and financial programs with us again, Mr.
Jon Wilkins, the Managing Director of the FCC. It is my hope
that our conversations today will pull back the curtain and
provide the committee and the American people with a better
understanding of the Commission's financial and performance
goals for Fiscal Year 2016 and what the Commission is really up
to.

Mr. Walden. I have used up the balance of my time. I now
recognize my friend and colleague from California, Ms. Eshoo.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ANNA G. ESHOO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And good
morning to you and to the Members, and to Mr. Wilkins. Welcome.
Today's topic is an important one; the FCC's budget, and we
again welcome you back to the subcommittee, Mr. Wilkins.
I noticed that we have some very young people in the
audience, and it occurred to me, I wonder if they know what we
are talking about, if they are going to get this. So let us see
if we can't keep it at an elemental level so that you
understand what the committee is doing and why we are here
today. It is very important because we are reviewing the
proposed budget for a very important agency, the Federal
Communications Commission.
I think the questions that I would like to see addressed
anyway, because I think that they are very high import, are the
following. And that is, will the agency have the necessary
staff to carry out the world's first voluntary incentives
spectrum auction, along with the IP transition, the review of
pending mergers, and USF reform. These are all topline
priorities, not only for the agency, but for this committee
that has really shaped those policies that are carried out by
the FCC. So I want to make sure that you have the resources to
do that.
Will the agency be able to upgrade its IT infrastructure so
that public comments on issues that are important to the
American people can be filed without crashing your Web site. We
saw what happened last year when there were over four million
people that weighed in, voicing their support for enforceable
net neutrality rules, and I would like to hear about that, what
plan do you have and what is built into your budget to handle
that. Will the agency remain on track to move its headquarters
within the next 2 years? It is my understanding that by
reducing the agency's footprint, that it is estimated that
approximately $119 million of taxpayer dollars would be saved
over 15 years. Now, that may not be the biggest number in the
Federal Government, but I think anyone that is in the room
would welcome having $119 million in their checking account
over the next 15 years. Finally, will the FCC be able to
develop and implement, and I think the chairman raised this, a
do-not-call registry for telephone numbers used by 911 call
centers. This is, again, another high priority of ours.
Certainly, it has been mine, going back to the '90s. This
provision was included in the Public Safety and Spectrum Act
that we wrote in this committee in 2012 to ensure that
automatic dialing or robo-call equipment does not tie up public
safety lines, and unnecessarily divert critical emergency
resources.
So I don't think these are small questions. They are
important ones, and they track on a parallel track what the
subcommittee's priorities and legislation has been, and
especially when the agency, and this is my understanding, you
can confirm it or deny it, that the agency is employing today
the lowest number of full-time staff in 30 years. The agency
has to have the tools and the resources to fulfill its mission,
which means more successful spectrum auctions, like the nearly
$45 billion, we are so proud of that, we really are very proud
of that, that was raised earlier this year.
So whether it is protecting the public interest, promoting
competition, enhancing innovation, these are all of the core of
the mission of the FCC, and we look forward to hearing your
testimony. Thank you for your service, and I look forward to
your directing answers to us on the questions that I pose.
And with that, I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. Gentlelady yields back the balance of her time.
The chairman recognizes the gentleman from----
Ms. Eshoo. I forgot something, Mr. Chairman. May I ask
for----
Mr. Walden. Of course.
Ms. Eshoo [continuing]. Unanimous consent to submit a
letter for the record from Consumers Union? It regards the
importance of the FCC's IT modernization for American
consumers.
Mr. Walden. Without objection.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Walden. Now we recognize the gentleman from Ohio, the
vice chair of the subcommittee on Communications and
Technology, Mr. Latta, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT E. LATTA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OHIO

Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And,
Mr. Wilkins, thanks for being with us today.
Oversight of the FCC serves as a critical function in
maintaining accountability and transparency at the agency.
Given the FCC's integral role in the information and
communications technology marketplace, we have a responsibility
to ensure that the processes at the commission are not
wasteful, and reflect a capability to handle such significant
parts of our Nation's economy. With that said, today's hearing
represents a valuable opportunity to examine the commission's
budget management and spending practices. Additionally, it is
important for us to gain a better understanding of the
challenges facing the agency that contribute to limiting the
efficiency of its operations. As a Representative, I take great
responsibility in ensuring that taxpayer dollars are spent
wisely and effectively.
I look forward to discussing how Congress can work with the
commission to ensure the advancement of the communications and
technology economy in a fiscally-responsible manner.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Walden. Gentleman yields back the balance of his time.
Chair recognizes the ranking member of the full committee,
the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. I want to thank the chairman and our Ranking
Member Eshoo for having this hearing, and welcome Managing
Director Wilkins.
We are here today to take a look at the Federal
Communications Commission's fiscal year 2016 budget estimates.
The FCC has broad jurisdiction. It oversees industries that
account for approximately \1/6\ of the economy, and growing,
but it also has been operating with the same budget for the
better part of a decade now, and that does not account for the
damage done by the sequester. So I should note that the FCC
operates with fewer than 1,700 full-time employees, and I would
say that that is certainly a small but efficient agency.
This year, the FCC asked for a $48 million increase in its
budget authority over last year. The vast majority of that
increase would pay to move the commission's headquarters to a
new home. Overall, the move would create a smaller footprint
for the agency, which will save $119 million over the next 15
years. Most of the remaining increase is to upgrade the
commission's aging and creaky information technology
infrastructure, which Ms. Eshoo mentioned, and that is an
update that will net a savings of up to $10 million over the
next 5 years. This is the same computer system that famously
ground to a halt under the weight of 4,000,000 Americans
writing in to voice their opinions about network neutrality,
and 4,000,000 is certainly an eye-popping number when it comes
to comments on a single proceeding. Modern computers, however,
should be able to handle that load without blinking.
Now, together, these temporary budget increases will save
the government nearly $130 million in the long run. Rejecting
these costs out-of-hand would be penny wise but pound foolish,
and fortunately, this subcommittee is practiced at reviewing
these types of budget requests.
Today's hearing is actually different than other FCC budget
hearings for a couple of reasons. First, it is the start of an
effort to revive an FCC reauthorization process that has been
dormant for 25 years, with the struggle Republicans have been
facing to fund the Department of Homeland Security, however, I
doubt the public wants us to create a brand new funding cliff.
Second, the timing of today's budget hearing has raised some
eyebrows, coming just days after the commission adopted new
network neutrality protections. And now, that might be a
coincidence, and I am hopeful it is because I think we should
all agree that this committee has a responsibility to conduct a
genuine oversight. We must make sure the FCC's dollars go as
far as possible, but we should also ask whether the commission
has sufficient funding to maintain its critical services for
the public, and together, it is our job to make sure that we
strike the right balance.
And I guess there is nobody else, so I will yield the
balance of my time.
Mr. Walden. Gentleman yields back the balance of his time.
As I said in my opening statement, this is an annual
process authorization committees are supposed to go through to
review budgets, so that is why we are here today.
And, Mr. Wilkins, we are delighted you could join us today
as the managing director for the Federal Communications
Commission, a big duty, and we welcome your testimony and the
work you do down there. Please go ahead.

STATEMENT OF JON WILKINS, MANAGING DIRECTOR, FEDERAL
COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

Mr. Wilkins. Thank you, Chairman Walden, Ranking Member
Eshoo, members of the subcommittee. I do appreciate the chance
to be here today to talk to you about our budget request.
I submitted my written testimony. What I thought I would
use my introductory time for is just to say a few words about
each of the four slides that I submitted, because they provide
some good context for our budget.
[Slide shown.]
The first slide. So just taking the historical perspective,
the FCC does have a two-plus decades record of being a very
good fiscal steward for the U.S. Government. So the left-hand
side of the chart shows that we are now closing in on $100
billion of revenue raised for the Treasury since 1994,
overwhelmingly from our auctions proceeds. Over that same time
frame, we have spent less than $8 billion on agency operation.
So for the U.S. Treasury, that means that 8 cents spent on the
FCC generates $1, and of course, even that 8 cents doesn't come
from general revenues, it comes either from retained auction
proceeds for a very tiny portion of those auction revenues, or
from our Section 9 reg. fees.
Now, our budget request for '16 is significant, and exactly
as you said, Chairman Walden, it is for $84 million. I just
want to make three points about that request. The first one is
that the lion's share of that request, 71 percent, is from a
management standpoint, these are unavoidable costs; these are
not costs that management is, for example, seeking as a new
initiative. The bulk of it is for the move. Our current lease
expires in October 2017, and we do have to spend some money to
reap the long-term benefits of lower lease costs. We are
requesting $21 million for IT. The bulk of that is to finish
the job that we started to truly transform and modernize our IT
infrastructure. It is by far our most important management
initiative. It will bring benefits and costs in efficiency and
in operations. And then the third point, these are the only
things we are requesting more funds for. In the last several
years, we have asked for more money from more people, for
example. We are not doing that. We heard the message and, in
fact, over the last year we have had a chance to look at our
workforce. We think we can do the job with the people we have
if we can upgrade the IT. So it is a big request, but it is
really just for these things.
Now, to put that budget request in context, for the last 6
fiscal years, on the left-hand side, the FCC has been
essentially flat. Our auctions funds was at $85 million for 9
years. It has gone up 2 of the last 3 years, specifically for
the incentive auctions. We appreciate that, and that work is
going well. In our non-auctions area though, we have been
actually flat in nominal terms. We had a very small increase
from '11 to '12 that was more than offset by sequestration, and
in real terms, our purchasing power has gone down. So we are
mainly a people-centered agency. Federal pay increase alone
increases our cost by a couple of million dollars a year. Our
rent goes up a little bit every year. So to put that in
context, fiscal year 2015, our flat budget was paired up
against almost $7 million of increased costs just for our
people and our rent and other contracts. That is about 40 to 50
people. In a given year, the FCC loses about 100, 120 people,
just to retirement and other attrition. So what the flat line
really means is that for every two people that leave the
commission right now, we can only replace one. And the right-
hand side shows the results of that. As Member Eshoo said, our
staffing is at its lowest, again, in '15, and our current
management plan is for it to go even lower in 2016; more than
100 lower than 6 years ago, and more than 200 lower from the
20-year average.
Finally, IT we think really is the solution to this. There
is no question that we can use IT to do our work more
efficiently, more transparently, and to support all the things
that Congress wants us to do. Over the last year, we have put
in place a very strong plan. We have actually started to move
it down the field. Three main areas, infrastructure costs. As
of today, we still have over 200 very expensive large servers
sitting in very expensive downtown real estate, being serviced
by very expensive direct contractors. Using some reprogramming
money we got last year, we have just finalized a contract to
move those to an off-site facility. It is the first step in
moving to a truly low-cost, secure cloud, efficient
environment. When you do that, you can improve the way you work
with data. So at the FCC, we have over 100,000 data objects,
including multiple definitions of the same basic thing that, to
a business person, seems ridiculous, 40 terabytes of data, very
expensive. When we have the infrastructure upgraded, we can
then essentially put all that data into a similar shared
environment that we can use much more efficiently. And that
then gets to the third piece; mission systems. That is where we
really saved the most money. We right now do most of our
software development on kind of a custom model. Everything is
a, you know, it is a custom renovation, if you will. We want to
get to a world where it is, you know, it is IKEA, you know, you
just have the pieces, it is pretty easy to build. When the
infrastructure and the data are modernized, we think that we
can cut our development costs by 50 to 75 percent and the times
to be shorter. So this is a thing that, from a management
perspective, we just want to plant our flag. We want to be able
to do this, and it will allow us to do a lot of things more
efficiently, and better do what Congress needs us to do.
And with that, I am happy to take any questions. Thank you
again.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wilkins follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. I appreciate that, and I appreciate the
leadership you have given.
I want to go back to this ratio, the 13 times, because $79
billion of that actually is from three auctions----
Mr. Wilkins. True.
Mr. Walden [continuing]. Correct? You are not going to sit
here and guarantee me that you are going to return 13 times
investment every year, year in and year out. It is really
pretty lumpy in there.
Mr. Wilkins. It is lumpy, and----
Mr. Walden. Yes.
Mr. Wilkins [continuing]. Actually, until the most recent
AWS-3 auction, the average was around $2.2 billion a year.
Mr. Walden. Yes.
Mr. Wilkins. Actually, when you add in $45 billion, that
goes up quite a bit----
Mr. Walden. Yes, right.
Mr. Wilkins [continuing]. But it will be lumpy. That is the
nature of auctions----
Mr. Walden. Yes.
Mr. Wilkins [continuing]. But on the long----
Mr. Walden. But the commission itself is not generating 13
times investment year in and year out.
Mr. Wilkins. Certainly, it depends on auction proceeds.
Mr. Walden. There you go. I believe you are aware that the
committee sent an oversight request to the commission on
February 18, asking for a set of information related to the
commission's regulatory and administrative processes, that
request was signed by me and Chairman Upton and Chairman
Murphy, motivated by a concern with the variety of lapses that
we perceive in the way the commission has been conducting its
regulatory and administrative business. As you may be aware,
the due date for that production of that information was today,
and I was distressed to be informed by my staff a little while
ago that that apparently is not going to be available today,
which we had hoped. I don't know how much you have been
involved in that matter, but I hope you will convey the
following message to the chairman's office, that we understand
the commission and staff is very busy, we do not intend to pose
meaningless or trivial obligations, but we do take seriously
our oversight responsibility. With respect to this specific
request, I would strongly recommend the chairman's staff make
available every effort to comply with our information request
by today's deadline. Based on the rigor of the response, we
will make every effort to work with the chairman and his staff
to be fair and reasonable.
Do you have anything to add to that?
Mr. Wilkins. No. I absolutely will convey that back to the
chairman's staff when I am back at the commission later.
Mr. Walden. So there have been some issues come up lately I
wanted to ask you about, given your expansive role there. Does
the FCC have policies or rules regarding staff use of social
media, such as Twitter, in their capacity as employees of the
commission, and do these policies or rules proscribe a
recordkeeping and retention policy for those communications?
Mr. Wilkins. So any use of personal, whether it is e-mail
or social media, certainly is subject to general Federal
Records Act requirements----
Mr. Walden. Right.
Mr. Wilkins [continuing]. Including the schedules that we
have in place. Those rules, as you know, certainly do require
if you are doing things that are official government business
in those environments, it is the responsibility of the employee
to bring them back into our records environment.
Mr. Walden. All right. Recently, it was reported that a
senior member of the Greenhill and Company had left his
position and joined the commission as a volunteer. I have a
couple of questions here. Could you describe what he will be
doing? Didn't the commission contract with Greenhill to perform
work related to the auction? I would like to know about that
contract, was it competitively bid, was Greenhill the lowest-
cost bidder, when was it awarded, you know, the basic sort of
oversight that we need to do here. What can you tell me about
this issue involving Greenhill and Company?
Mr. Wilkins. So let me follow up on the exact details of
that contract. Greenhill, as you know, it is an investment firm
that we contracted with to do estimates of the value of
broadcast licenses----
Mr. Walden. OK.
Mr. Wilkins [continuing]. For the spectrum auction, as part
of that process.
Mr. Walden. Right.
Mr. Wilkins. The results of their work has been shared with
quite a few broadcasters around the country.
Mr. Walden. Yes.
Mr. Wilkins. I think we have found them pretty valuable. In
terms of that individual, we will follow up with you on the
details.
Mr. Walden. Yes, we will have more questions on that for
the record, but the extent to which you can follow up, and we
are trying to get this information back because, you know, the
week after--when we return after next week, we will have all
five commissioners here, and so it would be, I think, helpful
for that hearing if we had----
Mr. Wilkins. OK.
Mr. Walden [continuing]. Some of this information. And so
we will follow up with more of the questions related to
Greenhill.
So let me move on to the USF issue because that is one that
has obviously gotten our attention. It appears that a little
less than \1/2\ of the $25 million in the Universal Service
Fund is going to the Wireline Competition Bureau, is that
accurate?
Mr. Wilkins. Yes.
Mr. Walden. And is any of that money going to the Wireline
Competition Bureau?
Mr. Wilkins. Yes.
Mr. Walden. And for what purpose and what kind of USF work
does WCB do?
Mr. Wilkins. Yes. So WCB, of course, are the program owners
of each of the four main universal service programs. Everything
from policy development to administration of policies,
everything from rules to appeals, sort of all of the day-to-day
operations of the program in the legal sense.
Mr. Walden. And is any of that money going to the
International Bureau, and if so, for what purpose and what kind
of work do they do?
Mr. Wilkins. No. That should not go to the International
Bureau unless I am missing some small detail, but no.
Mr. Walden. All right.
Mr. Wilkins. It is definitely intended to focus on
activities related to USF.
Mr. Walden. And is any of that money going to the Office of
Legislation Affairs? There are other bureaus and offices that
are slated to get some of this money, correct?
Mr. Wilkins. No. Just more broadly, we developed that $25
million figure based on the amount of activities related to USF
across the commission, and it is all activities, it is not
just----
Mr. Walden. Right.
Mr. Wilkins [continuing]. Audits, for example. A very small
portion of that, if there was leg. affairs work-related to USF
communications with Congress, for example----
Mr. Walden. Right.
Mr. Wilkins [continuing]. I think we would include that.
The idea was to fully capture the costs related to USF work.
Mr. Walden. All right. I have a couple of other issues for
the record that I will add to that, but my time has expired.
And again, I thank you for your testimony and the good work you
do.
And now, I would recognize the gentlelady from California,
Ms. Eshoo.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you again for
having this hearing. It is always an important one, and our
oversight is just essential. It is one of the major
responsibilities that we have in the Congress.
And, Mr. Wilkins, you are a terrific testifier.
Mr. Wilkins. Thank you.
Mr. Eshoo. You were brief in your opening statement, you
didn't have to read anything, you are smart, you know the
agency, and it is very helpful to us because you give very
direct answers.
You testified that the FCC plans a net reduction of 37
full-time employees for fiscal year 2016. We know that agencies
can essentially cook the books by reducing the number of full-
time employees, but then hire them back as contractors. Is that
anywhere near the case with the agency? Can we just dispense of
this as something that is not going to take place? Can you
assure us that it is not----
Mr. Wilkins. Yes.
Ms. Eshoo [continuing]. Going to?
Mr. Wilkins. Absolutely.
Ms. Eshoo. Well, that is good news.
I want to congratulate the agency on its recent efforts to
crackdown on consumer billing fraud. Just last week, the FCC
announced a $9 million fine against a company that was
illegally billing consumers, and switching their telephone
company without the consent of the consumers. It makes me
really wonder why people will do what they do. I guess they
think they can get away with it, but it is an important
function of the FCC.
So specifically, how does your budget request help the FCC
continue this important consumer protection work?
Mr. Wilkins. Yes.
Ms. Eshoo. Where is that buried in the budget----
Mr. Wilkins. Sure.
Ms. Eshoo [continuing]. And do you know how much it is?
Mr. Wilkins. Well, the Enforcement Bureau is around 240
people right now----
Ms. Eshoo. Yes.
Mr. Wilkins [continuing]. But we are not projecting staff
increases for any bureau including the Enforcement Bureau.
Ms. Eshoo. Yes.
Mr. Wilkins. The Enforcement Bureau, actually, is a great
example of how our IT actually can enable more effective use of
the people that we have.
Ms. Eshoo. Yes.
Mr. Wilkins. And it actually relates to process reform.
Process reform in my office is an internal support exercise.
Interestingly, the Enforcement Bureau is the first large bureau
at the commission that has, what I would call, a real tracking
system of how they do work. That was put in place in 2012.
Ms. Eshoo. Yes.
Mr. Wilkins. We have a new bureau chief there who, I can
tell you, is very aggressively using that sort of metrics to
make sure he is deploying his staff on them most important
areas, such as the ones that you mentioned.
Ms. Eshoo. Yes.
Mr. Wilkins. So the way we think about it is, we don't need
to add dozens of people to any given bureau to deliver those
results. We think we have very good people, we just want to use
them more efficiently----
Ms. Eshoo. Yes.
Mr. Wilkins [continuing]. And we see a lot of opportunities
for the IT to do that.
Ms. Eshoo. Right.
Ms. Eshoo. On the whole issue of IT, I think the chairman
raised this, you mentioned it in your opening statement, my
experience in Congress, both on this committee and as a member
of the Intelligence Committee, is that the government is really
lousy when it comes to procurement of IT. People don't know
what they are buying.
Mr. Wilkins. Yes.
Ms. Eshoo. And I mean you can have a GS-14 and they may
know the agency really well, but they really don't know what
they are buying. People can sell them just about anything. A
lot of taxpayer dollars wasted.
My question to you is, and you started to mention a part of
this is, what you plan to purchase relative to the IT system to
make it robust and 21st century and effective, and all of that.
Is this being built for you, or is it off-the-shelf?
Mr. Wilkins. Right. Off-the-shelf.
Ms. Eshoo. Great. That is the best answer you could have
given me. Nothing to pursue there. That was just what I wanted
to hear.
On the AWS-3 auction, and the near $45 billion that it
raised, we were very specific about where those dollars were to
be applied. What I would like to know is when will these funds
be available for obligation?
Mr. Wilkins. OK. So we have over $40 billion in our FCC
accounted treasury----
Ms. Eshoo. Yes.
Mr. Wilkins [continuing]. For the close of the auction.
There is the usual post-auction--any disputes, all issues have
to be resolved. The licenses then can be issued by the Wireless
Bureau----
Ms. Eshoo. Yes.
Mr. Wilkins [continuing]. And then the money can flow to--
--
Ms. Eshoo. So when do you think that money will be
obligated?
Mr. Wilkins. Congresswoman, I can't give you an estimate,
all I can say is we are working on it as fast as we can. We
know----
Ms. Eshoo. No, but I mean do you think it is going to be in
a year or 6 months, or just some ballpark.
Mr. Wilkins. I think that the ballpark, it is within a
year----
Ms. Eshoo. Yes.
Mr. Wilkins [continuing]. But in this case, obviously, it
is a very high dollar auction, lots of questions----
Ms. Eshoo. Right.
Mr. Wilkins [continuing]. All I can say is we will move as
quickly as we can.
Ms. Eshoo. OK. There has been a lot of attention given to
the need for enhanced location accuracy when calling 911 from a
wireless phone. Many landline phones in large office buildings
still only provide the building's address. Where is the FCC on
this? If you had to make a 911 call----
Mr. Wilkins. Internally?
Ms. Eshoo [continuing]. Yes. Tell me how it would work.
Mr. Wilkins. So----
Ms. Eshoo. Is it going to work or----
Mr. Wilkins. Yes.
Ms. Eshoo [continuing]. Is it in the works that it is going
to work, or----
Mr. Wilkins. If 911 is called within our facilities, we can
identify where in the building the call came from. That is an
issue in and of itself; is it eighth floor, fifth floor,
wherever. So we have a process where our security team knows
when the call goes out, it goes through to first responders,
but then we also----
Ms. Eshoo. Well, I know what the process is with first
responders and all that, but----
Voice. You dial 911.
Ms. Eshoo. Yes, exactly. You dial 911, but I want to know
what happens after that. Does the first responders, do they
have the granular location information----
Mr. Wilkins. Yes, our----
Ms. Eshoo [continuing]. Do callers need to dial an extra 9
before the 911?
Mr. Wilkins. Yes. Our system, we do dial the extra 9. So we
are 9911.
Ms. Eshoo. Are you going to fix that?
Mr. Wilkins. We service a lot of agencies. There is a----
Ms. Eshoo. Are you going to get rid of the 9?
Mr. Wilkins. There are mixed practices out there. And then
in terms of location, our security team knows where in the
building the call came from, both tells responders and then
also delivers our folks there.
Ms. Eshoo. Yes, well, you are really not behind the 8 ball
on this. That really needs to be upgraded, and especially that
it is the FCC. You should be the example, not only for the rest
of the Federal Government, but for the entire country, so you
need to work on that.
My time is up, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Walden. You are welcome.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Wilkins.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Wilkins.
We will now turn to the vice chair of the subcommittee, Mr.
Latta.
Mr. Latta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, Mr. Wilkins,
thanks very much for being here, and thanks for your testimony.
The Inspector General is required to conduct audits of the
commission's financial statements. Did the IG audit the
commission's fiscal year 2014 financial statements?
Mr. Wilkins. Yes.
Mr. Latta. Did the audit report a material weakness with
regard to the Universal Service Fund?
Mr. Wilkins. Yes.
Mr. Latta. Could you describe what those weaknesses were or
are?
Mr. Wilkins. Yes. It was a specific material weakness that
related to the way USAC, or the Universal Service
Administrative Company, reconciled its invoice amounts against
obligated funds. It specifically related to the extent of the
invoice deadlines in a particular year, and their systems
didn't automatically report back to their obligation system.
They actually found the problem. We were aware of it before the
auditors came in, of course. We told the auditors. So the
auditors, quite appropriately, said this is a problem to fix,
but no money was lost, it actually was a management step that
was identified.
Mr. Latta. So there was no impact on any monies out there?
Mr. Wilkins. No. No money was lost.
Mr. Latta. OK. And did you say has this weakness been
corrected and identified?
Mr. Wilkins. Yes.
Mr. Latta. OK.
Mr. Wilkins. Yes.
Mr. Latta. And how far back did that go?
Mr. Wilkins. That was just from 1 year because they changed
the invoice system for 1 year.
Mr. Latta. OK. And also, I guess to follow up on that, is
this the same issue that we discussed during your last visit
here, and is it associated with any new financial system?
Mr. Wilkins. No, that is our FCC genesis system. This issue
you are raising was at USAC, which is a separate----
Mr. Latta. OK, and who is the contractor?
Mr. Wilkins. For our system?
Mr. Latta. Right.
Mr. Wilkins. A company called CGI.
Mr. Latta. CGI, OK, thank you. And again, in fiscal year
2016, the budget request, it states that the commission is in
the process of creating a Joint USF Antifraud Taskforce to
combine resources agency-wide.
Mr. Wilkins. Yes.
Mr. Latta. And I appreciate the effort for a more targeted
approach to identify and prevent fraudulent activities within
USF, however, the agency has requested $10 million for
antifraud efforts within USF. How was this amount determined
for the $10 million?
Mr. Wilkins. Right. So we think that the need to have that
joint effort is very important. What we are doing though is
redeploying resources we have to staff it, whereas a year ago
we said actually give us more money to hire more people. And I
think it is an example of a year in there as the senior
management team looking very hard at the people we have and
where we can be more efficient, we said let us use the FTEs we
have to do this work, instead of asking for more.
Mr. Latta. OK. And could you give a specific breakdown of
that cost, for that $10 million?
Mr. Wilkins. Yes, so in 2015 we requested $10.8 million for
45 FTEs, I believe the breakdown was 17 for the Enforcement
Bureau, I want to say 20 for the Wireline Competition Bureau,
another 10 for my office, and the rest for the IG, I believe. I
might be off by one or two, but that was the rough breakdown.
We are not going to have that high of a staffing level so, for
example, instead of those 17 for the Enforcement Bureau, right
now that USF enforcement component of the Enforcement Bureau,
it was five people, and those are roles that we have filled as
people have left. So the group will not be as big, but as we
have the opportunity to reallocate resources we have, we think
we will staff that up because we are seeing lots of benefits
from what we are doing.
Mr. Latta. OK. Well, and additionally, how much of the
money is expected to be recovered through taxes of the
taskforce and other antifraud measures?
Mr. Wilkins. Well, certainly, and I think the IG would
agree with this too, $1 of enforcement or oversight in USF
tends to generate positive, more than $1 of returns from those
activities. Certainly, our reason for creating that effort is
because universal service, all those programs have been going
through lots of change over the last 2 or 3 years, essentially
around modernizing it for broadband. When you do that, the
rules change. Simple compliance can be harder for people to
participate in it because the rules are different. Obviously,
USF--and sometimes you have criminal or fraud issues, but
frankly, compliance with the rules is an important issue for
us. Our rules say if you don't comply with them, you shouldn't
get the money. And that is the kind of thing that we are really
focusing on internally is making sure that there is compliance
as the rules change so that the money goes where it should go.
Mr. Latta. OK. And the commission has also, as mentioned
earlier, is requesting over $44 million to move to a new
headquarters or for restacking. The budget request states that
by moving or restacking FCC headquarters, this process would
save the commission up to $119 million over 15 years. Can you
explain how the commission reached that estimate of $119
million over the timeline of 15 years?
Mr. Wilkins. Yes. So our current fully-loaded lease costs
to remain at headquarters is around $40 million, $41 million.
The space planning that we are doing already with GSA,
essentially to bring us, I would say, just in line with current
federal guidelines, we would be reducing that space by around
30 percent. And I think GSA--obviously, we are customers of GSA
in this process. They would also propose probably a lower per
square foot. So essentially, the idea would be for our lease
costs to go down by $11 million to $12 million a year over 15
years. You deduct from that though the, for example, the $51
million we are requesting now to facilitate that move, and the
net would be $119 million over the 15 years.
Mr. Latta. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And my time has
expired, and I yield back.
Mr. Walden. Thank the gentleman.
Now recognize the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Pallone, for questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Mr. Wilkins, I--Ms. Eshoo started--was talking about this
issue, but I wanted to follow up. I am very concerned about
consumers being hit with fraudulent charges on their monthly
communication bills through scams like cramming. And the FCC
has made strides over the past year trying to curb this
practice, but the question is if the FCC's budget continues to
flat line the way it has since 2009, will it impact the FCC's
ability to protect consumers from fraud?
Mr. Wilkins. Yes. If we continue to be flatlined, it will
impact our ability to delivery all areas of our mission. I
think our current budget proposal that we can make do with
fewer people is based on having much better IT to use those
people much more efficiently. And in the consumer enforcement
area you are describing, for example, there is a huge
opportunity to use data and analytics, using IT to be much
smarter about finding areas that we then go focus the resources
we have instead of just, perhaps, waiting for someone to
complain. So that is the opportunity we see, but it does
require the investment. I mean if we are flat lined, there is
no way we can make the investments nearly as promptly as we
want to. And I would actually add, if we are flat lined for
'16, in the sense of not being able to fund those move costs,
that money is going to come from somewhere. I mean our lease,
after 2017, goes up by $9 million a year, and nothing else
changes, someone has to pay that. I mean there really is kind
of a downward spiral around this move that, everything else
aside, really would affect our ability to fund anything at a
reasonable level.
Mr. Pallone. OK. I think you have answered in your response
the other two questions I had, but let me just look at this a
second. Again, you talked about the aging computer system that,
I guess, will eventually slow down your ability to continue
these reform efforts. I think you have answered that in terms
of what happens if you don't because that is where the bulk of
this additional money goes to, correct?
Mr. Wilkins. Yes. I think right now, our cost profile for
IT continues to grow because the cost of maintaining things
that are older and older grows every year. And when I was here
in September, I testified that over \1/2\ our systems are more
than 10 years old in terms of software, and the software, well,
that might as well be 100 years, right? The cost to do a
software update for something that was installed in 2004 is
astronomical because almost no one else does it. And so it is
really that treadmill; if you don't invest to get off the
treadmill, it just goes faster and faster, and you run faster
and faster, and you don't get anywhere and you are just
spending more money to essentially, you know, deliver the same
or worse.
Mr. Pallone. And I think you talked about the staff too,
that the FCC has a historically low number of full-time staff,
and whether any further reduction in the number of full-time
staff would impact your ability to carry out your
responsibilities. I think you kind of answered that too, but if
you want to add anything.
Mr. Wilkins. We think with sufficient IT support, the
staffing level we propose in '16 lets us do everything Congress
needs us to do.
Mr. Pallone. OK. All right, thanks a lot.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields back.
And the chair now recognizes the gentleman from Illinois,
Mr. Shimkus, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. Mr. Wilkins, welcome. It is good to
have you back.
Ranking Member Eshoo talked about the 9911 issue, but
Commissioner O'Reilly in a blog post said that it is a simple
programming change. And the first question--and this is for,
obviously, the facility which you are operating out of. Is that
your understanding, and did you give him that information as
far as the headquarters itself?
Mr. Wilkins. Yes. So it would be a programming change for
our voice-over IP phone system. It would cost some money.
Depends on if we just did it for our main headquarters
facility, or went to all of our remote locations. Actually
hearing the committee's interest and concern in that, I would
be very glad to go back and talk again with my IT team and see
what else we can do.
I will say that having looked at it, the one question that
we had for management is, the people that use our phones are
our internal people; we don't have members of the public back
in our offices, and at some level, they are used to dialing 9
to get out. And so we will----
Mr. Shimkus. Yes. Yes. I guess I would only say, you may
have guessed, obviously, a lot of people who are outsiders come
into the----
Mr. Wilkins. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. FCC to have meetings, you may
have bring your kid to work day----
Mr. Wilkins. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. These are really terrible stories
that----
Mr. Wilkins. We will be very glad to go back and----
Mr. Shimkus. And really governments should try to lead as
much as possible in doing this, and if it is a simple
programming then we can tell other entities that, hey, it is a
simple programming issue, and it may cost a little bit but the
return on investment over time, just for you all leading by
example, could be very helpful.
Mr. Wilkins. OK.
Mr. Shimkus. I would like to then go to a question on, last
time we had talked about your--talking about the internal
reporting processes for auction-related expenditures----
Mr. Wilkins. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. And reviewing the use of auction
funds and IT. Have you completed this review?
Mr. Wilkins. Yes. And so I think--my QFRs or one of our
document requests to this committee last year, we specifically
broke out--wherever we can, we do direct accounting. So a
person who works on auctions, they literally do their timecode
and say I worked on auctions. And wherever we can, we do that.
An IT contract that is for the new auctions platform, obviously
goes to auctions.
Around $55 million of our current auction spending is
directly accounted for.
Mr. Shimkus. Can you provide that stuff to us?
Mr. Wilkins. Yes. Yes, we will----
Mr. Shimkus. And the other follow-up--and you are providing
an audit of these responses and reviews, on the accuracy? Are
you----
Mr. Wilkins. We are certainly doing ongoing review to make
sure those costs are accurately reflected.
Mr. Shimkus. And can you provide us some of the ongoing
review and----
Mr. Wilkins. Sure. We will be glad to provide all the
information.
Mr. Shimkus. And, I am sorry I am going fast. I want to get
to the last one. You are also requesting $3 million for the
ongoing maintenance, improvement costs for the broadband map.
As many of us know on the subcommittee, who have been here for
a while, NTIA funded the map through Recovery Act funds or
stimulus funds. That is correct. Those funds were exhausted, so
last year FCC became responsible for its cost. So we are trying
to figure out how that happened. How did we go from NTIA, an
agency of the Department of Commerce, now where the FCC kind of
took control of this, and then we are trying--the other
question is who made that decision?
Mr. Wilkins. So as you said, NTIA got the funding in the
Recovery Act, because the FCC has expertise in it, lot of our
processes obviously involve collecting broadband data, NTIA set
up an interagency contract to fund us to actually do the IT
systems, and that was the practice until their funding went
away. So the idea of transferring it to us, I wouldn't say it
was like a preordained it transferred to the FCC, it is more of
de facto we run it, they can't fund it anymore. We have found
it to be a valuable policy tool and we would like to keep
funding it, but, as you said, it was not funded last year, and
right now it is on hold. I mean we are actually not investing
money to keep upgrading it or operating it in any kind of real
way.
Mr. Shimkus. But it didn't rise to the level of a, you
know, the commission actually making a decision or the chairman
saying we are going to do this, was this done just internally
kind of by default?
Mr. Wilkins. Right. It was----
Mr. Shimkus. You got handed the ball and you are----
Mr. Wilkins. Yes, well, it was the kind of thing where
agencies can collaborate on--NTIA had some money, we had some
expertise, we did the arrangement, set it up that way, and it
worked pretty well while they had the funding. And now we have
to figure out if we want to maintain it, where the funding
comes from.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. Chairman, my time is over. Thank you very
much. Thank you, Mr. Wilkins.
Mr. Latta [presiding]. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from New York, Ms.
Clarke, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank our
ranking member. I thank Mr. Wilkins for coming today to share
information with us.
I am a new member to this committee, and wanted to just ask
a couple of questions; one is somewhat parochial. I was visited
by my local regional broadcasters just recently, and they
raised a concern about regional office staffing, particularly
in the New York region, some concerns about radio piracy, and I
was wondering whether you have considered looking at these
regional offices and the staffing levels, and the concerns that
these regions have, whether you would be addressing that in
this budget, and whether there is a line item specific to those
regional offices?
Mr. Wilkins. Thank you for that question. So one of the
activities we are now undertaking with our most recent budget
being less than we asked for, is a systematic review of all of
our people, all of our offices, to find out how we can most
efficiently deploy with the resources we have. So we are
actively looking at that. It is not a line item in our budget
necessarily----
Ms. Clarke. Yes.
Mr. Wilkins [continuing]. But we are definitely looking
into staffing levels in offices like New York, and trying to
make sure we are making the best use of the people and the
money that we have.
Ms. Clarke. Just wondering, do you look at perhaps
activities nationally, and then look at allocation of staff
based on, you may have a larger problem, say, in a place like
New York----
Mr. Wilkins. Sure.
Ms. Clarke [continuing]. Than you may have in other parts
of the country, whether it is appropriate to shift staff
according to need?
Mr. Wilkins. Yes, I would agree. So the only way that we
can, especially in that field part of the FCC, the only way we
can manage is to find out where is the highest density of need,
and how can we deploy the people and the resources we have
against that. So that is absolutely the principle that we are
using as we are doing this review right now.
Ms. Clarke. Very well. Immediately upon taking office,
Chairman Wheeler identified FCC process reform as a priority.
An intra-agency staff working group produced the report on the
FCC process reform. What progress has been made to implement
the recommendations in that report, and could you please
explain what other steps the commission has taken to improve
the FCC's process?
Mr. Wilkins. Thank you for that question. That is a very
important priority for the chairman. My office is responsible
for, I would describe as the internal process reform steps.
There is a separate set of issues around how the commissioners
operate that my office doesn't really play a role in. I will
give you a couple of examples. There are a lot of things on the
internal process reform report around improving transparency
and using metrics to better manage our internal resources. One
thing that we just completed, with my office as the main
implementer, was a new system for consumers to register
complaints with the commission. We have a new online system, it
is a Web site. You have a problem related to your phone bills
or any other FCC issue, it is actually much easier for you as
an individual to go and make that complaint. The process reform
angle is we now have a much easier way to track those things,
to figure out is the backlog or the volume going up or down in
given areas, be more transparent about it and manage our
resources better. So that is one example. And I would just
emphasize that the IT investments that we want to make here,
that we have talked about so far in the hearing, are
overwhelmingly about having that model be used in many other
areas for process reform improvement, and that is why the
chairman is on my back to make sure we get the IT right.
Ms. Clarke. Very well. And as you know, FCC licenses pay
the cost associated with the FCC's operations. It is,
therefore, critical for the FCC to ensure that its regulatory
fees are assessed in a fair and equitable fashion. Can you
explain the FCC's efforts to ensure fairness in the regulatory
fee structure?
Mr. Wilkins. Yes, and let me answer that with two examples.
My office actually does the fee proceedings. We just completed
one last year where we tried to make at least a few areas
better. So for example, we set a new de minimis standard where
a very small business, under the old formula, may have had to
pay us a few hundred dollars and, frankly, spend more money on
lawyers and filing costs than the money, we just exempted them.
So trying to make it just less of a burden.
This also is the USF proposal in our current budget. It is
specifically designed so that the parts of the industry that
are involved in USF are the ones who would support those
activities of the commission, and the ones who aren't involved
in USF would not. Under our current model, I mean a broadcaster
is a good example, broadcasters don't have anything to do with
USF. Part of the regulatory fee a broadcaster pays does, in our
current model, go to basically pay for our USF activities. And
given that our costs will go up because of the move for a year
or two, we just thought this was the exact right time to
propose that alignment so that the people that pay fees, that
sort of pay for things that relate to their business or their
activity.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Latta. The gentlelady yields back.
And the chair now recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey,
Mr. Lance, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And good morning to
you, Mr. Wilkins.
The FCC makes a one-time request of $51 million for
restacking, and is this similar--for move or restacking. Are a
move or restacking equivalent, and which of the two would be
less costly?
Mr. Wilkins. Right. Certainly. So we always use move or
restacking because, certainly, our current landlord is eligible
to bid to retain our lease, and so the restacking would be we
would stay at the current facility but in smaller space. So we
would collapse and literally restack where the offices were
laid out. And so I think it is important from the GSA
perspective that we maintain as much competition for our lease
as possible, so we always maintain that.
The $51 million budget request certainly applies to either
one of those, because really what that pays for, it pays for
internal construction, walls, and these are not exciting things
but they are necessary things. So the furniture, and even if we
restacked our current location, you would change the footprint
because you are going to smaller offices, et cetera. And we are
committed to those--I mean we are committed and, frankly, GSA
is going to make sure we are committed to those lower lease
costs in the long term as we talked about.
Mr. Lance. Are these competitively bid, or to the lowest
responsible bidder, or----
Mr. Wilkins. Right. So Congress has to first approve a
prospectus. That hopefully will be coming from OMB relatively
soon. And then an RFP goes out to commercial lessors for the
period of several months, and people look at our requirements,
how much space, other things, and there is a competitive
bidding process that GSA runs and, you know, we try to get the
best deal for the taxpayer.
Mr. Lance. Well, thank you. At your convenience, we would
appreciate if you would provide us with a list of the awardees.
And----
Mr. Wilkins. Certainly.
Mr. Lance. We appreciate that, thank you. The budget
request includes $2.4 million to engage an administrator to
manage the Broadcast Relocation Fund.
Mr. Wilkins. Yes.
Mr. Lance. Is this going to be awarded through a
competitive bidding process----
Mr. Wilkins. Yes.
Mr. Lance [continuing]. As well?
Mr. Wilkins. Yes.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. That ends my question. Anybody on our
side wants the balance of my time?
Mr. Latta. I believe the gentleman yields back.
Mr. Lance. I will yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much.
And the chair now recognizes the gentleman from New York
for 5 minutes, Mr. Collins.
Mr. Collins. See if this is working. It wasn't last week.
Thank you, Mr. Wilkins.
I will begin one real quick question on the rural broadband
map.
Mr. Wilkins. Yes.
Mr. Collins. I represent some very rural counties, and you
currently use, if I understand, like the 9-digit zip code. In
these counties, your 9-digit zip code is showing as much as 97
percent coverage. The counties knew that was wrong. They did
their own in-depth study. It is under 50 percent. So I am
assuming you are aware of the shortcomings in that, and is that
what you are trying to address so we can actually get a number?
Mr. Wilkins. Right. Yes, right, the use of the broadband
map is a tool exactly to facilitate that kind of input and two-
way dialogue, because you are right, in universal service, for
example, we are deploying millions of dollars and it really is
supposed to be where it is most needed.
Mr. Collins. Where it is needed, which is our counties, and
they are not getting it because of the 9-digit zip code----
Mr. Wilkins. Exactly.
Mr. Collins [continuing]. Methodology.
Mr. Wilkins. Exactly. And so the broadband map has been
used, and our hope is to use it as a tool just to make that
easy, because it is one thing to have some complicated data set
to look at, it is another thing to see a map of your county
which you know----
Mr. Collins. Is wrong.
Mr. Wilkins [continuing]. See what the FCC thinks is right
or wrong, and if it is wrong, to be able to tell us.
Mr. Collins. I think all of us in this day and age would
appreciate the more accurate you can get it, the funds can go
where they actually are needed, which is many of the rural
counties.
So couple of questions on the budget. That is what I have
spent my life doing, both as a county executive in the largest
upstate county of New York, where I implemented Lean Six Sigma
for the first time in a large municipal government. We had over
5,000 employees. I cut 22 percent of the workforce, improved
efficiency, improved delivery of service, and those cuts saved
$100 million a year. So in budgeting, there are two ways of
looking at it. Let us flat line and add to, and then there is
zero-based. And just first question, are you familiar with Lean
Six Sigma, have you looked at it, because as a generality, you
can reduce your workforce 22 percent.
Mr. Wilkins. Yes.
Mr. Collins. I did it and actually improved service.
Mr. Wilkins. Yes. I am familiar with Six Sigma. I can tell
you that in my budget discussion with Chairman Wheeler, you
know, he and I are both relatively new to the government, from
the private sector, and I am familiar with zero-based
budgeting. Certainly, Chairman Wheeler's instructions to me are
to find ways to be as efficient as possible. You know, in the
federal context, you know, restructuring your workforce takes
more time and energy because there are a number of constraints,
and actually what we are----
Mr. Collins. Well, and I had a unionized workforce.
Mr. Wilkins. Well, and what we are doing now though is
consistent with those obligations that we have to follow, how
can we most effectively restructure.
Mr. Collins. So would it make any sense, and I have done
this so--to pick a department, to pick a unit that has--I mean
you might even think some areas where efficiencies would be--
and try to--I am assuming you have never really tried it. You
have never brought in master black belts, you have never
process mapped, is that----
Mr. Wilkins. So we are doing some of that work now. I mean
we are--in some of our areas we are doing----
Mr. Collins. But using the skill set of Lean Six Sigma, or
is it just----
Mr. Wilkins. Well, not Six Sigma specifically, but using
tracking information we have and doing more of a zero-based
exercise of----
Mr. Collins. If----
Mr. Wilkins [continuing]. What does it really take to do
the work that is being----
Mr. Collins. I would love to see if you could provide me
just some examples. That is my background.
Mr. Wilkins. Sure. Be glad do.
Mr. Collins. And perhaps even encourage you to consider,
even on a satellite basis or some small basis, try it and then
it can catch on, and the savings can just be dramatic.
Mr. Wilkins. We agree.
Mr. Collins. It is not normally the way government works.
Mr. Wilkins. Agreed.
Mr. Collins. So another comment, and I am not going to try
and trick you here, but you implied that because 8 cents in
your budget brought in $1. You said that. Number one, I would
say you are kind of taking undue credit for the wildly
successful spectrum audit that far exceeded your estimates. And
so kind of a rhetorical question, if we increased your budget
$10 million, could you guarantee us $120 million coming back in
on top of your current budget? Or if I gave you $100 million,
could you guarantee us $1.2 billion coming back?
Mr. Wilkins. No, I wouldn't want to say that. I would
emphasize----
Mr. Collins. I didn't think so.
Mr. Wilkins [continuing]. Thought that when spectrum
auctions were created in the mid-'90s, I don't think anyone
expected it would lead to the----
Mr. Collins. Well, my point is, I understand how you did
the numbers----
Mr. Wilkins. Yes.
Mr. Collins [continuing]. But in fairness to us, I think
you are trying to take credit for some things that were outside
of your scope, and I know that is a good thing to do but----
Mr. Wilkins. Well, our auction staff does do that work. I
mean that money comes from somewhere. It is because there is an
auction staff that runs those auctions.
Mr. Collins. So if we increased your budget by $10 million,
could you give us another $120 million----
Mr. Wilkins. Well----
Mr. Collins [continuing]. Coming back?
Mr. Wilkins. I think that the recent increases for our
auction----
Mr. Collins. No, no, no, on top of your current budget----
Mr. Wilkins. Well, I think for auctions, the $11 million
that we are requesting for our auctions fund probably will
generate more than $100 million from the----
Mr. Collins. No, but if I gave you 10 on top of that, could
you give us another--so if we give you 20, can you give us 240?
Mr. Wilkins. No, no, clearly, clearly, there is a limiting
principle----
Mr. Collins. OK. Well, I only bring that up because you
were a little self-serving on that one.
Mr. Wilkins. OK.
Mr. Collins. OK.
Mr. Wilkins. That is fair.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields back.
And at this time, the chair recognizes the gentleman from
North Dakota, Mr. Cramer, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cramer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Wilkins, for being here. Thank you for your--you are very
knowledgeable and it is great to have a witness that is both
knowledgeable and forthcoming.
I want to just follow up a little bit on where I think Mr.
Lance was going, and maybe expand it a little, and Ms. Eshoo as
well. I appreciated your answer to her with regard to, you
know, contractors or, you know, former employees coming back as
contractors, and that was a good answer. But I am missing
detail I think when I look at the budget request, and I would
just say it could be very helpful for us, and give us sense of
confidence if we could get more details about not just the
$44.1 million, for the moving and stacking, which I think is a
large amount, and I wish I had a local moving company to bid on
it, but the $32 million in addition to that is pretty vague, to
say the least, and I would just really want to encourage you,
first of all, if you can explain that a little bit, but then
provide us some detail, again, you know, before the chairman
and the commissioners visit here.
Mr. Wilkins. OK. Absolutely.
Mr. Cramer. That would be very helpful.
Mr. Wilkins. Would you like me to--I can----
Mr. Cramer. Please.
Mr. Wilkins [continuing]. Say a little more?
Mr. Cramer. Yes, please.
Mr. Wilkins. So on the move costs, it is $51 million that
is just in our budget request.
Mr. Cramer. Right.
Mr. Wilkins. It is split as our usual practice between
auctions and non-auctions.
Mr. Cramer. Right.
Mr. Wilkins. $51 million. That would be the first of two
fiscal years where some of that spending is required. The total
estimate we are getting from GSA is closer to about $80
million, so $50 million would be the larger chunk.
Just to give you some context, for the amount of square
feet that we are talking about for our new lease, that would be
about $175 per square foot, fully loaded, for everything from
walls and furniture to the cost to move the stuff. That
compares to, let us see, GSA gave us three examples, NIH and
NLRB both recently did moves that were $206 a square foot, so
we are a little lower than that. Recently, the FTC, which is
sort of a similar agency to us in terms of----
Mr. Cramer. Sure.
Mr. Wilkins [continuing]. People, moved about half as many
people, it wasn't their full staff, it was a part of their
staff, about 900 people, total was $75 million over several
fiscal years. They had some different issues going on, but
again, we are talking about a similar amount of money for twice
as many people. So I am not an expert in move costs, but from
what GSA has told us, the numbers are pretty much in the range
that they would typically do with a federal agency. The rest of
the cost, so exactly as the chairman said, total is $84
million, take 51 away from that for the move, that leaves you
with 33. We have got $4 million for the PSAP system and the
broadband map, $8 million in inflation and $1 million for the
IG. We could talk about any one of those, but those are kind
of----
Mr. Cramer. Sure.
Mr. Wilkins. Those are what they are. We are left with $21
million of--we are left with $15 million if you take the PSAP
and broadband map out. So those are, as Congresswoman Eshoo
said, that is to buy the off-the-shelf IT infrastructure,
instead of having--I mean we literally have 200 giant servers
like you would see in a movie from 20 years ago, sitting in
very expensive real estate over here on 12th Street.
Mr. Cramer. Yes.
Mr. Wilkins. I mean that is not how you do IT, certainly in
the private sector, and you shouldn't in the public sector now
either. So we have a--literally, a truck is going to show up to
the FCC in a couple of weeks and take those suckers out to West
Virginia. And that is the first step to going to a true cloud
environment which, for storage and your basic servers, is just
the way to do it. So that is what those costs are, and we will
be glad to give staff follow-up on all of the specifics of
those contracts.
Mr. Cramer. I would be helpful, just because, obviously,
details are--and information keeps the imagination from getting
too far astray, if you know what I mean.
I don't have anything else, but thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Johnson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And, Mr.
Wilkins, thank you for being here today.
You have requested $25 million out of the USF fund to
reimburse the agency for costs of oversight administration of
the fund, with $10 million of this amount going to the creation
of the Joint USF Antifraud Taskforce. Do you expect the fund
for USF oversight administration to be a one-time disbursement,
or do you expect this to be an ongoing effort?
Mr. Wilkins. Right. So we certainly would, if that was
granted in '17, then we would have to, in fact, resubmit it and
it would be reapproved by Congress, if it was approved. I get--
--
Mr. Johnson. So it is ongoing, am I understanding that----
Mr. Wilkins. Well, I really think it is obviously Congress'
decision, and it is just about this issue of fee-ness to the
fee payers.
Mr. Johnson. Yes.
Mr. Wilkins. And to be clear, the money is the money.
Right? In other words, those are people that we largely have
today. We may be reallocating some of our current workforce to
that on the margin, but those are costs that are right now
being paid by our fee payers. Out Section 9 fees, they pay it.
Mr. Johnson. What----
Mr. Wilkins. That is not going to change a lot.
Mr. Johnson. What is that money going to be used for? The
budget request says salaries and IT. Is it going to pay
salaries----
Mr. Wilkins. No.
Mr. Johnson [continuing]. IT or both?
Mr. Wilkins. No, IT, that is a mistake if that is what it
says. It is just for the salary and expenses for the people who
do USF work at the commission.
Mr. Johnson. Prior to this request, how did the agency fund
these costs?
Mr. Wilkins. Out of our regular Section 9 regulatory fees.
Mr. Johnson. OK. The FCC acknowledges that it has collected
just over $90 million in excess regulatory fees, so will the
commission or the Administration, as was called for in GAO's
2012 report to Congress, titled Federal Communications
Commission regulatory fee process needs to be updated, will
they provide Congress with a proposal to true-up these fees so
as to avoid continued growth of the uncollected funds?
Mr. Wilkins. Well----
Mr. Johnson. Over-collected funds, I am sorry.
Mr. Wilkins. Sure. I mean it certainly does strike us as a
burden on our fee pays, and I would love to have the money, but
that is sort of the--it is outside the FCC's control. That is
certainly something for the Administration to work with
Congress on what to do with those funds.
Mr. Johnson. All right. As you also know, Mr. Wilkins, the
FCC is well aware of the legal challenges ahead once the Order
is released. There may be reconsideration requests filed at the
commission, Motions for a Stay of the Order, and appeals of the
Order that could go all the way to the Supreme Court. Has the
FCC budgeted and estimated the potential resources needed and
costs of the litigation for this year's budget request?
Mr. Wilkins. Yes. So I can--so with regard to open Internet
issues, my office--I am the budget--I am the green eyeshade
guy, not the policy guy. I can tell you unequivocally we do not
have a current plan to add more resources to say Wireline
Competition Bureau or the General Counsel's Office. I mean this
is certainly an important issue that will take staff work, but
in terms of my staffing discussions with those office and
bureau heads, it is not different than, I would say, the usual
large important issues that those staff support. So there is no
increase in this budget, for example, to support that activity.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Litigating the Title II Order will not be
costless though. Do you agree that is fair to say?
Mr. Wilkins. Certainly. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Johnson. Has the commission projected how much the cost
will be for 2016, '17, '18 and '19? You may have just answered
that. You haven't projected that out?
Mr. Wilkins. No. Our current budget assumes that the
litigation support that we have in the General Counsel's
Office, for example, will be able to handle that. Now, if the
office chiefs change their minds on that, they would bring it
to me, but right now that is our plan.
Mr. Johnson. OK. One final question, and if you would
please for the sake of time, just a simple yes or no. Wouldn't
the commission have saved a significant amount of money if it
had let Congress legislate on net neutrality instead of moving
forward with an ill-fated Title II Order that it knows is going
to be litigated for years?
Mr. Wilkins. No.
Mr. Johnson. No. Why? Why do you say no? Cost of
litigation? Because you just said that it was going to be----
Mr. Wilkins. Well----
Mr. Johnson. The cost of litigation was not going to be
negligible, so----
Mr. Wilkins. Well, our bureaus and offices that deal with
those sorts of issues, essentially, these are expert,
experienced attorneys, or economists, or policy people, and
this is their job. Any given year, we will have major
litigation, we will have major issues, those offices are built
to do that. And certainly----
Mr. Johnson. But that litigation is not free. That
litigation is not free. The taxpayers are paying for that
litigation, so the question is wouldn't it have been more
prudent to let Congress work with the FCC to get a legislative
fix to net neutrality, rather than spending taxpayer dollars to
litigation something that they know is going to be litigated?
Mr. Wilkins. Well, Congressman, from my office's
perspective, I can assure you there is no incremental budget
requests that are being driven to support that. We have people
who do that. Certainly, the prioritization question----
Mr. Johnson. But they don't do it for free, that is the
point I am making. They don't do it for free.
Mr. Wilkins. No.
Mr. Johnson. If they weren't doing that, they would be
doing other things that are meaningful and useful for the
taxpayers, not litigating something that they could have
precluded by working with Congress. Do you see what I am
saying?
Mr. Wilkins. Certainly, the cost of the people to do that--
--
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Wilkins [continuing]. Will be----
Mr. Johnson. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latta. The gentleman yields back.
And the chair recognizes the gentleman from Kansas, Mr.
Pompeo, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wilkins, you said in your testimony, ``You are
currently examining additional workforce restructuring at all
FCC facilities.'' Can you tell me if that includes studying
closing field offices?
Mr. Wilkins. We are doing a thorough review of actually
every part of the commission, and certainly, the field is part
of that review, yes.
Mr. Pompeo. And are you doing that internally or do you
have third parties that have assisted you in conducting that
review?
Mr. Wilkins. No, it is as Mr. Collins from New York said,
we have brought in some management experts to support our
internal staff in doing that review.
Mr. Pompeo. Have they provided you with reports?
Mr. Wilkins. We have been----
Mr. Pompeo. Drafts, memos, PowerPoint slides?
Mr. Wilkins. We do not have a final report yet. We have a
final report quite soon actually that we would be glad to----
Mr. Pompeo. Do you have a draft report, do you have interim
reports, do you have anything that you can share with us?
Mr. Wilkins. They have been sharing their analyses with us
as we have been going along, and their final report is due,
actually, next week.
Mr. Pompeo. Is there recommendation to close field offices?
Mr. Wilkins. They have made us good recommendations for how
we can look at the people we have, the real estate costs we
have, and deliver the mission better.
Mr. Pompeo. Right. I asked a direct question, you gave a
generic response. Is there recommendation to close field
offices for the FCC and relocate people to your headquarters?
Mr. Wilkins. In the interim analysis they have done, they
have shown some cost-based ideas that could be consistent with
that, but there is not a final recommendation yet.
Mr. Pompeo. And are these savings reflected in the budget
that you have provided us?
Mr. Wilkins. No.
Mr. Pompeo. You said they could show some savings. You have
seen the interim report, did you assume, yes, we are going to
go down that path and----
Mr. Wilkins. Well----
Mr. Pompeo [continuing]. The budget includes it?
Mr. Wilkins. The answer is as our '16 budget request does
presume, or does project, that our staffing levels drop, we are
going to look at every possible area we can to most efficiently
effect that. The default is people retire or leave the
commission and we just don't replace them. And we are certainly
looking at other areas where we can do other sorts of workforce
changes, and absolutely not just in the Enforcement Bureau
field and all across the commission, and that was the
chairman's instruction to me when our budget came in where it
did.
Mr. Pompeo. Sure, but my question is what did you do? You
had interim reports, what did you assume for purposes of your
budget? Did you assume there would be changes in the lease
payments in the field offices, locality pay connected to that,
there are lots of changes, changes in--you might have had
engineers there and you would have lawyers here----
Mr. Wilkins. Yes.
Mr. Pompeo [continuing]. Tell me what you assumed when you
put the----
Mr. Wilkins. So our budget request, right, is for
activities that will be taking more than the better part of a
year in advance of when the budget is done.
Mr. Pompeo. Yes.
Mr. Wilkins. So when you are talking about that kind of a
future view, all you can do is say we will spend less money on
categories such as FTEs. Then, as Congress considers that, we
have to view our management plan and say, OK, how are we best
going to make that happen. Will it be through changes at
certain bureaus, will it be through other savings? This type of
analysis is certainly part of that process, but it was not a
preordained, that is how we are going to pay for X. We just
have to do the management work to find out where we save the
money.
Mr. Pompeo. Right. It is just a bit disingenuous because it
is not always the case that you just let folks go. Sometimes
you let an engineer go and you bring a lawyer on, right? And so
it is worth thinking about how you do that. It is not just a
case that you used attrition, you have now made policy and
programming differences that I think are important for us to
understand. And I guess what I would ask you in closing is,
when you get this report, it sounds like it will be in the next
couple of days----
Mr. Wilkins. Yes.
Mr. Pompeo [continuing]. When you get a copy of this
report, will you make sure we get a copy as well?
Mr. Wilkins. As we decide on what to do with those
recommendations and other work we are doing, we absolutely will
share it with----
Mr. Pompeo. Right, but even before you decide, when you get
the report, you have clearly hired a contractor to do a report,
and you already have documents from this contractor, right?
Mr. Wilkins. Yes.
Mr. Pompeo. They have provided you interim reports, that we
get the interim reports.
Mr. Wilkins. We certainly will give you the final report.
We want to make sure----
Mr. Pompeo. Can we get the interim reports?
Mr. Wilkins [continuing]. The interim reports are----
Mr. Pompeo. That is a yes-or-no question. Can we just get
the interim reports?
Mr. Wilkins. Well----
Mr. Pompeo. That is----
Mr. Wilkins [continuing]. I think we wouldn't want to
provide things that ultimately weren't what we relied on.
Mr. Pompeo. Sure you would. Sure, it is OK for us to see
them. There is no harm in us seeing them. You may make a
different decision.
Mr. Wilkins. We----
Mr. Pompeo. Taxpayers paid for these. What is the harm in
sharing them with the Legislative Branch?
Mr. Wilkins. Certainly, whatever, of course, things that
you request we will provide.
Mr. Pompeo. Great, thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Latta. The gentleman yields back.
And the chair recognizes the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr.
Guthrie, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you.
You said replace an engineer with a lawyer. Aren't you both
an engineer and a lawyer? So Mr. Pompeo has a good perspective.
Mr. Pompeo. We yield.
Mr. Guthrie. Not a practicing--I will yield to you, not a
practicing lawyer.
I have a question on spectrum. I have gotten involved with
Ms. Matsui on the government spectrum. Hopefully free up more
spectrum from auctions, so I was just going to tie into that,
just some budget questions on that. And specifically the
process of retaining auction revenues and how it works in
practice----
Mr. Wilkins. Yes.
Mr. Guthrie [continuing]. And I am interested in what
happens when the FCC is authorized to retain a certain amount
to offset the cost of the auction administration in a certain
year, but auctions in that particular year raise less than the
threshold. I believe that this happened in 2008-'12, where in
no year did the FCC reach the $85 million threshold. So my
question then, when the auction failed to raise more money than
the FCC is permitted to retain, how is the difference made up
to cover the expense of the auctions?
Mr. Wilkins. Right. So I don't have the specifics on the
year you mentioned. We will be glad to provide----
Mr. Guthrie. OK.
Mr. Wilkins [continuing]. Anything additional. The general
process is, obviously----
Mr. Guthrie. Yes, the general process I am interested in.
Mr. Wilkins. Yes. Obviously, Congress sets our cap of
revenues we are allowed to use, and then there is sort of a
separate process we have to do with OMB----
Mr. Guthrie. Yes.
Mr. Wilkins [continuing]. Around retaining some certain
amount of auction revenue so that they can then give us those
funds as Congress sets the cap. So just for example, so right
now, I believe we have a little bit less than 3 years worth of
current auctions program in our auctions account at the
Treasury. So we are sort of funded through at least the next 2
fiscal years and into the next, and then certainly this
question of what is retained for future FCC use from the AWS-3
auction will be part of that discussion with OMB too.
Mr. Guthrie. So can it be carried over from previous years
and previous auctions, and if so, can you carry over to the
future auctions and are there restrictions?
Mr. Wilkins. Well, OMB will keep the funds in an account,
so the funds--so the money is there.
Mr. Guthrie. Yes.
Mr. Wilkins. We certainly only can use what Congress sets
our cap for, or if we have approval to reprogram funds or if
funds can be on a know your basis moved from one to the----
Mr. Guthrie. So they can go from one year to the next, as
long as they are within the cap.
Mr. Wilkins. Yes. Our ability to spend the money is just
set by the Congressional appropriation process.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. But----
Mr. Wilkins. The question is the money there is OMB.
Mr. Guthrie. So when it goes above the cap, well, it
depends on the appropriations process you said.
Mr. Wilkins. Yes, we----
Mr. Guthrie. It would revert to the deficit reduction at
that point.
Mr. Wilkins. Right. Yes, we can't go above our cap unless
we got appropriator approval to do that through a reprogramming
or something.
Mr. Guthrie. And on a related note, given that there are no
significant trenches of spectrum in the auction queue beyond
the broadcast incentive auction scheduled for next year, and
hopefully we can do some government auction eventually, and
considering the request for an increase in the cap on retention
and spending of auction proceeds, because I believe in this
budget request there is an increase in the cap on--in the cap
on retention and spending of the auction fees.
Mr. Wilkins. Yes, to 117, yes.
Mr. Guthrie. So should we expect the FCC to identify
additional bands that could be brought to auction during the
time after the incentive auction, which would require funding
to support these activities?
Mr. Wilkins. Well, certainly our experts in our auctions
program work with all the different government entities
involved in spectrum planning and certainly we want to be in
the business of making spectrum available for use, so we will
participate in that. And of course, the question of what level
of auctions is set aside so it funds our program, from a
management standpoint we try to make sure OMB thinks at least a
few years ahead so we don't run out of money----
Mr. Guthrie. Yes.
Mr. Wilkins [continuing]. And of course, OMB wants to make
sure the money is used more broadly too, so that is just part
of the ongoing dialogue.
Mr. Guthrie. Perfect. Well, I appreciate your answers in
this and your forthrightness.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Walden. Gentleman yields back the balance of his time.
Appreciate his participation in the hearing.
I am going to yield a minute to Ms. Eshoo who wanted to do
some follow-up comments.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
The gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Johnson, we weren't back in
the room yet, he raised a very interesting point about asking
Mr. Wilkins would the FCC not have saved money, essentially,
if, in fact, there were a legislative approach to the issue of
net neutrality. And I think it is important to state for the
record that, wherever people are on this, that is where they
are----
Mr. Wilkins. Sure.
Ms. Eshoo [continuing]. But I think that it is important to
state for the record that broadcasters sued after decisions
were taken by the Congress. USF, I mean there is a line as long
as Independence Avenue of people that sued relative to what the
Congress did and the lawsuits that were filed. Certainly, the
incentive auction brought forward lawsuits. There was previous
action by the Congress on net neutrality, but I don't think it
stands in the same area as the 3 that I just mentioned. So
there is not a tidy answer to this. There just isn't. It is not
one size fits all. Congress takes actions on a daily basis, and
people sue. So it is not just one way or the other. And I just
wanted to get that down for the record. And I appreciate your
giving me the time.
And, Mr. Wilkins, I think you have just been a terrific
witness because you are an effective person at the FCC in terms
of the work that you do. Thank you.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. Thank the gentlelady for her comments.
And, Mr. Wilkins, as you know, our committee is very
interested in doing its due diligence here, just as you are at
the commission. You know we have a lot of questions that we
have given you to work on, and again, in my opening questions
there are some we would really appreciate getting the answers
to before the five commissioners are here in a little over 10
days. So we appreciate that. And we will continue to go back
and forth with you on the data requests that the committee has
had. And again, thank you for the work you do down there, and
thank you for participating in our hearing.
And with that, we stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:53 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Today we are starting down the road to reauthorize the
Federal Communications Commission--a task not undertaken since
the first Bush administration. We are starting this process
with a relatively simple, but important step--an examination of
the FCC's Fiscal Year 2016 Budget Request. We have had numerous
concerns about the commission's processes and recent actions--
leading to aggressive oversight of the FCC. Today's examination
of the agency's budget request will help bring openness and
transparency to the nuts and bolts of how the agency executes
its mission and where the commission appears to be headed.
The communications ecosystem that the agency oversees today
is one that could not have been fully envisioned in 1990. As we
look at reauthorization, we must ensure that the FCC is
responsive to the marketplace and encourages innovation rather
than stand in the way. Demonstrating the need for
modernization, the commission majority last week abandoned
years of bipartisan light-touch regulation of the Internet in
favor of heavy-handed, intrusive government regulation.
On its face, the budget request suggests much more of the
same from the FCC, with one caveat. If approved, the agency's
funding will exceed the half billion dollar mark for the first
time. And it proposes to reach these heights by expanding its
funding sources beyond regulatory fee collections and spectrum
auction proceeds to include money taken directly from the
Universal Service Fund. This is troubling. The USF is funded
directly by consumers of telecommunications services. On its
face, it appears that the agency's solution to the pressing
need for fiscal discipline is simply to take money out of
consumers' pockets. And while Congress has approved a transfer
of funds from the USF in the past, it approved that funding for
the FCC's Office of Inspector General and expressly for audits
and investigations to protect the fund against waste, fraud,
and abuse. In contrast, it appears the FCC intends this funding
to pay for the costs of performing part of its core mission--
implementing and administering the Universal Service Fund.
There are, as we have come to expect, other proposed
increases in the commission's request--more money for IT
modernization and $51 million for the agency's new offices.
Collectively they represent a request for an $84 million
increase in funding for the agency. As I have noted before, it
is a critical part of this committee's work to foster a
smaller, more nimble government for the innovation age. I look
forward to the examination of these proposed increases and
understanding of how the FCC's request furthers this goal.

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
