- IMPROVING THE MEDICAID PROGRAM FOR BENEFICIARIES

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

IMPROVING THE MEDICAID PROGRAM FOR BENEFICIARIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 18, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-76

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

___________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
98-433                      WASHINGTON : 2016

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                     Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          KATHY CASTOR, Florida
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina         Massachusetts
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TONY CARDENAS, California
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
CHRIS COLLINS, New York                  officio)
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Gene Green, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     3
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     4
Hon. Renee L. Ellmers, a Representative in Congress from the
State of North Carolina, prepared statement....................    46

Witnesses

Michael Boyle, M.D., Vice President of Therapeutics Development,
The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     9
Answers to submitted questions...............................    57
Tim Clontz, Senior Vice President for Health Services, Cone
Health.........................................................    15
Prepared statement...........................................    17
Answers to submitted questions...............................    60
Rick Courtney, President, Special Needs Alliance.................    23
Prepared statement...........................................    25
Answers to submitted questions...............................    63

Submitted Material

Statement of House Coalition, submitted by Mr. Lance.............    47
Statement of the National Academy of Elder Law Attorneys,
submitted by Mr. Pitts.........................................    50
Statement of collection of organizations in support of H.R. 670,
submitted by Mr. Pitts.........................................    53
Statement of Representative G.T. Thompson of Pennsylvania,
submitted by Mr. Pitts.........................................    55

IMPROVING THE MEDICAID PROGRAM FOR BENEFICIARIES

----------

FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 18, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:01 a.m., in
room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joseph R. Pitts
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Pitts, Guthrie, Shimkus, Lance,
Griffith, Bilirakis, Long, Ellmers, Bucshon, Brooks, Collins,
Green, Butterfield, Schrader, Kennedy, and Pallone (ex
officio).
Staff Present: Clay Alspach, Chief Counsel, Health; Gary
Andres, Staff Director; Leighton Brown, Press Assistant; Noelle
Clemente, Press Secretary; Graham Pittman, Legislative Clerk;
Michelle Rosenberg, GAO Detailee, Health; Chris Sarley, Policy
Coordinator, Environment & Economy; Josh Trent, Professional
Staff Member, Health; Christine Brennan, Minority Press
Secretary; Jeff Carroll, Minority Staff Director; Tiffany
Guarascio, Minority Deputy Staff Director and Chief Health
Advisor; and Samantha Satchell, Minority Policy Analyst.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Pitts. The subcommittee will come to order. The chair
will recognize himself for an opening statement.
Today, Medicaid is the world's largest health coverage
program. Medicaid plays an important role in our healthcare
system, providing access to needed medical services and long-
term care for some of our Nation's most vulnerable patients.
The Congressional Budget Office estimates that Federal
Medicaid expenditures will grow from $343 billion this year to
$576 billion in 2025. At the same time, state expenditures have
grown significantly, accounting for more than 25 percent of
state spending for fiscal year 2014.
Given the scope of the program and its impact on millions
of Americans' lives, Congress and states have a responsibility
to ensure that the program is modernized to better serve some
of our Nation's neediest citizens.
Congress can make incremental improvements to this 50-year-
old system in a way that respects taxpayers, empowers patients,
and promotes more holistic, patient-centered care. That is why
I am so pleased today to be discussing four bipartisan bills
that will help strengthen a patient's role in their own care
and reduce barriers to accessing health care.
First, the Ensuring Access to Clinical Trials Act of 2015
would permanently allow individuals with rare diseases, who
participate in clinical trials, to continue to be able to
receive up to $2,000 in compensation for participating in
clinical trials without that compensation counting towards
their income eligibility limits for SSI or Medicaid.
Second, Representatives Bilirakis, Lance, and several other
colleagues have introduced H.R. 3243, which would authorize the
HHS Secretary to waive certain Medicaid requirements in regards
to the PACE program. PACE--the Program of All-Inclusive Care
for the Elderly--is an integrated care program that provides
comprehensive long-term services and supports to individuals
age 55 and older who require an institutional level of care,
many of whom are dually eligible for both Medicare and
Medicaid.
The PACE model is limited to those age 55 and older who
meet State-specified criteria for needing a nursing home level
of care, but other targeted populations could benefit from the
successes of the comprehensive PACE model.
Next, Ranking Member Pallone and G.T. Thompson have
introduced a bipartisan bill that would extend the special
needs trust exception to allow nonelderly individuals with
disabilities to establish a special needs trust on their own
behalf. If enacted, a special needs trust established by a
nonelderly, disabled individual would no longer be considered
an asset in determining that individual's eligibility for
Medicaid.
Finally, Representative Collins will be introducing the
Medicaid Directory of Caregivers Act, or the Medicaid DOC Act.
This commonsense proposal would require state Medicaid programs
to provide patients in their fee-for-service Medicaid program
with a directory of healthcare providers participating in
Medicaid.
Medicaid patients in managed care have an identified
network of providers. However, too often in fee for service
Medicaid patients struggle to find a doctor who will accept
Medicaid. And this bill would help solve that problem and
effectively reduce a Medicaid patient's barriers to care by
cutting down on the time and energy they have to expend to find
a doctor to provide care.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Joseph R. Pitts

The Subcommittee will come to order.
The Chairman will recognize himself for an opening
statement.
Today, Medicaid is the world's largest health coverage
program. Medicaid plays a critical role in our health care
system, providing access to needed medical services and long-
term care for some of our nation's most vulnerable patients.
The Congressional Budget Office estimates that federal
Medicaid expenditures will grow from $343 billion this year to
$576 billion in 2025. At the same time, state expenditures have
grown significantly, today accounting for more than 25% of
state spending in FY 2014.
Given rising federal costs, Congress has a responsibility
to ensure that proper incentives are put in place to increase
the accountability inclusiveness of Medicaid, while maintaining
quality for our nation's neediest citizens.
To that end, the clarification of eligibility limits and
thresholds on Medicaid will serve to bring vulnerable
populations into the program, while confirmingreassuring
existing enrollees as to their eligibility status.
As a result, the creation of certainty in the Medicaid
system will allow us to take another step towards providing
meaningful access to care, while protecting taxpayer
investments and ensuring that care is provided for the truly
needy.
That's why I'm so pleased today to be discussing several
bipartisan bills that will help boost the accessibility and
transparency of the Medicaid program.
First, a bill to be introduced by Reps. Doggett (TX),
McGovern (MA), and Marino (PA) would permanently allow
individuals with rare diseases who participate in clinical
trials to exempt up to $2,000 in compensation for services
rendered from their Medicaid eligibility.
Second, Representatives Bilirakis (FL), Lance (NJ), and
several other colleagues have introduced H.R. 3243, which would
authorize the HHS Secretary to waive certain Medicaid
requirements in regards to the PACE program.
Next, Ranking Member Pallone (NJ) and Rep. GT Thompson (PA)
have introduced a bipartisan bill that would allow for a
special needs trust exception to extend to non-elderly,
disabled individuals for purposes of Medicaid calculation.
Finally, Representative Collins (NY) will be introducing
the Medicaid Directory of Caregivers Act, a bill that would
require State Medicaid programs to increase patient
accessibility through the publication of an electronic list of
Medicaid providers.
It is my hope that through the steps currently taken in
these bills, as well as any productive additions that may occur
henceforth, this committee can come together to take meaningful
steps towards Medicaid certainty, transparency, and
accountability.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today, and I
yield to --------------.

Mr. Pitts. I look forward to hearing from our witnesses
today. Is anyone seeking time on our side?
If not, I yield back, and at this point I recognize the
ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr. Green, 5 minutes for
his opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GENE GREEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Green. Good morning. And thank each of you for being
here this morning.
We are here to examine four bipartisan bills, each of which
makes key improvements in the Medicaid program. I thank the
chairman for holding this hearing. It is both an opportunity to
advance these worthy legislative proposals, but also build on
our committee's record of bipartisan success for this Congress.
As we know, nearly 1 in 10 Americans are impacted by a rare
disease. The Ensuring Access to Clinical Trials Act, introduced
by Representative Lloyd Doggett, allows patients with rare
diseases to participate in and benefit from clinical trials
without risk of losing critical benefits. The bill makes
permanent the Improving Access to Clinical Trials Act, a law
enacted in 2010 that permits patients with rare diseases to
receive compensation for participating in clinical trials
without that compensation counting towards their income
eligibility limits for SSI or Medicaid. This is scheduled to
sunset on October 5, so this is timely legislation. Without
extending or making IACT permanent, people with rare diseases
would be discouraged from participating in clinical trials. At
a time when there is such a great need to develop new
therapies, promoting access to clinical trials for patients in
need of treatments is something we should all support.
H.R. 670, the Special Needs Trust Fairness Act, was
introduced by Ranking Member Frank Pallone and Representative
Glenn Thompson. This important legislation will correct an
error in the law that prevents capable individuals with
disabilities from creating their own special needs trust.
People with disabilities often need help covering the high
cost of long-term services and support. Federal law allows
individuals to use special needs trusts to retain some assets
for the purpose of supplementing expenses that are not covered
by public assistance programs. Unfortunately, an oversight in
current law makes it incredibly difficult for an individual
with disabilities to set up a special needs trust on their own.
This has the impact or effect of deeming all individuals with
disabilities incapable of handling their own affairs, which is
blatantly false and discriminatory.
The Special Needs Trust Fairness Act will correct this
injustice. I want to thank our ranking member for his long
history of leadership on this issue.
The Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly, or PACE,
is a community-based, long-term service and support program
designed to provide quality integrated care for some of our
Nation's most vulnerable citizens. Under this proven care model
patients who are eligible for nursing homes are able to remain
in their homes and receive medical support services through the
adult daycare centers. The PACE Innovation Act of 2015 will
allow the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, CMS, to
pilot the PACE care model with new populations where high-
quality, fully integrated care is likely to be effective.
Finally, the Medicaid Directory of Caregivers Act is a
draft proposal that responds to recent reports which
highlighted challenges patients have with provider directories
in their health systems. Too often it is difficult for patients
to see if a doctor is affiliated with their health plan and
providers are uncertain if they have been included in a newly
established insurance network.
Confusing or misleading provider directories have led to a
rise in surprise billing where a patient faces unexpected,
costly out-of-network medical bills. This timely draft
legislation requires States that participate in fee-for-service
Medicaid to publish a provider directory on a regular basis.
I look forward to working with my colleagues to advance all
these legislation. I look forward to working with my colleagues
on the committee to further strengthen Medicaid programs in key
areas and build on past success. Each of these bills is the
product of thoughtful, bipartisan consideration and work. And I
want to thank our witnesses for being here today and look
forward to discussion on the legislation proposals.
And I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman, and now I
recognize the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Pallone, 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Obviously, we have four pieces of legislation in the
Medicaid program that are having a legislative hearing today,
and three of the bills have both bipartisan and bicameral
support and have already passed the Senate.
In particular, one of the bills under consideration, the
Special Needs Trust Fairness Act of 2015, would correct an
unfair anomaly in Federal Medicaid law to allow nonelderly
individuals with disabilities to establish a special needs
trust on their own behalf, and this legislation is a proposal
that I have sponsored for many years. I am happy to see this
commonsense policy moving forward.
There is no reason why we should prevent competent
individuals from establishing their own special needs trust,
and it is time we fix this unintended problem that undermines
the rights of those with disabilities.
I am also pleased to see a proposal with wide bipartisan
support to promote innovation in the PACE program. The Program
of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly, or PACE, is an
integrated care program that provides comprehensive long-term
services and supports to individuals age 55 and older who
require an institutional level of care, many of whom are
eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid and of course are known
as dual-eligible beneficiaries.
This legislation would allow PACE programs to waive certain
requirements, like expanding to the under-55 population, that
limit the ability of this successful program to grow. And I
recently learned that a new PACE program is in my home district
and I look forward to supporting the continued success of the
program.
I also look forward to hearing testimony regarding H.R.
209, the Ensuring Access to Clinical Trials Act, a bill with 49
bipartisan cosponsors and one that should be of considerable
interest to this committee given its rare disease focus.
This legislation would permanently remove the sunset clause
that was in the original Improving Clinical Trials Act that was
signed into law in 2009. It also builds on a 2014 GAO report
finding that clinical trial compensation for travel to a rare
disease trial location and time away from work actually acts as
a deterrent for vulnerable SSI and Medicaid beneficiaries who
are fearful of losing eligibility for their benefits when they
need them most.
The legislation would make certain that beneficiaries can
disregard up to $2,000 of compensation per year that an
individual may receive for participation in a clinical trial
investigating a rare disease.
And finally we have a draft bill on the agenda that I would
like to have more time to review, but that shows great promise
as a bipartisan initiative to improve access to care in
Medicaid. The draft legislation proposed would require states
that participate in fee-for-service Medicaid to publish up-to-
date provider directories. And I want to ensure that we go
about drafting such a requirement in a way that is streamlined
with managed care provider directory requirements in Medicaid,
but I feel certain that we will all share the same goal with
this legislation.
Let me thank you, Mr. Chairman and our ranking member, Mr.
Green, for holding the hearing on these legislative initiatives
in Medicaid with broad bipartisan support from our committee
members and look forward as we move these bills in the
subcommittee and full committee. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
As usual, all the written opening statements of the members
will be made a part of the record.
That concludes the opening statements of the members.
I would like to thank our panel, the witnesses, for coming
today. I will introduce them in the order that they present
their testimony.
And you will each be given 5 minutes to summarize your
testimony. Your written testimony will be made a part of the
record.
First of all, we have Dr. Michael Boyle, vice president of
therapeutics development, the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.
Welcome.
Then Mr. Tim Clontz, senior vice president for health
services, Cone Health.
Welcome.
And Mr. Rick Courtney, president, Special Needs Alliance.
Thank you all for coming. And we will begin with Dr. Boyle.
You are recognized for 5 minutes for your summary.

STATEMENTS OF MICHAEL BOYLE, M.D., VICE PRESIDENT OF
THERAPEUTICS DEVELOPMENT, THE CYSTIC FIBROSIS FOUNDATION; TIM
CLONTZ, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT FOR HEALTH SERVICES, CONE HEALTH;
AND RICK COURTNEY, PRESIDENT, SPECIAL NEEDS ALLIANCE

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL BOYLE

Dr. Boyle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My name is Dr. Mike Boyle. I am a professor of medicine
from Johns Hopkins, where I have run the Adult Cystic Fibrosis
Program for the last 15 years, and I am vice president at the
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, where I oversee clinical trials.
And on behalf of the CF Foundation and representing the 30,000
people with cystic fibrosis in the United States, I am really
grateful for this opportunity to be able to testify in support
of H.R. 209, the Ensuring Access to Clinical Trials Act. We are
particularly grateful to Health Subcommittee Chairman Pitts,
Ranking Member Green, full committee Chairman Upton, and
Ranking Member Pallone, the bill's sponsor Congressman Doggett,
and all of those who are working to pass this very important
legislation.
Remember, cystic fibrosis is a rare genetic disease that
primarily affects the lung. It causes the body to produce large
amounts of thick mucus that congest the lungs and leads to
life-threatening infections and serious digestive
complications. In the 1950s, few children with CF lived to
attend elementary school. But since then, tremendous progress
and understanding and treatment of CF has led to dramatic
improvements in length and quality of life for those with CF so
that many people with CF now can expect to live into their
thirties, forties, and beyond.
As a physician, professor, and clinical investigator at
Johns Hopkins I have seen the devastating impact of this
disease and the importance of clinical research in developing
treatments that can change the lives of individuals with CF, I
am privileged to have played a role in several pivotal trials.
It is for this reason I am here today to ask that the Ensuring
Access to Clinical Trials Act be passed without delay.
As you know, the Ensuring Access to Clinical Trials Act of
2015 eliminates the 5-year sunset clause from our current laws,
the Improving Access to Clinical Trials Act, or IACT. It was
signed into law in 2010, and IACT allows people with rare
diseases to receive up to $2,000 annually in compensation for
participating in clinical trials without that compensation
counting toward their income eligibility limits for SSI and
Medicaid. But unless Congress acts, this critical law will
expire on October 5 of this year. The Senate has already passed
identical legislation by unanimous consent, and we urge similar
swift consideration of this bill in the House.
The particular individual that comes to mind when I think
of the Ensuring Access to Clinical Trials Act is a young man
with cystic fibrosis by the name of Michael that I was caring
for in 2009 prior to the original passage of this law. Mike had
significant lung disease from CF, but for many years had made
time to participate in clinical trials to help speed the
development of desperately needed new therapies.
Yet, in 2009, when a trial of a very promising new therapy
called ivacaftor started and was looking for CF clinical trial
participants, Mike didn't participate, not because he didn't
want to--in fact, he desperately wanted to enroll in the trial
of a drug which was later found to be the most effective drug
that has ever been developed for his type of CF--but because he
had evaluated his finances and was afraid that the modest
payment of approximately $750 associated with participation in
the trial would put his Medicaid and SSI support, on which he
was completely reliant, in jeopardy. He did not enroll. Mike
even volunteered to participate in the trial without payment,
but this is not allowed by most hospital review boards for the
vast majority of clinical trials, including this one.
Approximately 4 months after deciding not to enroll because
of financial concerns, Mike died unexpectedly from
complications of CF. And to this day I still wonder if his
outcome may have been different had he enrolled.
Rare disease researchers face a real challenge in
recruiting participants to test new medications. Securing an
adequate number of clinical trial participants is essential to
testing new therapies, so we can't let any obstacles stand in
the way of being able to let these patients enroll.
If the Improving Access to Clinical Trials Act were allowed
to expire and this barrier were reinstated, it would not only
affect future trial enrollment, it could cause those with rare
diseases who are currently participating in clinical trials to
drop out of these trials for fear of losing benefits. This will
put vital clinical research at risk at a time when the medical
needs of many people with rare diseases are already not being
met.
The advent of precision medicine has allowed specific
medications to be developed which target the specific genetic
makeup of patients. Two of these therapies are now available in
CF, but they only treat a subset of patients. We need to have
availability of patients for additional trials to treat the
other half of these patients.
The mission of the CF Foundation is to find a cure for all
people with CF, including those with the rarest CF mutations.
Even then, there might be only a handful of people with those
mutations who can enroll in these trials. In order to achieve
this goal, we must ensure that nothing stands in the way of
carrying this out and developing these breakthrough
medications. All of these things make the support of this act
essential.
Again, I am deeply grateful to the committee for this
opportunity to offer testimony in favor of the Ensuring Access
to Clinical Trials Act and I ask for your support of it. The
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation stands ready to work with this
committee and congressional leadership to ensure passage of
this bill to enable those with rare diseases to access life-
sustaining treatments and enjoy the best health and quality of
life possible. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Boyle follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
I now recognize Mr. Clontz for 5 minutes for your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF TIM CLONTZ

Mr. Clontz. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Green, and members
of the subcommittee, thank you for holding this hearing.
My name is Tim Clontz, and I am senior vice president at
Cone Health, a large regional health system in North Carolina
and a joint venture partner in three PACE programs. It is my
distinct privilege to testify on behalf of the National PACE
Association in support of a PACE Innovation Act 2015.
Programs of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly, or PACE
programs, serve some of our most frail and most vulnerable
populations, those needing nursing home level of care. By
integrating medical care and community-based, long-term
services and supports, PACE allows seniors to get the care they
need at home and with the love and support of their family
members and friends.
PACE is a proven high-quality program. Studies show that
PACE enrollees live longer, with fewer hospitalizations, and
live at home longer than those receiving care through other
programs.
Unfortunately, many individuals cannot access the PACE
benefit because of arbitrary age restrictions or because they
are not yet quite sick enough to qualify. These limitations
have real consequences for real people, their families, and for
the delivery system.
Take, for example Jim G., a 53-year-old Virginia resident
with early onset Alzheimer's disease. He lived at home with his
wife Karen and school-aged children. Jim tried to enroll in
PACE but was unable to because he was not old enough.
Initially, Jim stayed at home alone during the day where he
was isolated and struggled with activities of daily living,
such as personal grooming, household chores, and child care. As
his memory deteriorated, so did his health. Jim was
hospitalized in 2014 for a lung infection caused by silent
aspiration, which occurs when the swallowing function is
weakened by Alzheimer's.
His wife Karen struggled to care for Jim and her school-
aged children and hold down a full-time job, but eventually had
to quit her job for Jim. Unfortunately, she quickly discovered
that his needs were more than she could handle, and following a
psychotic break and a week in a psychiatric facility, Jim was
permanently placed in a memory care unit near their home.
To add to her stress, Karen had to crowd source to raise
money for his care as this particular facility was not covered
by Jim's VA benefits. This is no way to treat a 23-year
veteran.
This heartbreaking situation might have been avoided had
Jim been able to enroll in PACE. He could have received daytime
support that would allow him to continue to live at home with
his family. He could have received therapies to help him stay
physically strong and primary care to help avoid the silent
aspiration and other complications.
PACE has significant experience with dementia and might
have prevented or managed his psychiatric deterioration. And
Karen and her family would have received much needed respite
services, emotional and social support, and peace of mind.
The PACE Innovation Act of 2015 would help Jim and many
others like him by allowing PACE to serve younger individuals
with disabilities, at-risk populations, and others who would
benefit from the fully integrated services offer by PACE.
This legislation is revenue neutral, bipartisan, and has
been endorsed by many national organizations. Simply put,
helping people like Jim get the care they need at home with the
love and support of their family and friends makes sense.
Integrating medical care and community-based, long-term
services and supports also makes sense.
These are two truths that the PACE program has known and
applied for over 25 years for people age 55 and older who need
a level of care comparable to a nursing home but who wish to
continue their lives at home. It is time to build on this
foundation and extend this effective delivery system to
additional people through a pilot program.
The PACE Innovation Act does this. Through this act, the
PACE model can be adapted to serve people under the age of 55
and people at risk of needing nursing home level of care.
People like a man or a woman with early onset Alzheimer's or a
younger person with physical disabilities or a person with an
intellectual or a developmental disability deserve the same
options.
While the differences in each of these individual needs may
be significant, the shared challenge of accessing effective,
integrated, and coordinated medical and long-term services and
supports is compelling. We can build a more effective delivery
and financing systems to serve these vulnerable populations.
With your support, the PACE Innovation Act and the pilot
programs can help show the way.
Thank you for the opportunity to address the committee on
these vital matters.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Clontz follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
And I now recognize Mr. Courtney 5 minutes for your
summary.

STATEMENT OF RICK COURTNEY

Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Chairman Pitts and Ranking Member
Mr. Green and members of the subcommittee. I am glad to come to
Washington and testify in strong support of the Special Needs
Trust Fairness Act, H.R. 670, introduced by Representative
Glenn Thompson and committee Ranking Member Frank Pallone.
Their leadership on this has been steadfast and outstanding,
and we appreciate that.
I am honored to serve as president of the Special Needs
Alliance, a nationwide organization of special needs planning
attorneys. And I am also a member and former member of the
board of directors of the National Academy of Elder Law
Attorneys. Both organizations devote substantial resources to
serving the needs of the special needs and disability community
and strongly support the Special Needs Trust Fairness Act.
In 1979, I became the father of twin daughters. My wife and
I love both our daughters and we are proud parents, but they
have had very different paths. Melissa was in gifted and
talented education through secondary school and college, and is
now the young wife and mother of two elementary school-age
boys. Melanie, her twin sister, was genetically the same, but
different. She has cerebral palsy and learning disabilities.
She is a wheelchair user. But through her determination and
hard work, she got through high school and community college
and obtained an associate of arts degree in 3 \1/2\ years. She
found a job with our state art chapter after college. She was
the coordinator of a project called My Voice, My Choice,
teaching young adults with developmental disabilities self-
advocacy skills.
Suffice it to say she has taught us a lot too. She has
never wanted help with things she could capably do, and she has
never easily accepted that she can't do something because she
is physically disabled. She does, however, need and is
receiving services through a Medicaid waiver program in our
State. The cost of attendant care and medical services is high
and she must rely, like many people with disabilities, on
essential programs like Medicaid.
For now, my wife and I are here to be supportive of
Melanie, but it won't always be so, and her needs my grow as
she gets older. If she were to receive some money through an
inheritance or an insurance settlement, she would lose her
Medicaid waiver benefits that pay her attendant for a few hours
a day to help her with those activities of daily living she
requires help with.
In order to keep those benefits, she would be required to
put those assets into a special needs trust, also known as a
supplemental benefits trust or a (d)(4)(A) trust. Under the
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993, funds held in these
trusts are not counted as assets or resources for a person's
SSI or Medicaid eligibility determination, and the trust
provides a way to provide funds for other life essentials that
are not covered by Medicaid, such as clothing, furniture,
telephone, or computer access.
Unfortunately, that law included a drafting oversight that
penalizes physically disabled, mentally capable adults in the
creation of these trusts. By requiring that such trusts can
only be established by that individual's parent, grandparent,
legal guardian, or a court, mentally capable adults are forced
to rely on others to do this for them. The effect of current
law is they are treated as though they were mentally incapable
or mentally incompetent and cannot legally act for themselves.
So Melanie would not be allowed to create a special needs
trust for herself, and believe me, she would question why. She
would not understand why, unlike her sister, she can't
establish a trust to hold funds that come to her. She would
question why, if her mother and father were deceased, she would
have to hire a lawyer to go ask a judge to create a trust for
her, which, unfortunately, some courts have been unwilling to
do.
In addition to being demeaning to the individual, this
barrier places an enormous burden on already strained court
resources. The individual may be forced into an imposed
guardianship and even a loss of Medicaid or SSI benefits.
The barrier in the law creates an equality and fairness
issue. One should have the right to contract if one has the
mental capacity to do so. We believe it was a legislative
drafting oversight that caused the problem and not the intent
of Congress to deny this basic right to mentally capable adults
with disabilities.
The Special Needs Trust Fairness Act would fix this problem
with two words. By simply introducing the words ``the
individual'' into the current statute that describes who can
create a special needs trust, it would permit Melanie and other
mentally capable adults with disabilities to create such
trusts.
On behalf of Melanie and my family and so many other
clients that we have worked with, I thank you for the
opportunity to testify here before you today and look forward
to taking any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Courtney follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
We will begin the questioning. I will recognize myself 5
minutes for that purpose.
Dr. Boyle, in your experience as a researcher, how has the
Improving Access to Clinical Trials Act affected recruitment
for clinical trials since it was implemented in April of 2011?
Dr. Boyle. Well, the easy answer to that is it has allowed
an increasing number of patients to be able to participate that
otherwise either wouldn't have been able to or wouldn't have
because of fear of exceeding their income limits. We actually
keep pretty close track of this in terms of talking with
research coordinators around the country, and the overwhelming
feedback has been that this has removed a barrier which has
allowed patients who otherwise, like I said, would have been
hesitant to participate.
The reason this is particularly important is obviously not
just for the individual, but for actually advancing science. As
we look at some of this precision medicine and we need small,
specific populations of patients to study that have specific
genotypes, sometimes a few patients can make a difference. And
so it has been helpful extremely helpful both for the patients,
but also for advancing the science.
Mr. Pitts. Now, you mentioned in your written testimony,
Dr. Boyle, that many in the cystic fibrosis community consider
this the year of the clinical trial, with 18 clinical trials
underway this year. Can you speak to what is on the horizon in
cystic fibrosis research and how the Ensuring Access to
Clinical Trials Act might play a role?
Dr. Boyle. Well, thank you for that question. In some ways
it follows onto that previous question where we have been--it
is a great success story, right? We have seen some of this
recently. It featured President Obama in the State of the
Union, talking about precision medicine, in which we are
starting to actually develop medications which treat different
types of cystic fibrosis based on their underlying genotype,
their genetic characteristics.
Again, this gets a little hard because you can't just group
everybody together. And so one of the exciting things in CF has
been these new transformative medicines that just don't treat
the symptoms, that just don't treat cough or mucus, but
actually treat the underlying cause. So that is a big thing. At
the same time, we have other trials that are treating the
ongoing infection, the ongoing inflammation, and nutritional
problems.
So it is the year of the clinical trial. We are going to
have a talk called that in our upcoming national meetings, but
because it is such an exciting time for advances in CF.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you.
Mr. Clontz, I am happy that Pennsylvania leads the country
in the number of PACE programs, with 19 programs serving
individuals throughout the State. So I think that PACE
expansion is a great idea. But serving younger individuals with
disabilities who are still in the prime of their lives would
likely be different than serving older adults who are in the
twilight of their lives. Would PACE be able to adapt to serve
these new populations? Would younger people be served alongside
older adults? How would it all work?
Mr. Clontz. It is important to note that the legislation
authorizes CMS to do a demonstration project to determine how
best to serve younger individuals through PACE. So we can test
a couple of different approaches to figure out what will work
best for new populations.
One of the programs in Philadelphia is interested in
exclusively serving individuals with physical disabilities.
They want to adhere to the PACE model in some ways, using the
interdisciplinary team and capitated financing, but incorporate
other services and benefits that are unique to the needs of the
individuals with spinal cord or cerebral palsy or other issues.
So in that case it would be a very unique and distinct program.
In other areas we will have to be more creative. For
instance, in remote rural counties there might not be enough
potential participants to warrant the construction of a program
exclusive to these individuals. In that case, an existing PACE
program could leverage its existing care team and resources to
provide primary care and therapy services while partnering with
other organizations to provide home-based services and
supports, employment services, and other services required by a
younger population.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you.
Mr. Courtney, we will start with you on this, but any of
you can jump in here. Do you have any additional ideas, other
than the ones presented to us in these bills today, about
approaches that would improve Medicaid patients' healthcare
outcomes, curb program outlays, and possibly be bipartisan. I
think today's hearing and last week's hearing on other Medicaid
bills demonstrate this committee is ready to work together to
make some improvements to the program. Would you please
comment?
Mr. Courtney. I have looked at the testimony of both the
gentlemen who have testified today and believe that their
programs, what they are asking for, is going to help a lot of
people and benefit the Medicaid program. I don't know that I am
aware of any additional initiatives to take at this point.
Mr. Pitts. Mr. Clontz or Dr. Boyle, do you want to continue
to add?
Dr. Boyle.
Dr. Boyle. The answer is, I am a little afraid to shoot
from the hip on this, but I would love to be able to think
about this with our team and to be able to submit further to
you.
Mr. Pitts. OK. We will send it to you in writing. You can
respond in writing.
My time has expired. The chair recognizes the ranking
member, Mr. Green, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am pleased with this
committee's continuing commitment to advancement in medical
science. Although we passed the 21st Century Cures, our work is
not complete. I believe H.R. 209 highlights another area in
which the committee must work research on rare diseases.
Mr. Boyle, what makes clinical trials for rare diseases
like cystic fibrosis more difficult than a common disorder like
blood pressure?
Dr. Boyle. It is all about the numbers. There are only
30,000 individuals with cystic fibrosis in the United States.
Most clinical trials, particularly for early development of
drugs, require adults, so that is about half that number. Then
you splitting down into specific characteristics of those
patients that you want to study. There are certain types of
infections, there are certain types of genetics. So those pools
get smaller.
At the same time, we are making sort of amazing advances.
It is really held up as a disease that is seeing some of the
most exciting advances in medicine recently. So the biggest
difference in this for rare disease population is we need those
numbers because we don't have large numbers like hypertension
or COPD, other diseases.
Mr. Green. The GAO report from last year found that the
average amount of compensation for rare disease clinical trials
is $568. Is it fair to say that when you factor in travel, time
off of work, and other expenses, that most patients afflicted
by rare diseases may in fact lose money in order to participate
in a clinical trial? And in a smaller group, I know it is
difficult. I am happy that we are able to shed the spotlight on
the important issues, and 209 is a good bipartisan piece of
legislation and hopefully we will pass it on.
H.R. 670. Mr. Courtney, your biography shows that you were
the first attorney ever in the State of Mississippi to receive
the designation of certified elder lawyer attorney. In almost
40 years of providing legal advice for elderly and disabled
there are probably very few individuals in the country as much
experience with you as you need in special needs trust.
Having practiced probate law in Texas before I got elected
to Congress, there is obviously a need. Can you recall any
particular client where passage of this law would have made a
notable difference in their health and livelihood?
Mr. Courtney. Yes, sir, we have had several. There was a
young woman who was injured and she relied on Medicaid waiver
services to provide care. And she received a settlement, and
she had to do a special needs trust, but she had no parent or
grandparent living, she had no legal guardian because she was
mentally capable. She had to resort to a court. And there were
some problems with the court that she would have to go to,
understanding that they had to step in and create the trust. So
it caused delays for her and also a temporary loss of benefits
because of the delays of getting to court to establish a trust.
We don't feel it was Congress' intent in the initial statute to
put that burden on her or on the court.
Mr. Green. When I was practicing law I found out, and it
wasn't through law school, but it was practice, that in Texas
we have what I think was called a Miller trust, that a senior,
Alzheimer's, debilitating illness would sign that trust and
then they would be eligible for Medicaid because they would put
whatever income they had and that would be assumed by the
state. Is that something that is based on state to state?
And, frankly, it was hard to get that information. The
state agency did not share it with with questions. But thank
goodness I had a great law professor who explained it to me. Is
that common in other states to have something like that?
Mr. Courtney. The Miller trust that you refer to is in
subsection (b) of the statute that we are talking about. H.R.
670 seeks to amend subsection (a), which is the individual
special needs trust that would hold resources or funds,
property, and not be counted as assets for Medicaid
eligibility.
The Miller trust is one in which someone who needs nursing
home care or some institutional level of care for Medicaid can
place income, and the income can go into the Miller trust. But
that is a separate type trust, and we are not seeking to any
revision of that statute.
Mr. Green. OK. Thank you.
PACE innovation program remains a successful asset in our
community since 1971. PACE advocates are proud to stand behind
over 100 programs that help. Mr. Clontz, although PACE has
consistently grown over the years, unfortunately, it is not
available to all patients who wish to enroll. What is the
existing barriers preventing the program from spreading
further?
Mr. Clontz. We would love to see more PACE programs as
well. There are a couple of factors that really affect PACE
growth and NPA has identified several regulatory and process
changes that would assist.
First, PACE is a very capital intensive program. Programs
must build a day center and hire their full interdisciplinary
team many months before opening. This investment can run up to
$4 million to $6 million prior to opening, all to serve 150 or
so individuals. If CMS would allow programs to leverage
existing community resources by contracting with adult day
centers and family physicians, it would allow us to grow more
efficiently.
Additionally, the PACE application process is lengthy, time
consuming, and bureaucratic. The PACE application typically is
about the size of a phone book. But if CMS was to move to a
more attestation-based model where programs could assure they
meet all of the major program requirements it would expedite
the process.
Finally, CMS needs to dedicate staff resources to support
PACE management and growth. PACE responsibilities are split
across multiple divisions with CMS and we need a dedicated
staff for PACE.
As for Houston, there is a program under development in
Houston that is working with the state on an application, yet
it has struggled to align PACE with managed care in the state.
This is a perfect example of how better technical assistance
and leadership from CMS would be helpful.
Mr. Green. If you could get me that group in Houston, be
glad to work with them.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman.
And I now recognize the vice chair of the subcommittee, Mr.
Guthrie, 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you.
My first is for Dr. Boyle. In this position, when I was in
the state legislature, there are a lot of families that come to
advocate, and we get to know them and get to know families,
particularly personally a lot of times. And there were a couple
of people that I knew that had cystic fibrosis and they said
that our child is probably going to live to be in their late
twenties, maybe thirty. I think one lived to be late twenties,
one early thirties, so they are no longer with us.
And yesterday I actually was in a discussion with someone
about the new innovations, a pharmaceutical that has been
approved, and so there is a lot of promise.
And we spent a lot of time in this committee this year and
bipartisan, unanimously passed the 21st Century Cures Act, and
trying to get cures to the market quicker. And then how will
the Ensuring Access to Clinical Trials Act help advance the
discovery, development, and delivery of cures?
Dr. Boyle. Well, I think in a couple ways. Really the way
that we make progress at the end of the day is by scientific
clinical trials. Right? So we have a lot of good ideas, and
actually the 21st Century Act and those things have opened up
some possibilities for doing new testing.
But the biggest thing is we need access to patients. We
have to partner with them to test these therapies to figure out
if they are going to really make a difference. And so we can
test in dishes with cells, we can do all kinds of tests in the
lab, but at the end of the day, all of these trials have to go
through patients.
And so this act enables us to be able to partner with
patients and make sure that some of the newest, most needy
patients--remember, over a third of our patients are on
Medicaid with cystic fibrosis. And so if those patients have a
barrier to participate, we have lost two things: one, the
ability to be able to make those advances, but also in some
ways some of the people who are most needy are missing out.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you very much.
And, Mr. Courtney, I certainly appreciate your testimony.
Mrs. Eisenhower was always asked, always answered, they said:
``You must be proud of your son.'' And she would always say:
``Which one?'' So it sounds like you are very proud of both of
your daughters. But I can tell you when we were talking about
Melanie and said if she was told she wasn't able to do
something, I can see a little pride, and I guess she has a
little fight in her. So I could just see that in your face. I
don't know if the people back behind there can see it in your
face. So that is great that you are advocating.
I just want to ask you about the difference between the
special needs trusts. Of course there are pool trusts, and we
created ABLE. As a matter of fact, I don't know if it is your
Representative, but a Representative from Mississippi was real
involved, Greg Harper, in the ABLE accounts. And could you
explain the difference in those for the populations for which
they are created?
Mr. Courtney. We want to thank Congress for passing the
ABLE Act earlier this year, because it is a wonderful tool for
people with disabilities. But in certain circumstances, because
of some limitation based on CBO scoring, it is limited to those
people who have a disability that occurred prior to age 26. So
a 28-year-old young woman who becomes disabled from an injury
would not be able to have an ABLE account.
It is also limited in the amount of money that can be
placed into an ABLE account. So $14,000 per year is the maximum
at this point that could fund the account. So even if my
daughter Melanie, who had a disability prior to age 26, were to
receive money and want to open an ABLE account, if she got a
life insurance settlement from an aunt who left her as
beneficiary for $50,000, she could only put $14,000 of that in.
The other money would disqualify her for Medicaid.
So that is why the ABLE Act is a wonderful tool, but it
works in coordination with special needs trusts in many
situations because there are other assets a person with a
disability may acquire or have that would need to be in a
special needs trust and could not go into an ABLE account.
Mr. Guthrie. So the H.R. 670 will still be needed because
in your daughter's situation the ABLE account wouldn't cover
the situation you just described?
Mr. Courtney. Yes, Mr. Vice Chairman, that is true, because
she would have some assets that would need to be placed in the
trust so they would not disqualify her for benefits. And at
this point the deficiency in the act is that she is not able to
create that trust.
Mr. Guthrie. Well, are there limits in the amount of money
that can be put into in a special needs trust and what the
funds can be used for?
Mr. Courtney. There are not limits on that in the statute
that was passed in 1993, because it varies so much. Someone may
get an inheritance of a few thousand dollars, someone may get
more.
Mr. Guthrie. Were there limits in the way the funds can be
spent?
Mr. Courtney. There are limits because the act itself says
that there is a Medicaid payback from that trust, a payback
reimbursement to Medicaid of any funds left in the trust at the
beneficiary's death. So that is one protection of the Medicaid
program. But also state agencies and Social Security's POMS
policies place criteria on those trusts, special needs trusts.
And many states have very restrictive rules and policies about
how disbursements may be made and for what from a special needs
trust.
So, yes, there are protections of those moneys. It is an
irrevocable trust. The beneficiary can't revoke it and undo it
once they create it or once it is created. We hope they will be
able to create it.
Mr. Guthrie. Appreciate it.
Mr. Courtney. And they also have to appoint an independent
trustee.
So those are all protections of the money to protect it
both for the needs of the beneficiary that are credible and
reasonable needs based on state policies and also that the
trustee can monitor.
Mr. Guthrie. Well, thank you.
My time has expired, and I really appreciate you guys being
here.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. I thank the gentleman, and I recognize Mr.
Schrader from Oregon, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Clontz, I am very interested in the PACE program. We
have one, obviously, in Oregon that seems to work very well. I
think most people realize that in-home care gets you better
results at the end of the day. Even in my little corner of the
veterinary medical world my patients do a lot better at home.
Could you talk a little bit about research that has
compared health care delivery, health care outcomes with folks
in PACE versus going to, say, a nursing home?
Mr. Clontz. Absolutely. Several studies have explored the
cost effectiveness and quality of PACE. A recent study by
Mathematica Policy Research determined that PACE costs are
comparable to the cost of other Medicare options and provide
better quality of care. The study determined that PACE
enrollees had a lower mortality rate than comparable
individuals either in nursing facilities or receiving home and
community-based services through waiver programs.
Mr. Schrader. Very good. I would like to get a copy of
that, if that is possible. That would be really interesting.
One of the other big problems it deals with of course is
the dual eligibles, folks both on Medicare and Medicaid, very
expensive population to take care of, multiple doctors,
multiple needs. The coordination becomes difficult. Can you
talk a little bit about how PACE handles that coordination
compared to a traditional situation?
Mr. Clontz. Yes. At least in North Carolina the vast
majority of the participants, in fact 95 percent or more, are
dual eligible. So it is the population that we work with
predominantly.
It really is about the integrated nature of PACE in terms
of coordinating care, having these individuals on a regular
basis, typically three times or more a week in the adult day
center, being able to put eyes on these folks, having direct
access down the hall from a physician, having therapy when they
are in the facility. These folks are picked up at their homes,
drivers go in the homes. They can see whether there are subtle
changes in their living arrangements. All of this is really
about an integrated care model.
Mr. Schrader. Very good. Well, we have enjoyed the same
good results in Oregon.
With that, I will yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
I now recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I appreciate the
comments from my colleague from Oregon. And I had it out in
efficient order, but I think I am going to continue with Mr.
Clontz for a second.
One of the big concerns is how the high-cost population, as
we were talking about, the duals, are driving Federal
healthcare spending. Can you follow up, you were talking about
this is with Mr. Schrader, but can you, again, talk about how
PACE programs are reimbursed and what is known about the cost
effectiveness of these programs?
Mr. Clontz. PACE programs are essentially on the Federal
side a Medicare Advantage plan. We received capitated payments
on a monthly basis for each of our individuals. On the Medicaid
side, it is obviously different from state to state, but we
have received an amount that is less than what--a PACE program
receives fewer dollars than they would receive if they were
actually in a skilled nursing facility. The payment model is
actually designed that way.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
Now, Mr. Courtney, in a follow-up to a hearing we had last
week, we heard testimony about individuals taking advantage of
loopholes in Medicaid eligibility policies, such as through the
use of annuities and promissory notes, to obtain Medicaid
coverage when they could afford to pay for their own care. Can
you explain how a special needs trust differs from some of
these other financial instruments?
Mr. Courtney. Well, a special needs trust is a creature of
Federal statute, OBRA 1993 created that and recognized that
Medicaid does not provide everything that a person with a
disability may need. It provides what Medicaid pays for for
medical services, but there are other life needs, like clothing
and access to the community.
So the special needs trust is a method and an effective
method that the law recognized to hold excess resources that
would not be countable, but subject to a Medicaid reimbursement
payback to meet other needs that are supplemental to what
Medicaid would cover.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, I have been a member for quite a long
time, and every once in a while we will then reinvestigate,
because I know in your opening statement you talked about elder
law issues.
There is a concern by many of us of the squirreling away of
assets for seniors then to become Medicaid qualified when they
can obviously--I used to tell a story of my grandmother. She
was in long-term care, 10 years. Every penny of her assets were
used for the first 3 years. And then the rest came. She then
qualified for Medicaid, and thank God it was there, and it took
care of the 7.
There is a concern that there is ways to avoid people
paying down their assets to the care before they qualify, and,
Mr. Chairman, we still need to investigate, because Medicaid
and Medicare are still going broke, OK, there are still
programs that have structural actuary problems that we need to
address.
My last question for Dr. Boyle. In your experience, is it
common practice for clinical trial participants to receive
compensation for participation?
Dr. Boyle. Yes, it is actually a good question, because I
think one of the common things when you look at this act is to
say: Well, why don't patients turn down the money. Compensation
in clinical trials is actually a really scrutinized area. Every
trial that we submit there is an ethics review board for the
local hospitals, as well as our network that looks and sort of
stipulates how much a patient gets paid.
And there is a sweet spot. If it is too much, then it feels
like you are enticing them to participate in a trial that maybe
we don't know if it is beneficial. Right? So too much actually
feels that is not ethical.
On the other hand, almost every ethics review board says
you can't give patients the option of paying nothing, being
paid nothing, because they feel like they might feel some
pressure from the physicians to say: Oh, why don't you not take
payment?
So they always set what is considered to be sort of a fair
amount of payment. It is a modest amount, it covers travel, it
covers some of their time. The fact that this is only a $2,000
limit that we are talking about shows how modest it is.
So, yes, patients get paid. It is way less than the amount
of time they spent. And they really don't have any choice. The
amount is stipulated by an ethics board that looks at each
clinical trial.
Mr. Shimkus. And if I may, I have another question, Mr.
Chairman. But I just want to follow up on his response.
So you are telling me that the payment is designed to make
sure that they are not being overcompensated, but they are--the
ethics board seems to believe that they need to give them
something----
Dr. Boyle. That is right.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. And that is why they are paid.
Dr. Boyle. Well, that is right. And so really it is
designed, it is supposed to basically compensate them for their
time. It is actually not supposed to be an enticement with too
much. The too little part, they are a little afraid of treating
patients differently, as well as the patients who participate
in trials feeling pressure to decline payment when they may
need it.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlemen.
Now recognize the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Lance, 5
minutes for questioning.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First I request to
enter into the record a letter from over 50 organizations in
support of the Ensuring Access to Clinical Trials Act.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Lance. As Republican co-chair of the rare disease
caucus, I meet with patients almost weekly who suffer from
conditions for which there are few or no treatments. These
disease populations are so small, the challenges for drug
development are significant. Disease populations with greater
numbers often struggle to maintain adequate participation in
clinical trials, but the challenges are far more acute in the
rare disease space. The Ensuring Access to Clinical Trials Act
seeks to address this challenge by helping to move clinical
research forward and to ensure that rare disease patients on
Medicaid and SSI can participate in clinical trials without
fear that their compensation will count toward their
eligibility limits.
To demonstrate the importance of participation in clinical
research, I briefly share the story of a young man named Alex
who lives in the district I serve. As an 8-month-old infant,
Alex was diagnosed with cystic fibrosis, and his parents were
told he would live to be about 20 years old. Today Alex is 20,
and in his lifetime, a life expectancy for a patient with
cystic fibrosis has more than doubled, due largely to the
successes of clinical research.
Clinical trials have brought about cutting edge therapies
which have made it possible for Alex to live his life, attend
college, and hope for a brighter future. These benefits from
the clinical trials that lead to a number of treatments,
including hypertonic saline, which was brought to market after
a 10-year study, and continues to benefit Alex as he struggles
daily to clear his airways of the life threatening mucous and
bacteria that cystic fibrosis produces. Most recently other
drugs have been brought to market, Kalydeco and Orkambi, two
drugs that address the root causes of cystic fibrosis. These
new therapies have been heralded as historic breakthroughs for
the treatment of cystic fibrosis and have potentials to address
decades to the life of Alex and others. And I certainly want to
work with everyone on this committee as we move forward on
these important issues. And I thank all on the panel in that
regard.
Now, Mr. Courtney, I used to practice law, and I was very
much interested in your remarks. The Special Needs Trust is
Federal legislation, obviously, and I would imagine, as you
state, it was merely an oversight. Certainly anyone who is
competent, regardless of physical disability should be able to
document this without having to rely on someone else. And I
would imagine that legislation would pass easily. Glenn
Thompson is a very able member of the Congress. He and I are
classmates, coming in on the same day.
I do share Congressman Shimkus' concern, and I do not
attribute this to you or to anyone whom you represent. What is
the typical amount that is placed in the Special Needs Trust in
your opinion based upon your experience in the practice of law
for almost 40 years?
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Lance. I don't believe there
is a typical amount because as you might understand from having
practiced law, there might be a small inheritance from a family
member.
Mr. Lance. Sure.
Mr. Courtney. Or there might be a large insurance or
litigation settlement.
Mr. Lance. Or a large inheritance, I presume. It is
possible. Isn't it?
Mr. Courtney. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lance. And when the person passes on, then the Federal
Government and the state government are reimbursed for Medicaid
payments if there are funds in that trust?
Mr. Courtney. Current statute does not provide for
reimbursement to the Federal Government for SSI payments, but
to Medicaid, the state Medicaid agency where they have received
Medicaid benefits will get reimbursed.
Mr. Lance. And is it only the percentage that the state
pays under the Medicaid, or is it the full 100 percent?
Mr. Courtney. It is the full amount that Medicaid has paid
for that individual's care even prior to the Special Needs
Trust implementation.
Mr. Lance. I see. So, for example, as I read the figures in
your great State, Mississippi, which I know because I went to
Vanderbilt Law School right next door, you have a share--
Mississippi, 74 percent is funded by the Federal Government and
roughly a quarter by the state government. Is that accurate?
Mr. Courtney. That math is correct, yes.
Mr. Lance. That is certainly not true in New Jersey where
it is 50/50. I have never understood that, but certainly others
can explain that to me. And so the full 100 percent would be
reimbursed through the State agency. Is that how it would work?
Mr. Courtney. Yes. An individual in Mississippi receives
Medicaid benefits. Then at the death, any assets in the Special
Needs Trust would go back to reimburse the state in full for
those benefits the state had paid.
Mr. Lance. Thank you very much. My time has concluded. I
yield back, but this reminds me that I did once practice law,
and it is a very interesting conversation. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
I now recognize the gentleman for New York, Mr. Collins, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Collins. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this hearing. It has been very educational and interesting. I
want to thank also the committee's taking a balanced approach
to Medicaid reform. And your testimony is very helpful.
Last week we held a hearing focused on curbing waste,
fraud, and abuse in the program, and this week we are
addressing how we can improve the program for beneficiaries.
These two aspects really should go hand in hand in order to get
the country's entitlements under control.
A bill that I recently drafted, have not quite dropped yet,
but we are talking about it today, the Medicaid Directory of
Caregivers or Medicaid DOC Act. This bill is an example, I
would like to think, where commonsense meets good government.
The Medicaid DOC Act would require that states who operate a
fee-for-service or primary care case management program would
include on the Medicaid program's Web site simply a directory
of physicians who have served Medicaid patients in the prior 6
months.
Today some states have this service; others don't. The bill
came as a result of hearings by this committee and GAO reports
that have been citing access to care of primary physicians, a
problem with Medicaid fee-for-service programs. If
beneficiaries can't find a doctor who will treat them, what is
the point in having this kind of insurance?
So I would welcome any of you to comment on this. Again, I
like to call it commonsense meets good government, and, again,
for this hearing hear some opinions or thoughts you might have.
Dr. Boyle. Well, I can comment, and I can probably comment
wearing two hats. First of all, as a cystic fibrosis physician,
a good number of our patients, as we said, over a third are on
Medicaid, and frequently, although we take care of the majority
of their CF needs with a CF team, there is specialty care and
other cares that they need outside of our team. And you are
right, it is a barrier sometime to be able to identify those
other caregivers who would accept Medicaid.
So that list would be helpful, and, actually, as previously
practicing in primary care for a few years before doing
specialty training, I think it is true not just for CF
patients, but for all individuals on Medicaid. So----
Mr. Clontz. I would add that it is a very commonsense
approach and another tool for individuals to find a physicians.
Mr. Collins. Yes. I have to think as we have expanded
Medicaid, in many cases, certainly in New York, it is just must
be the most frustrating thing to say: I finally got insurance
and you are going up and down, and, you know, there is no
guarantee that someone on the list would maybe accept new
patients, just kind of a start.
Do you have any other suggestions youwould like to share
with the committee, that is the purpose of a hearing, that you
think and any kind of other commonsense approach to help these
patients find a primary care physician? I know you must have
thought it through at some point.
Mr. Clontz. As a health system who serves a very large
population of Medicaid recipients and other disadvantaged,
economically disadvantaged individuals, it is a constant
process for us to identify physicians, not only who are taking
Medicaid, but are taking new Medicaid patients.
One of the things that we have done in addition to having a
federally qualified health center in our community, we have
also opened up a pediatric clinic for Medicaid and self-pay
patients, and an adult clinic as well. So it is a constant
battle for us, and any tool we can get would be welcomed.
Mr. Collins. I want to thank you all for those comments,
and certainly would urge all my fellow members here to support
the bill as we do move this forward and intend to drop this
very soon. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
I now recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Bilirakis,
5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it so
much.
Mr. Clontz, thank you for testifying today on the PACE
Innovation Act. I am proud to be a cosponsor of this great
piece of legislation. The Program for All-Inclusive Care for
the Elderly, or PACE, is a unique program that many people may
not know about. So I appreciate you testifying today.
In Florida we have four PACE providers that serve 900
participants in six counties. One of these providers happens to
be located near me, Suncoast Pace in Pinellas County, the
county where I reside and I represent part of the county.
Mr. Clontz, who is eligible for the program currently, and
under this bill how will that change?
Mr. Clontz. A potential participant in PACE is eligible if
they are 55 years of age or older, have been qualified by the
state as needing skilled nursing facility care, and reside in a
service area for a PACE organization. So all of those
qualifications have to be met.
Mr. Bilirakis. Very good. Thank you.
Again, as I understand it, the majority of PACE
beneficiaries are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid. Is
there any data on the extent to which the program's
effectiveness varies based on whether or not the beneficiaries
are dual eligibles?
Mr. Clontz. I am not aware of any that is specific to dual
eligibles versus those that are Medicare only or private pay,
if that is your question. We can certainly reach that.
Mr. Bilirakis. Yes. Please do. Thank you very much.
Dr. Boyle, again, thanks for your testimony. I am a
cosponsor of the Access to Clinical Trials bill, and it is an
important provision for patients, in my opinion. What
proportion of rare diseases still lack appropriate treatments
and thus could benefit from additional clinical trials, and how
many or what proportion of individuals with rare diseases
receive Medicaid benefits?
Dr. Boyle. So I am not sure if I know the exact percentage
of all rare diseases that receive Medicaid benefits, but I can
tell you that the needy population number is high. Like I said,
our number is over a third of our patients rely on Medicaid. I
think that is probably reflective of that population in
general. And the other thing is that is a particularly needy
group in terms of new therapies. I think you asked about what
proportion still needed additional clinical trials.
Mr. Bilirakis. Exactly.
Dr. Boyle. I would say there are almost no rare diseases
right now that we say don't need any more clinical trials.
Right? So even those who have therapies we know we can continue
to make progress if we have access to these patients for
trials, and that the vast majority of them are in early stages
needing trials to have any type of therapy.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thanks so much.
One last question, Mr. Chairman. I guess I have time.
Dr. Boyle, if FDA allowed the use of biomarkers, would it
permit for more diverse patient populations in clinical trials
and make the clinical trials easier to fill? How important are
biomarkers to future drug development particularly for rare
diseases of patients?
Dr. Boyle. Well, that is a very good question and a
particular area of interest of mine. So biomarkers, as you
know, would allow us to potentially look at other outcome
measures for clinical trials that maybe aren't the typical
things such a lung function which require large populations.
So I think it depends on the disease how good those
biomarkers are, but certainly we know that in the future we
want to be able to try to look at the whole picture and not
just one measurement in patients but also to use the other
weapons we have, the other tools that we have to assess a drug.
So being able to look at tests in the lab, being able to look
at other markers of how patients are going to do, would allow
us to have a little smaller cheaper trials to get some of the
same answers.
So I think the FDA is already doing a lot and discussing
with this, but I think that we are looking forward to working
with them, working with you, on new strategies to incorporate
that in the whole approval process because it would expedite it
in getting new therapies to patients.
Mr. Bilirakis. Very good.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for calling this very important
hearing. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
I now recognize the gentlelady from Indiana, Mrs. Brooks, 5
minutes for questions.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. During the 21st
Century Cures debate, it's when I personally learned that we
had--we know there are over 10,000 known diseases and
conditions with cures and treatments, but there are only a cure
for 500 of them. And that was somewhat shocking to me.
And so then to know that we have difficulties with the rare
disease populations, I would like to ask you if this act
sunsets, what will actually happen to the patients who are in
clinical trials who are receiving payments now?
Dr. Boyle. Thank you for that question, because you are
right, if this law were to sunset, it wouldn't just affect the
future. It would affect today----
Mrs. Brooks. Right.
Dr. Boyle. Or actually October 6 probably. And that is
because people who are currently in trials and getting and
receiving payments would suddenly have to recalculate. Right?
And they would have to look and say: Can I afford to stay in
this trial? That could actually have a devastating effect for
trials if they feel like they are getting close to getting some
answers when suddenly patients are pulling out. That is
actually one of the biggest nightmares of researchers when you
start losing patients because it is hard to assess outcome.
So you are right. It is not just a down-the-road issue. It
would be an October 6 issue in terms of advancing therapies for
those other thousands of rare diseases you discussed.
Mrs. Brooks. Are clinical trials run differently for
pediatric therapies versus adult therapies, and where does the
payment go?
Dr. Boyle. So they are, and, again, this is a big topic of
discussion in trying to make sure this is done well. The
majority of higher risk trials early on are in adults. But once
there is a little bit of establishment of some safety, then we
do want to move down to pediatric patients because we want to
be able to treat those patients early on before they have all
those diseases. But we need to be able to demonstrate effect on
those.
So pediatric trials often times have their own separate
entity that we run. In some ways they are almost more
challenging to enroll because obviously as a parent of three
teen daughters, I would have the same feeling of, ``Hey, do I
really want to put my child through this, or can I let some
adults do it?'' So it is a particularly needy group to enroll.
The payment above the age of 18 goes to the individual.
Below that it actually goes to the parents. Obviously they can
work with the child to decide about that, but there is a whole
area of assent after the age of 12. So patients who are 13 or
14, they can't sign consent themselves to participate, but they
do have to sign something that says, ``I understand this.'' I
have talked about it, and I do want to participate, even though
they are not legally able to sign. I hope that that answered
your question.
Mrs. Brooks. I am curious about the payments because I have
read in your testimony people can get paid anywhere--is it the
ethics committee that does the reviews? How is the payment
determined what patients get for clinical trials? Because I
have read from $50 up to $2,000.
What is $50? And why would--that doesn't pay for time and
travel, I wouldn't imagine, and so why is there that minimal of
a payment in any case?
Dr. Boyle. So it all depends on the design of the trial and
it is supposed to reflect the amount of time spent. So it is
not supposed to reflect risk. Right? If you are paying people
more to take more risk, that actually feels like you are
enticing them to do something unwise.
So what happens is there are some standards set--in the CF
community, the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation has played up a large
part of this with our therapeutic development network. So we
actually say, calculate the number of hours that this
individual is going to be participating, and this is the amount
that they can be compensated based on the amount of hours.
It is not a reflection of the risk. And then the travel
that--being reimbursed for travel is a separate issue. That is
actually not part of the pay--I can tell you nobody gets rich
doing this. This is basically just trying to be able to make
sure that they have enough to pay for their time that they have
because it is affecting all the rest of their lives, whether it
is in school or it is having a job, it is a way to be able to
cover them even when most of the time they are just
volunteering out of altruism.
Mrs. Brooks. OK. Thank you all for all of your work. This
has been very helpful today. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlewoman.
I now recognize the gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Long, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you all for
being here today.
Mr. Courtney, currently an individual with a disability
cannot set up his or her own Special Needs Trust. If this
individual does not have a parent, grandparent, or legal
guardian available to set up a trust, what are the next steps?
Mr. Courtney. Well, the other option in current law is to
go to a court to do that. And some courts have been reluctant
or even unwilling to allow a competent person with no
guardianship to come into court and ask to create a trust or
have the court create the trust.
Mr. Long. And if they did allow that, how long does it take
to petition the court?
Mr. Courtney. Well, it can takes months or up to a year
depending or court delays and getting an attorney that would
understand how to go forward and look at the statute, Federal
statute, and understand those benefits to be able to approach
the court. So it can take a lot of lawyers' fees and time and
court resources for months.
Mr. Long. So it might take a Ph.D. from MIT to be able to
sort it out?
Mr. Courtney. Yes, right. Or an experienced elder law
attorney that understands those things.
Mr. Long. Are there any additional costs that would be
incurred?
Mr. Courtney. Certainly there are court fees, there are
lawyers' fees that would have to be paid to hire the lawyer to
go to court and do that. And then there also might even be the
need for that individual to pay for their own care during the
interim if the benefits were cut off because they were
determined to have too much money yet but not yet in a trust.
Mr. Long. Can you give specific examples of an individual
with a disability who has been unable to set up a Special Needs
Trust without petitioning the court?
Mr. Courtney. Who has been able to set up a Special Needs--
--
Mr. Long. Yes. Do you have any examples of individuals that
have been able to do this without having to petition the court?
Mr. Courtney. Those individuals who have a surviving parent
or grandparent, the parent or grandparent could sign the trust
and----
Mr. Long. Yes, but I am saying if they don't have the
parent, the grandparent, or legal guardian.
Mr. Courtney. No. They can't set up a Special Needs Trust
if they don't have one of those four entities or people that
can establish the trust.
Mr. Long. That is kind of what I was thinking. Do you
believe that current law which precludes individuals from
setting up their own Special Needs Trust creates a presumption
that these individuals lack the mental capacity to create their
own trust?
Mr. Courtney. That is exactly how the current law treats
them, as though they were mentally incapable and incompetent to
manage their own affairs.
Mr. Long. And how would making this technical correction in
the law provide more equitable treatment for individuals with
disabilities?
Mr. Courtney. It would allow mentally capable adult with
physical disabilities to create the trust that Congress has
recognized as an effective vehicle to hold assets and allow
that person to do it without the complications of having to go
through the court process as we mentioned and give them the
same equity and fairness that other non-disabled adults are
accorded by law.
Mr. Long. Without going through this long arduous court
process that we have ascertained is made to take forever and a
day.
Mr. Courtney. That is correct.
Mr. Long. And it is hard to sort out.
Mr. Courtney. Yes, sir. That is correct.
Mr. Long. OK. Thank you all. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
That concludes the questions from members who are present.
We will have follow-up questions. We will send them to you in
writing, other members who were not able to attend I am sure
will send them. Please we would ask that you respond promptly.
And that means that members, they have 10 business days to
submit questions for the record. So members should submit their
questions by the close of business on Friday, October 2.
Thank you for your testimony. It has been very clear. You
have been very, very excellent witnesses in this very important
issue as we move forward.
Without objection, the subcommittee is adjourned.
Let me just add, I have a UC request here to submit the
following documents for the record: letters from the National
Academy of Elder Law Attorneys, collection of organizations in
support of H.R. 670, Special Needs Trust Fairness Act, and a
statement from Representative G.T. Thompson of Pennsylvania.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Pitts. OK. The hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:22 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Renee L. Ellmers

I want to thank Chairman Pitts and Ranking Member Green,
and the Committee for their focus today on improving the
Medicaid program for beneficiaries. This vital safety net
program has had many successes to date, but as my colleagues
know Medicaid faces significant challenges as we work to
modernize the program to ensure it is able to provide
meaningful access to the most vulnerable patients for decades
to come.
While I generally support the bills under consideration
today by the Subcommittee aimed at improving Medicaid patient
access to care, I very much believe there is a missing
component in this discussion.
I found particularly noteworthy the GAO report this
committee recently received which found that Medicaid enrollees
face particular challenges in accessing certain types of care,
such as obtaining specialty care or dental care. Additionally,
GAO has previously reported that 38 States experienced
challenges ensuring enough participating providers.
These disturbing revelations point to a real policy need to
address the holes in this vital safety net program and
facilitate improvements to care among our nation's most
vulnerable.
With respect to specialty care, Congresswoman DeGette and I
have been working on a bipartisan bill to improve Medicaid
access to care and improve quality outcomes when it comes to
medically necessary foot and ankle care. The HELLPP Act (H.R.
1221) would remove Medicaid patient access barriers to the best
trained and best educated physician specialists of the foot and
ankle--podiatrists, also known as doctors of podiatric
medicine.
Our health-care system increasingly requires the skills of
podiatrists because they play a critical role in treating lower
extremity complications related to diabetes, peripheral
arterial disease, obesity, arthritis, and other chronic
conditions, as well as treating and preventing complications
from these conditions. Take diabetes as an example: The early-
warning signs of diabetes are often found in manifestation of
complications in the lower extremity. As such, podiatrists are
frequently the first health-care provider to detect, treat, and
therefore significantly prevent or reduce complications, such
as lower-limb amputations.
Foot and ankle care is already a covered benefit under
Medicaid. However, access to that care is jeopardized because
currently federal Medicaid law only includes part of the
Medicare physician definition which results in not ensuring
access to a podiatrist.
The HELLPP Act would remedy this access barrier by
referencing the same Medicare definition of physician to ensure
that Medicaid patients-who disproportionately suffer from
chronic conditions-have timely access to the most appropriate
and best trained providers of foot and ankle care.
A strong body of evidence shows that when podiatric
physicians and surgeons are delivering foot and ankle medical
and surgical care, patient outcomes are better,
hospitalizations are fewer and shorter, and our health-care
delivery system saves billions of dollars annually.
The Energy & Commerce Committee has voted in favor of this
Medicaid access provision in past legislation (2009). And just
last congress our Senate colleagues included this podiatry
access provision in that chamber's main Medicare SGR reform
bills last congress.
While the bills before the Subcommittee are important
elements toward improving Medicaid for beneficiaries, there is
more we can and should be doing. I very much hope we can take
additional steps in the near future and also work to advance
the HELLPP Act this congress.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
