- TITLE II: 21ST CENTURY WORKFORCE

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

TITLE II: 21ST CENTURY WORKFORCE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

APRIL 23, 2015
__________

Serial No. 114-33

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

96-084                       WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                     Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               JERRY McNERNEY, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        PAUL TONKO, New York
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREGG HARPER, Vice Chairman          GENE GREEN, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     LOIS CAPPS, California
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             KATHY CASTOR, Florida
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   PETER WELCH, Vermont
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILL FLORES, Texas                   FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma               officio)
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     3
Hon. Gene Green, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     4
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................    64
Hon. Bill Flores, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, prepared statement......................................    65
Hon. Joe Barton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, prepared statement......................................    65

Witnesses

Tracy Brundage, Vice President, Workforce Development and
Continuing Education, Pennsylvania College of Technology, on
Behalf of Shale Net............................................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Rick Jarvis, Vice President of Field Construction, Morrow-Meadows
Corporation, on behalf of National Electrical Contractors
Association....................................................    18
Prepared statement...........................................    20
Ramanan Krishnamoorti, Chief Energy Officer, University of
Houston........................................................    25
Prepared statement...........................................    27
Monica Martinez, President, Hispanics in Energy..................    36
Prepared statement...........................................    38
Charles Wilson, Senior Reactor Operator Trainer, Managing
Partner, CW Consulting Group, LLC..............................    46
Prepared statement...........................................    48

TITLE II: 21ST CENTURY WORKFORCE

----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 23, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed
Whitfield (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Whitfield, Shimkus, Pitts,
Latta, Harper, McKinley, Johnson, Long, Ellmers, Flores,
Mullin, Hudson, Rush, McNerney, Green, Doyle, Castor, Sarbanes,
and Loebsack.
Staff present: Nick Abraham, Legislative Associate, Energy
and Power; Gary Andres, Staff Director; Charlotte Baker, Deputy
Communications Director; Will Batson, Legislative Clerk;
Leighton Brown, Press Assistant; Allison Busbee, Policy
Coordinator, Energy and Power; Patrick Currier, Counsel, Energy
and Power; Tom Hassenboehler, Chief Counsel, Energy and Power;
Brandon Mooney, Professional Staff Member, Energy and Power;
Caitlin Haberman, Democratic Professional Staff Member; Rick
Kessler, Democratic Senior Advisor and Staff Director, Energy
and Environment; and John Marshall, Democratic Policy
Coordinator.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Mr. Whitfield. I would like to call the hearing to order
this morning. Today we are having a hearing on a draft bill,
Title II of the 21st Century Workforce, and we have a
distinguished panel of witnesses with us this morning. And I am
not going to introduce you now, but I am going to introduce you
just prior to your 5-minute statement. But we do thank you for
joining us this morning. And I would like to recognize myself
for 5 minutes for an opening statement.
First, I want to thank Bobby Rush as well as Bill Flores,
Gene Green, and Richard Hudson for sponsoring the bipartisan
discussion draft that we will be talking about today entitled
the 21st Century Workforce. This discussion draft will become
part of our larger energy legislation that we will be rolling
out in the weeks ahead. I have already complimented you, Bob,
and thank you for coming.
As we all know, the domestic energy sector is undergoing
dramatic changes. Thanks to American innovations, our decades
of declining oil and natural gas production have given way to
tremendous increases in output. The Energy Information
Administration recently projected that the United States will
eliminate net energy imports by the year 2030. This abundant
and affordable energy is sparking new manufacturing activity in
the United States.
America's energy and manufacturing renaissance is also
leading to a jobs renaissance. Energy and energy-related
employment has been one of the few economic bright spots in
recent years, everything from those employed discovering and
producing energy to those constructing and operating the
infrastructure to transport it, to the new factories that are
powered by it.
But America's energy transformation has some problems
because we are now finding that we need more trained workers in
these areas, skilled workers. So there are many opportunities
out there, and this is what this legislation is all about,
trying to assist in the development of these new job
opportunities.
As you know, we have also had a lot of people lose their
job as we make this transformation in energy. Certainly, in the
coal sector they have been hit very hard. And so we have a
great opportunity here. I know the Department of Energy has
already expressed an interest in developing a jobs program, but
we feel like it is important to provide some guidance in that,
and as I said earlier, Bobby Rush has been talking about this
for some time, and actually, his draft was the basis for this
Title II.
So we have a unique opportunity here in our broader energy
bill to address this issue, and that is what we hope to do. And
we hope that your testimony will provide us some insights on
your thoughts on this important subject.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Ed Whitfield

I would like to thank my good friend Bobby Rush as well as
Bill Flores, Gene Green, and Richard Hudson, for sponsoring the
bipartisan discussion draft that we will be talking about
today, entitled 21st Century Workforce. This discussion draft
will become part of our larger energy legislation that we will
be rolling out in the weeks ahead. I also thank our witnesses
for appearing before us today.
As we all know, the domestic energy sector is undergoing
dramatic changes. Thanks to American innovations in hydraulic
fracturing and horizontal drilling, decades of declining oil
and natural gas production have given way to tremendous
increases in output. The Energy Information Administration
(EIA) recently projected that the U.S. will eliminate net
energy imports by 2030. This abundant and affordable energy is
sparking new manufacturing activity in the U.S.
America's energy and manufacturing renaissance is also
leading to a jobs renaissance. Energy and energy-related
employment has been one of the few economic bright spots in
recent years--everything from those employed discovering and
producing energy, to those constructing and operating the
infrastructure to transport it, to the new factories that are
powered by it.
But America's energy transformation has taken the job
market by surprise. Many in need of work do not have the skills
required to fill these high-paying opportunities, and the
Department of Energy's job programs do not fully reflect
current realities.
That is the problem the 21st Century Workforce discussion
draft seeks to address. It updates DOE's energy training
programs to better serve today's energy market and today's job
seekers. Just as America's energy situation is changing, so is
its workforce. We have growing numbers of minorities
participating in labor markets, but these groups have been
historically underrepresented in the energy sector. The 21st
Century Workforce bill would strengthen the outreach to these
potential energy workers. Our goal is nothing less than to have
the best trained and most diverse energy industry in the world.
In addition, there are displaced workers, such as those
once employed in the coal sector, who are now looking for new
opportunities in energy. Of course, my hope is to get as many
of these men and women employed again in the coal industry, but
for the others the discussion draft has programs to help them
transition into other energy careers.
The discussion draft does not create new programs out of
whole cloth, but builds upon the base that already exists at
DOE. And it applies to a wide variety of programs and
partnerships with 4-year colleges, community and technical
colleges, and high schools as well as other governmental and
private institutions involved in energy.
Now, I know that on this subcommittee we don't always agree
on which energy source is the best. We have proponents of wind
and solar as well as proponents of fossil fuels and nuclear
power. However, this discussion draft is fuel neutral--it does
not seek to target any particular energy source, but rather
gives DOE the flexibility to allocate its resources to wherever
the job opportunities are. And the focus goes well beyond
energy production to also include downstream opportunities such
as those in infrastructure that were highlighted in DOE's
recent Quadrennial Energy Review as well as those in the
manufacturing sector that are made possible by affordable
domestic energy.
Energy and energy-related jobs are critical to American
economic growth in the years ahead. The career opportunities
are many, and the 21st Century Workforce discussion draft will
go a long way towards ensuring that we have qualified Americans
to fill them.

Mr. Whitfield. And with that, at this time I would like to
recognize the gentleman from Illinois for his opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this important hearing, and I must commend you and your staff
for working with my office on the 21st Century Workforce bill.
That is the focus of what we will be discussing here today.
Mr. Chairman, I hope that the same spirit of goodwill and
negotiations that the minority and the majority sides that have
displayed in working on this discussion draft can be carried
forth as we continue to work on the remaining sections of a
broader bipartisan comprehensive energy bill. The Nation is in
need, waiting for it, and a Nation in need deserves a
comprehensive energy bill.
I am also optimistic knowing that both sides continue to
work diligently at a good faith on hammering out some of the
more contentious outstanding issues so that hopefully we can
bring forth a bill that helps move our Nation's energy policy
forward and restores this subcommittee's reputation as a true
model of what bipartisanship can accomplish.
Mr. Chairman, the 21st Century Workforce legislation
addresses an issue that is neither partisan nor bipartisan, but
rather it is non-partisan because this is an issue that
benefits communities, benefits industry, and benefits the
overall American economy. This bill brings together government
agencies including the National Labs, the energy and
manufacturing industry, unions, schools, community colleges,
and universities among others and promotes collaboration to
make sure that we are tapping into a wealth of under-utilized
talent and training and preparing workers for the energy and
manufacturing jobs both presently and of our future also.
Mr. Chairman, this bill is important because it matches up
the needs of an industry and a willingness and able workforce,
and in the process it helps start new cycles of hope, new
cycles of opportunity for groups who have in many cases been
overlooked and underserved. In fact, Mr. Chairman, it is my
hope, my sincere hope, that if and when this bill is enacted,
it would be instrumental in helping to create individuals with
similar stories so that those we hear from today, their stories
will be repeated time and time and time again, stories I might
add like Mr. Wilson's from the Englewood community that is
located in my district in Chicago, Mr. Wilson, who beat the
odds and turned his life into an inspirational profile that can
serve as a motivation to this Nation and to this Nation's young
men all across this Nation.
Mr. Chairman, this legislation can help to open new
pathways to jobs, new pathways to careers, new pathways
entrepreneurial opportunities for women, for minorities, and
for our veterans while also helping to move our overall economy
forward by promoting STEM education as well as developing
educational guidelines for institutions at all levels, from
elementary to post-graduate university programs. This bill
would help to ensure that we are training individuals with the
skills necessary to work in the energy and manufacturing-
related jobs including energy efficiency, energy conservation,
from blue-collar workers to managers to supervisors up to and
including new entrepreneurs and business creators.
So Mr. Chairman, again, I applaud you for holding this
hearing today as well as working with me to make this issue a
priority in what we hope will be a broader bipartisan, non-
partisan energy and infrastructure bill. I look forward to
engaging the witnesses that we have here today, and I welcome
the witnesses. And with that, I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. The gentleman yields back the
balance of his time. Mr. Upton is not here. Does anyone on our
side of the aisle, they would like to take any of his time. OK.
I see the gentleman from Texas is recognized for an opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GENE GREEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you and
the ranking member for holding the hearing today, and I want to
thank our witnesses for coming and testifying today.
Specifically, I would like to acknowledge Dr. Ramanan
Krishnamoorti, the Chief Energy Officer at the University of
Houston. Being a graduate of University of Houston College of
Business and going back there to law school, I can't say too
many nice things about it because it gave me the education I
have. And what Dr. Krishnamoorti and his colleagues are doing
in the energy field are amazing. I stated before; we can't say
it enough. Texas is leading the Nation producing results. This
time it is our energy workforce development. Thanks to the
University of Houston, San Jacinto Community College,
ExxonMobil, and other stakeholders, Houston is launching a pad
for efforts like these contained in this legislation today. The
University of Houston partnered with the Energy Institute High
School to engage high school students and get them interested
in working in the energy field. The Texas Gulf Coast Community
College Consortium is addressing the workforce need of our
industries. The Community College Petrochemical Initiative is a
public/private partnership that is unique to the industry.
Through programs like the University of Houston Partner, the
TGCCCC and CPI, industry job opportunities become realities.
I look forward to working with my colleagues on this
legislation to ensure that success that we have in East Harris
County where I represent the refineries and chemical plants
continues and is duplicated nationwide. And I yield back my
time. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back, and that
concludes the opening statements. So now we will get to our
panel of witnesses. Once again, thanks for being with us this
morning. I will introduce you individually and give you each
opportunity for 5 minutes for an opening statement.
So our first witness is Dr. Tracy Brundage who is the Vice
President of the Workforce Development and Continuing Education
at Pennsylvania College of Technology on behalf of Shale NET.
So Dr. Brundage, you are recognized for 5 minutes, and the
little red lights will come on when your 5 minutes is up. There
are two little boxes on the desk, but we do look forward to
your testimony. And thanks for being with us, and just be sure
to turn the microphone on so we all can hear.

STATEMENTS OF TRACY BRUNDAGE, VICE PRESIDENT, WORKFORCE
DEVELOPMENT AND CONTINUING EDUCATION, PENNSYLVANIA COLLEGE OF
TECHNOLOGY, ON BEHALF OF SHALE NET; RICK JARVIS, VICE PRESIDENT
OF FIELD CONSTRUCTION, MORROW-MEADOWS CORPORATION, ON BEHALF OF
NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS ASSOCIATION; RAMANAN
KRISHNAMOORTI, CHIEF ENERGY OFFICER, UNIVERSITY OF HOUSTON;
MONICA MARTINEZ, PRESIDENT, HISPANICS IN ENERGY; AND CHARLES
WILSON, SENIOR REACTOR OPERATOR TRAINER, MANAGING PARTNER, CW
CONSULTING GROUP, LLC

STATEMENT OF TRACY BRUNDAGE

Ms. Brundage. Good morning. Thank you, subcommittee
members, for the opportunity to speak about the need for
workforce development and training in energy and related
industries. My name is Tracy Brundage. I am the Vice President
for Workforce Development at the Pennsylvania College of
Technology, a special mission affiliate of Penn State committed
to applied technology education.
My testimony today will focus on Shale NET, a partnership
of training providers, economic development, the public
workforce system and employers who responded to the call from
the energy industry for a trained workforce.
When we ask executives in the gas and oil industry what
keeps them up at night, many will respond by expressing their
concerns regarding the great crew change. The energy industry
is facing a mass exodus of talent and experience. In order for
the industry to succeed in the 21st century, it must continue
to recruit and retain talent from a more diverse labor pool.
The industry must be prepared for the inevitable departure of a
large number of workers who are retiring.
To address these challenges, industry, government, the
public workforce investment system, economic development
agencies, education, and training providers must create the
kind of educational infrastructure that will provide a
qualified workforce the industry needs. Our work, through Shale
NET, over the last several years, has focused on building this
infrastructure.
In 2010 Penn College, Westmoreland County Community College
in Pennsylvania, and 18 other training providers across Ohio,
Pennsylvania, West Virginia, and New York came together to
create Shale NET. We were awarded $4.96 million from the U.S.
Department of Labor's Community-Based Job Training Grant
Initiative to develop and implement a 3-week training program
that exposes students to expectations of the industry related
to job readiness skills, safety, and technical awareness.
The curriculum was designed from input from industry,
stressed consistency of content, and awarded competency-based
in industry-recognized credentials. Though the program was open
to all, special efforts were directed to recruit veterans, the
unemployed, and underemployed. The results for Shale NET are
stellar. Over 14,000 individuals explored the Talent Match Web
site which provides realistic job profiles of energy
occupations and information about the industry. Over 1,100
completed practical training, and almost 3,500 obtained job.
The placement rate was 79 percent, and retention three quarters
after placement was 82 percent.
In October 2012, Shale NET was awarded a U.S. Department of
Labor Trade Adjustment Assistance in Community College and
Career Training, known as TAACCCT, Round II grant for $14.96
million which combines the short-term programming of the
initial Shale NET grant with stackable college credit
offerings.
Shale NET is a best-practice model that can be deployed and
implemented in other areas because the curriculum is
competency-based, developed with input from industry,
consistent, easily replicated, and flexible, dependent upon
industry needs. The success of Shale NET is a direct result of
strong partnerships with employers and trade associations,
workforce investment boards, one stops, economic development
agencies such as the Pittsburgh-based Allegheny Conference on
Community Development, and local governments who share a common
desire to place qualified candidates with employers and family-
sustaining careers.
Several innovative strategies are being deployed by Shale
NET to bring blended technical curriculum to remote areas,
veterans, and underserved populations. One strategy uses state-
of-the-art 3D immersive technology and artificial intelligence
to assess and teach more advanced technical skills related to
natural gas and oil production in a simulated environment.
These methodologies create enormous cost savings for
educational institutions, embrace leading edge technology honed
by the U.S. Department of Defense to train and assess
competencies and make capacity-building more feasible and
efficient.
For future programs that are introduced to meet energy
workforce needs, there are several factors that are imperative:
to establish public/private partnerships that become the
backbone of developing a broad array of training options across
the geography of the United States; to target federal funding
in promoting regional collaborations that align with industry's
multi-state operations; and to direct funding where the impact
is greatest to support energy training initiatives that secure
jobs for America's workforce.
Our job is not yet done. Thanks again for this opportunity
to speak on Shale NET's behalf.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Brundage follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Dr. Brundage. And our next
witness is Dr. Rick Jarvis, who is Vice President of Field
Construction, Morrow-Meadows Corporation, on behalf of the
National Electrical Contractors Association. So, Mr. Jarvis,
you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF RICK JARVIS

Mr. Jarvis. Thank you, Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member
Rush, and members of the subcommittee for inviting me here to
testify today at this important hearing. On behalf of the
National Electrical Contractors Association, the nationally
recognized voice of the electrical construction industry, thank
you for holding this important hearing regarding the workforce
development needs of the energy and manufacturing sectors.
My name is Rick Jarvis, and I serve as Vice President of
Field Construction for Morrow-Meadows Corporation, a premier
electrical and data communications contractor on the West
Coast. I am pleased to be here on behalf of the National
Electrical Contractors Association, also known as NECA. NECA is
comprised of over 60,000 electrical contracting firms employing
over 750,000 electrical workers and producing an annual volume
of over $130 billion.
Growth and diversification in the energy economy have
created unprecedented opportunities for the electrical
construction industry. A record 60 percent of electrical
contractors are currently performing work on energy
construction projects. Unfortunately, the availability of
skilled labor and an aging workforce threatens our ability to
continue to meet the demands of the market.
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the
anticipated number of job openings for electricians due to
growth and retirement from 2012 to 2022 is roughly 224,000.
Recruiting new talent to our apprenticeship training program is
crucial to the success and future of our industry, and we are
working hard to recruit new talent to join the trade.
For over 70 years, the electrical construction industry has
been investing $100 million annually in its successful
privately funded apprenticeship and training program. This
joint venture between NECA and the International Brotherhood of
Electrical Workers, the IBW, which I am still a member, gives
participants the opportunity to learn the electrical industry
while getting paid and without a college education. We are
proud of the opportunities offered by our apprenticeship
training programs around the country.
I for one am an example of what an apprenticeship program
can do for a person. After high school, I worked several
different jobs before entering a 4-year IBW-NECA electrical
apprenticeship program in 1982. During the course of my
training, I earned college credits and learned the difference
between a job and a career. After completing my apprenticeship,
I rose from journeyman electrician to foreman, then to general
foreman. In 1991 I was promoted to the general field
superintendent for the Morrow-Meadows San Diego branch office.
Four years later I was promoted again, this time to the general
field superintendent of their corporate division in Los
Angeles, California, where I now hold the position of Vice
President of Field Construction.
The IBW-NECA apprenticeship program has trained over
375,000 electricians like myself including an increasing number
of minorities, women, and veterans, a focus that we have today.
Attracting young talent to this program and others like it is
key to meeting workforce demands across the energy sectors.
NECA is proud to support this committee's discussion draft
and the committee's efforts to address the workforce
development needs of the energy industry. I hope my own
experience in this apprenticeship program can serve as a
testament to the opportunities for upward mobility that
learning a skilled trade can present. We are hopeful that as
the Federal Government works to address the workforce
development needs on the energy and manufacturing sectors, it
assists our industry by actively promoting apprenticeships as a
well-paying career option.
We appreciate the committee's interest in collaborating
with electrical contractors as mentioned in the draft language.
Our training programs are all about skill development for the
21st century workforce. I am happy to take any questions, and
we look forward to continued work with this committee as it
moves forward with this worthwhile process. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Jarvis follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you, Mr. Jarvis. And our next
witness is Dr. Ramanan Krishnamoorti who is the Chief Energy
Officer at the University of Houston. And I am excited you all
have a Chief Energy Officer down there at the University of
Houston. But thanks for being with us, and you are recognized
for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF RAMANAN KRISHNAMOORTI

Mr. Krishnamoorti. Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member
Rush----
Mr. Whitfield. And be sure to bring the microphone up close
there.
Mr. Krishnamoorti. My name is Ramanan Krishnamoorti, as the
chair recognized. I am the Acting Vice President and Vice
Chancellor for Research and Technology Transfer and the Chief
Energy Officer at the University of Houston. The University of
Houston is a leading Tier 1 public research university that
offers undergraduate and graduate programs on campus and online
to more than 41,000 students. The University of Houston is a
designated minority-serving institution, a Hispanic-serving
institution and was rated the second-most racially and
ethnically diverse university in the Nation by U.S. News &
World Report in 2010.
UH takes full advantage of our location in Houston, the
energy capital of the world, to offer undergraduate, graduate,
and certificate programs in all facets of the energy industry.
As the committee considers ways the Federal Government can
foster education and training for energy and manufacturing
jobs, I am pleased to speak with you today to share some of the
innovative ways the University of Houston is working to train
our workforce for high-skilled jobs in the energy industry.
The oil and gas industry in particular is experiencing a
massive misalignment of workforce needs and student education.
It is a significant challenge to recruit and retain a
qualified, stable workforce. The technology and skill
requirements are rapidly changing in the industry. It is
estimated that the skills of oil and gas workers become
obsolete after 3 to 5 years, and the much talked-about crew
change of the baby boomers is happening now and it is
significantly impacting the industry's workforce.
So what does this look like? Between now and 2017, there is
a projected shortage of 75,000 mid-skill workers and 10,000
highly skilled workers, and these numbers are expected to
double over the next 5 years. That is a shortage of 20,000
highly skilled workers. We need to rapidly upscale the mid-
skill workers to meet this deficit.
The University of Houston has, over the last 7 years,
embarked on a transformation to become the energy university in
research, technology transfer, and most importantly, student
education. We have already developed successful programs at the
undergraduate level, like petroleum engineering, and at the
graduate level, such as the Nation's first and only subsea
engineering program.
Our success is due in large part by how we have engaged the
industry, K through 12 education such as the Energy Institute
High School in the Greater Houston area, and community college
education including the nine community college systems in the
Greater Houston area. Through advisory boards and adjunct
faculty, we have developed strategies to address actual
workforce realities, to find quick wins for continued business
engagement, and to recruit and retain women and minority
students. One of these strategies is a focus on upscaling
through certificates and stackable credentials.
So how does stackable credentials meet workforce needs? Two
ways: speed. It accelerates skill enhancement of workers and
their re-deployment in areas of critical need. Second, volume.
The stackable format provides rapid portability and scalability
of the program. Basically, it is more high-skilled workers in
less time.
The stackable credential model has seen success in other
areas of higher education, like healthcare. By stacking a
series of certificates, a professional gains higher level
credential or degree to advance their career. Our innovation is
to apply this model to the energy industry's needs.
UH has developed stackable credentials that can quickly
scale up energy workers to earn undergraduate degrees in
organization, leadership, and supervision. This program is
competency based and requires, one, the completion of two out
of three certificate programs in advanced petroleum technology,
advanced process technology, and advanced safety technology;
and second, the completion of two certificate programs in
project management and organizational leadership and
supervision.
To launch this program, we thought creatively and
strategically about what population to target. One of the most
significant needs in the Greater Houston area is the scaling up
of mid-skill workers in the process technology industry where
over the next 3 years over $120 billion of investment will take
place to grow the infrastructure and adapt to the cheap
availability of unconventional oil and gas. The first cohort in
the advanced process technology certificate in Fall 2015 will
demonstrate the scalability and portability of our upskilling
program and will let the Energy University build on the
significant achievement of the entire education pipeline
including K-12 education and community college education.
The Committee's focus on workforce development in the
energy sector is well placed. We are very proud of the
initiatives the University of Houston has undertaken in our
region and are encouraged by the Committee's efforts to
consider ways to scale workforce development programs in the
energy sector on a national basis. I thank you for the
opportunity to provide testimony today and look forward to
answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Krishnamoorti follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much, Dr. Krishnamoorti. Our
next witness is Monica Martinez who is the President of
Hispanics in Energy. So thanks for being with us, and you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MONICA MARTINEZ

Ms. Martinez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman Whitfield and Ranking
Member Rush and members of the subcommittee. I want to thank
you for the opportunity to testify today on Title II: 21st
Century Workforce.
Mr. Whitfield. Would you mind just pulling the microphone a
little bit closer?
Ms. Martinez. Oh, sure. I commend each of you for taking
the time to focus on ensuring that America has a strong,
diverse energy and manufacturing workforce. It is a privilege
to be here today to support the bipartisan draft legislation
that is aimed at accomplishing this critical priority.
I am Monica Martinez, President of Hispanics in Energy.
Hispanics in Energy is a non-partisan, non-profit organization
whose mission is to engage Hispanic and other diverse
communities in our Nation's energy policy dialogue and
workforce. And thank you, Congressman Flores, for being a
continued supporter.
Our population is over 54 million, making people of
Hispanic origin the Nation's largest ethnic or racial minority.
At 11.9 million Hispanic households, we comprise roughly 10
percent of our Nation's total households.
For 2012, the median income of Hispanic households was
$39,000 whereas the median income of U.S. households was
$51,017. The poverty rate among Hispanics is roughly 25.6
percent, whereas the national poverty rate is at 15 percent.
I mention these figures to make sure I am illustrating the
disparity that exists. But I also find them useful in the
debate when we discuss jobs and economic opportunity. The best
way to help alleviate poverty and to grow household income is
to expand the outreach and availability of good paying jobs.
And I believe that for Hispanics, African Americans, American
Indians, women, and all Americans, access to economic
opportunity in the energy field can be crucial for helping
boost those earnings and bring about greater standards of
living.
We have heard about the shale revolution and even more so
even when we talk about green energy economy. We know that
there are job opportunities available. Recent reports, even
ones by HIS, project that there are up to 408,000 jobs
available that can be held by African Americans and Hispanics
by 2030 in the oil and gas sector. IHS estimates that 63
percent of all job opportunities will be blue collar jobs. This
is a truly bipartisan and energy technology neutral
opportunity. We know that even the green sector is growing, and
they are moving as well. And I think we need to take advantage
of it.
Hispanics in Energy over the last year has held community
conversations across the country discussing this very
opportunity. From that effort we have learned several things.
General dissemination of energy opportunities to a variety of
stakeholders is key.
Recent research indicates that the number one obstacle to
women considering employment in the oil and gas industry is
lack of awareness and understanding of the job opportunities
and career development available. Just by outreaching and
making sure we are sharing the message, we can overcome this
obstacle.
Engagement of students at all levels from when they are
young sprouts, early age in elementary and beyond, is critical
to engaging them. When we think about it, of the 70,000
undergraduate engineers, only 12 percent represent all under-
represented groups, and the pool of under-represented engineers
gets even smaller at the graduate level. We must do something
to change this.
We also need to expand the network of engagement by energy
providers and companies to create a pipeline of prospective
networks, and this includes working with various groups--
veterans workforce development associations, other associations
like our own--to create that partnership within that non-profit
and public/private sector is key.
The fourth principle is really thinking about pathways that
need to be developed for different demographic groups and
segments of the population. I recognize the Center for Energy
Workforce Development that can attest that the education and
skills needed are the same for everyone, but the best way to
prepare individuals may in fact be different. And this may
include different wrap-around services or other items to help
ensure their success.
The last principle I mention, and this is because I was a
former regulator within the State of Michigan, and my question
always was, we have to look at the data and analyze, just
making sure everything that you do--and I know this is
mentioned in the draft legislation--look at the analysis and
create benchmarks. We need to assess the performance and also
find and discover best practices so that what we are doing in
one region can be replicated in other regions as appropriate.
Those are key.
In closing, I just really want to thank the committee for
their work. If we do not take action today to improve the
opportunities for under-represented communities in the
workforce, we will be only adding to the current disparity that
exists between the energy industry and the community it serves.
The energy industry can be more reflective of the
characteristics of our population, and by doing so, our whole
economy will benefit. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Martinez follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, and our next witness is Mr.
Charles Wilson who is the Senior Reactor Operator Trainer and
Managing Partner of CW Consulting Group. Thanks for being with
us, and Mr. Wilson, you are recognized for 5 minutes as well.

STATEMENT OF CHARLES WILSON

Mr. Wilson. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Rush, and the
other members of the committee, my deepest gratitude.
I am a 36-year-old black man who was raised in the South
Side Englewood neighborhood of Chicago. I was born to a single,
teenage mother, Elizabeth Wilson, and have two younger
siblings, Natasha and Tabitha Wilson. My mother's parents died
while she was in her teens. My father played no role in our
lives. Today I don't know if he is dead or alive.
We were poor. My family received SNAP benefits, and a small
amount of money that my mother received afforded us a very
humble apartment during a period in Chicago where the murder
rate was nearly twice the rate it is today. Despite my
impoverished circumstances, I matriculated through the Chicago
Public School System and graduated from Lindblom Technical High
School. In 1996, my joy of having survived to the age of 17 and
graduating high school displaced my need to put together a
long-term life strategy and plan of execution. That lack of
having specific goals contributed to me becoming a teenage
husband and father, ready to repeat the cycle that is
commonplace amongst those in communities similar to mine. The
walls of hopelessness and poverty waited to trap yet another
tenant and disrupt the generational foundation necessary to
break this destructive cycle.
The birth of my firstborn, Erin Wilson, provided me an
opportunity to be a man whose values and principles would be
the polar opposite of the man responsible for my birth. That
opportunity came in the form of a career serving in the U.S.
Navy as a nuclear operator and submariner. My 6-year career
provided me the base knowledge and unique skill set that was
attractive and needed by the commercial nuclear industry.
Exelon Nuclear gave me my first opportunity as an IBEW
union chemistry technician and instructor. That opportunity set
a trajectory which allowed me to obtain my senior reactor
operator certification for training in December 2013. Since
Exelon, I have worked at various commercial sites. Every job I
have had in the industry has provided me with at least $100,000
annual income. The new awareness of this life-changing career
path inspired me to partner with my best friend, Dion Clark, of
TCI Solutions, also a Navy nuclear operator and senior reactor
operator certified trainer. Though Dion served as part of the
Navy surface fleet, we won't hold that against him. Dion, a
product of Chicago's South Side Robbins neighborhood, and I
decide that we wanted to share the opportunity we had been
given with our community, the under-represented, disadvantaged,
and underserved. Our philosophy was simple: If we could make
it, so could they.
And here is how: We created the Legacy Initiative, a
program that is rooted in the concept of teaching young people
how to think critically. Our youth span from elementary through
high school, and we challenge them to take a moment and ask,
with this decision, is what I am about to gain worth what I
might lose? We incentivize this intrinsic behavioral change by
using ourselves as muses, making them aware of the opportunity
and educating them on how to attain these opportunities.
From 2008 until now, we have taught our character
development and logic curriculum to more than 4,000 youth in
Chicagoland, Arizona, and Pennsylvania. We have partnered with
the Center for Energy and Workforce Development. We are now
implementing the second phase of our strategy to pipeline these
young people to those post-secondary institutions that have 2-
and 4-year STEM degrees. These individuals in turn will become
the qualified, skilled workforce that the energy and
manufacturing industries need.
This bill would make what were a series of chance
encounters and good timing for me into a template for
deliberate, rewarding strategies for those demographics I
represent and more. As evidence, I offer that my daughter, who
graduates in June from Kenwood Academy in Chicago, will be
entering the historically black university, Howard, majoring in
nuclear engineering. My oldest son, Willie Hampton, graduates
next year and intends on obtaining his 2-year technology
degree, getting a job as a nuclear operator, taking courses
while he is utilizing his company's tuition reimbursement
benefit, and then graduate with his undergraduate degree at the
same time as his high school classmates. But he will have 2
years of work experience, having enjoyed a six-figure income
and having no debt.
Our paths like the ones funded and supported by this bill
ensures that my 5-year-old son, Charles Wilson II, and others
in his generation don't have to experience poverty and can
start to build the generational wealth and opportunity that
evaded the generations before them. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wilson follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Wilson, and I thank all of
you very much for your testimony. I will recognize myself for 5
minutes of questions, and then we will give everyone up here an
opportunity.
Many of you have talked about programs that are already in
existence, and Ms. Brundage, with Shale NET and Mr. Jarvis with
the NECA labor union apprenticeship programs in which you all
are doing at the University of Houston. And I was wondering, on
the Hispanics in Energy, do you all have a training program or
a program that is helping workers get into the energy sector?
Ms. Martinez. We don't have a training program, but we are
doing the outreach. And what we found from our tour across the
country last year was that in many ways, many of these programs
are operating but they are not interconnected.
Mr. Whitfield. They are not interconnected?
Ms. Martinez. Right. So when we think about the engagement
of many things, we know that there are different groups that
are out there working and trying to aim towards this goal, but
a lot of times the agencies and the entities are not
communicating. And so, by part of this legislation, I do
believe, is to make sure that you have that efficiency and that
collaboration, because with that collaboration you can achieve
better success.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
Ms. Martinez. So many groups work within their own silos.
And so our goal is to try to help bring those things together
and make those connections.
Mr. Whitfield. And Mr. Wilson, you and Mr. Clark, in your
program, do you all have training programs or is it more of a
mentoring or how does it exactly----
Mr. Wilson. Combination of both, Mr. Chairman. What we
found in our time was that we have to change the behavioral
process and thinking of the young people in some of these
communities. We can't put them in front of an employer and they
don't know how to make better decisions for themselves. So we
wanted to instill things like self-concept and self-respect,
accountability. And then with that, we can instill leadership.
So that is the first part, is to change that behavioral
attitude and decision making.
Secondly, yes, we do want to then train them with those
stackable credentials that the doctor mentioned and also the
wrap-around services that Ms. Martinez also spoke to. So there
is a collaborative aspect that has to come with this. So there
is the training, not only with the mentoring but also with the
skills that they need to--into the energy sector.
Mr. Whitfield. So do all of you agree that this type of
legislation would really be beneficial or does anyone have any
suggestions on ways we could improve it? I am assuming all of
you have read it.
Mr. Jarvis. Mr. Chairman, if I could, our apprenticeship
program addresses the exact things the other panel members are
talking about today with our outreach programs. We have many
programs where we reach into the communities for the
underserved and undereducated and offer these career
opportunities. And so we think this legislation speaks exactly
to that, and we look for your support.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Dr. Krishnamoorti?
Mr. Krishnamoorti. Thank you. We agree with that
observation. There is no silver bullet. It has to be a
combination strategy. We need to look at apprenticeship
programs. We need to look at stackable credentials. We need to
look at mentorship programs. And clearly, these programs have
to be scalable, but in the end are individually focused.
Mr. Whitfield. I think Ms. Martinez touched on a good point
because it is awful easy to kind of be isolated out there and
not have interconnection. So that is one. I am sorry, Dr.
Brundage, did you want to make a comment?
Ms. Brundage. Yes. Thank you. No, I agree with you, and I
think, one of the things that I tried to reference in my verbal
testimony was to try to target some of that federal funding in
promoting those regional collaborations. And in the example of
Shale NET, we set up a lot of hubs in areas where there is a
lot of activity, and it began in the upstream side. But as we
moved forward realized that there are more opportunities to
spread that out into scale in the midstream and downstream. So
it is taking that successful model and those stackable
credentials and trying to build that continuum and that pathway
for people to continue in being able to move into those types
of career opportunities.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
Mr. Wilson. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
Mr. Wilson. To also ask you the question about other areas,
there are two other areas that I think that we should
concentrate on as well and that is the wrap-around service
aspect. Groups like the United Way, if we can utilize those
non-profits that will take care of the things that children
have to consider or youth have to consider, if you are
wondering about eating, you are not going to concentrate on
your math and physics. So if we have those things that sort of
take those concerns off the table, I believe that will help
strengthen that pipeline.
Secondly, when they get to these schools, do they have
adequate housing? That is something that I had one of my youth
contact me about and say though he can get into the school,
which was Linn State, he didn't know where he was going to
live. So that is another concern is when they get there, how do
we make sure they are taken care of when they get to these
collegiate levels?
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much, Mr. Wilson, and my time
has expired. So Mr. Rush, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. Again, I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman. This
has been so far a very exciting hearing for me. Mr. Wilson, as
I read your testimony and listened to your testimony, I
couldn't help but be moved by your story which is a story that
has been shared thousands and thousands of times among youth
across the Nation. It reminded me also of my own life story,
and I was also raised by a single mom with five children on the
South and West Sides of Chicago. And I am a high school
dropout. I dropped out of high school, but now I have two
bachelor's degrees. So overcoming the odds is something that I
am real familiar with. And so your story reflects and is
parallel not only to my story but to others.
I applaud you for not settling for the life that was right
around you, the life that you observed day by day, getting up
in the morning and going outside and seeing the negativism that
is around you, and somehow you had to dream bigger and dream
further and dream the impossible. And so I applaud you for not
only dreaming the impossible but you believed in the impossible
and believed that you can overcome the odds and make the
impossible possible. So I really congratulate you. I know the
path and the steps that you have gone through.
And I just want to take a moment. Ms. Martinez, it is so
good seeing you again. We were on the same panel some months
back, and welcome. But Mr. Wilson, in your testimony you stated
that success came from unexpected and unplanned manners. Tell
me what did you mean by that? Explain that more. How do you
think that provisions of this bill can help other young men and
young women through real-life conditions and help them to
realize that similarly evasive but real nearby American dream
if we only had the courage to step out? How do you think this
bill will assist in that manner?
Mr. Wilson. For me, it is important for me to think about
the fact that there is more, there is more to it. And sometimes
it is just a matter of exposure. When I was in Chicago and
those neighborhoods, I wasn't exposed to anything. I could only
see what was in front of me, and I didn't have many role models
around for me to see what was possible. So when I speak to the
unexpected, I didn't script this. I spoke to my mother the
other day, and I said who would have thought in this small
bedroom on 56th and Hermitage that I would be sitting here in
front of Members of Congress? That is what I mean. It is not
about where you are from. It is are you going to use it as a
crutch or are you going to use it as fuel? And once you are
exposed, once you have access, I believe that these young
people that we are talking about, they will see what they need
to become. We will incentivize that behavioral change. We will
see that there is something to lose. And when you feel like
there is something to lose, it changes your behaviors.
So for me, that is what did it. I looked at my daughter,
and I did not want her to have to repeat the cycles of not
having a father in her life. He became, my father became, my
fuel. If I do the opposite of what he does, he has given me my
blueprint for me to be successful and hopefully raise
successful children. And I want to speak to a legacy. This is
what it is about for me. My children saw me and how I did what
I did, and now their efforts are deliberate. They are planning
it. It is not happenstance, which is what happened for me. If I
didn't have a friend, Brady Fox, that went to the Navy and
said, hey, do you want to come? I looked around. Why not join
the Navy? And with that, I was selected to be a part of the
Navy Nuclear Propulsion Program, and I am able to now say that
that gave me the foundation that I have right now. And with
these institutions, these educational opportunities we have
now, this can now again be another pathway that wasn't expected
and now exists. And I believe this bill will allow more of
these type of stories to again be delivered.
Mr. Rush. In a similar way, I dropped out, and I was 17
years old on my next birthday which was about 3 months later. I
pleaded with my mother to sign. Let me go into the service.
Three of my friends from the neighborhood, two of them went to
the Marines and I went to the Army. And that is what gave me
the wherewithal and to turn my life around. So again, parallel
circumstances.
Thank you so very much. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, Mr. Pitts, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me continue with
you, Mr. Wilson. You have a compelling story. I really
appreciate hearing it. And you went in the Navy, and that was
the key. What were your skills before you went in and how was
the Navy effective in changing your skill level?
Mr. Wilson. My skills from an educational standpoint came
from Lindblom High School. It was a technical high school. And
it was very rigorous in the sciences and the math. I was
unaware that I would need to use algebra or understanding what
velocity and force and anything meant. And it is funny. There
is an exam that is required once you take what they call the
ASVAB for the military. I was then selected to take this
nuclear entrance exam. I recall one of the questions talking
about speed, and it happened to be something I paid attention
to with my teacher, Mr. Robinson, in physics. I needed a 50 to
pass, and I had a 52. And there were five of us that took it,
and I was the only one that actually passed. And when I looked
around, they took me into a room and they said, we want to talk
to you, Charles. I said, what is that? You are the only one
that passed. And I looked at people who were college educated
around me. They were speaking about this nuclear program as if
it was something that they knew that they were going to get. I
looked around and I was the only one that passed.
So I would say that that time in high school, that
education, that math and science focus, is what gave me the
foundation. Any other skills came from just truly survival,
being in Chicago. And I was a pizza delivery guy. I don't know
if that had anything to do with it.
Mr. Pitts. What were the key components? You have a real
compelling story. I want to drill down a little bit. What are
the key components to your behavioral change?
Mr. Wilson. My mother first. Elizabeth Wilson represents
fortitude, strength, and more importantly resiliency. You have
to understand, a teenage mother having three children and not
planning her life to be that way and not having her own parents
to fall back on because both of them died while she was a teen.
And so she literally was trying to write the book as she
was moving forward. She inspired me. She gave me the belief in
myself as well. She encouraged me to be free. I used to enjoy
bringing As home to her because she smiled, and that inspired
me to want to do that more.
When I got to high school, my classmates, watching how they
got up every day to come to school, despite the odds, gunshots,
three or four different gang neighborhoods that we would walk
through, and I saw them come every day. And there was a joy to
come to school with everyone from Lindblom. Those things, that
relationship, is what caused me to say I want to do more. I
want to do better than what I am seeing.
Mr. Pitts. Now, in talking about working with people who
need a second chance, how do you teach and how do they
emphasize the right character qualities for behavioral change
to get them so they do show up on time, you know, that they are
the type of employee that employers want to hire. Would you
develop that a little bit?
Mr. Wilson. I believe the first thing is we have to be
transparent and honest about what opportunities exist. Very
many times we speak very vaguely about what an opportunity is.
So someone from let's say my neighborhood, when I would go
speak to the young people that we had in Chicago and other
places, I would literally take them my paycheck, and I would
pass it around and I would tell them to look at the number on
my paycheck and let them see me tangibly and give my story and
say I am nothing but you. There is no magic pill except focus
and having specific goals because after you have these specific
goals, the map to get there will lay itself out.
So I think when you are honest and transparent--the other
thing is you have to be very transparent about your errors. We
typically try to gloss over the errors and only get to those
good things about us. So being transparent is what allowed me
to now have people that trusted me, and when I give them now
these suggestions, they will take it for face value initially,
and then when they see the results, they are bought in. So it
actually becomes intrinsic because I first show them that it is
possible, and then secondly, here is what it takes to get there
and then they will believe it.
I think that is what it is. All people need is an
opportunity, and if they see that it is possible and they see
someone in front of them that looks like them that can speak to
and articulate a message for them that is palatable, I think
they will get it from there.
Mr. Pitts. And you are obviously teaching that to your
children so you can replicate success.
Mr. Wilson. That is correct.
Mr. Pitts. You are a real inspiration. Thank you very much.
My time----
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Pitts.
Mr. Pitts [continuing]. Has expired.
Mr. Whitfield. I wanted to make an announcement that we
anticipate that there will be votes on the floor at about 11:15
or 11:20. And of course, we have 15 or 17 minutes to get over
there. I think if we break for these votes, a lot of people
will end up not coming back. So would you all object if
everyone was given 3 minutes for questions? That way we would
have maybe an opportunity for everyone to ask questions. Is
that suitable with everybody? OK. Then Mr. McNerney of
California will be recognized for 3 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. I enjoy being the first one with 3 minutes,
Mr. Chairman. No, I want to thank the chairman and the ranking
member for their work on this and the panelists. They have very
good testimony. We have the Labor Statistics' unemployment rate
for African Americans at 10 percent, more than twice that for
whites. Hispanics, almost as bad, some of the statistics that
Ms. Martinez raised. And then on the other hand, we have all
these opportunities in the energy industry. Solar industry grew
86 percent since 2010. Wind industry, 73,000 full-time workers.
Energy efficiency, 1.3 to 1.9 million new jobs by 2050. So we
have it and we have opportunity. What are we going to do about
it? Well, we have some ideas up here on the panel. I thank you
very much for that.
Dr. Brundage, I am very excited by Shale NET. I haven't
heard anything about it before. I am going to ask my staff to
get a copy of a description of that, see how applicable that
would be. Could you give me some idea how Shale NET is funded?
Ms. Brundage. Yes, absolutely. Right now I mentioned in the
verbal testimony it was funded by the Department of Labor. a
TAACCCT Round II grant, which was a capacity-building grant to
help with infrastructure. This particular grant does not pay
for tuition. On the short-term workforce side, we have these 3-
week programs, sort of like boot camps, and we have active case
managers that help the students understand the expectations and
the culture, the work environment. We start classes early, we
end later, so that they have a feel for what the expectations
are, and we have been able to raise local dollars through
Pennsylvania's Act 13 and to help with scholarships and also
through corporate engagement. Chevron has pledged $460,000 for
the initiative over the next several years. And so we are
trying to help offset some of that tuition because unemployed
and underemployed folks, you know, if they don't have access to
those dollars, it is difficult.
Mr. McNerney. OK. Thank you. Mr. Jarvis, you said the
government should promote apprenticeships. Do you have any
ideas on how that should be done?
Mr. Jarvis. By supporting apprenticeship programs through
the different grants that are available, and by supporting our
trade groups, it allows us to do more outreach into the
community. I am also moved by Mr. Wilson's story. I have many
employees that work under me that have come up through our
programs, outreach programs, and some of the other questions
about what does it take to make people understand these
opportunities and what skills. We teach life skills, things as
simple as you have to get to work on time, you have to show up
every day. Our outreach programs teach those things first,
which makes these people, as they come into our apprenticeship
programs, successful in the program. If you can't do those
things----
Mr. McNerney. Well, I have been to the YouthBuild program
in my district, and IBW is there promoting apprenticeships. So
that is good. I would like to ask Mr. Wilson a question, but I
have run out of time. So I will yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you, and they called this vote a
lot earlier than we thought. They have already called the vote,
but at this time right now, the gentleman from Mississippi, Mr.
Harper, for 3 minutes.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to each of you
for being here on a very important topic, and I, too, would
like to say, Mr. Wilson, thank you for the inspiring story. And
I am not one who wants to brag on my academic accomplishments,
but I did graduate in the top 100 percent of my class. So I
wanted to go ahead and throw that out. It was close, too, by
the way.
Mr. Jarvis, you talked about the importance of having a
flexible workforce available to adapt to emerging trends. Can
you give me an example of what you mean when you say it is
unnecessary and short-sighted to train someone in a single
technology?
Mr. Jarvis. Yes. Thank you. We train electricians to be
able to do all sectors in the electrical industry so a very
common example today is the solar industry. There are groups
that believe that we should be training a solar worker which is
just one small piece of being able to do electrical work. Our
5-year apprenticeship program teaches a career opportunity.
Markets change. The solar industry will change. Our training
program trains a person for a lifelong career to be able to
earn not only top wages but top benefits as well. So you need
to have a diverse training that takes a lot more than just one
sector in the energy industry in our opinion.
Mr. Harper. And if you do that, whether we call it cross-
training or giving them the different options here, what does
that do as far as the additional time needed for the training
program?
Mr. Jarvis. Well, the training program that we have is a 5-
year program, but you work as you----
Mr. Harper. Within that curriculum for the 5 years, OK.
Mr. Jarvis. Correct.
Mr. Harper. Great. Thanks. I will yield back in the
interest of time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Jarvis. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Harper. Mr. Loebsack, you are
recognized for 3 minutes.
Mr. Loebsack. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and our ranking member.
This really is a really great opportunity to hear from you
folks. It has been kind of an eclectic panel I think to say the
least, a lot of different things that have been mentioned here.
I might ask just one question. I do want to just make some
comments about workforce development more generally, and I do
want to kind of throw a question at you folks that may be
unfair and probably should be directed more at my colleagues
and as we work through this bill and do what we can to make it
better eventually. But I was on the Education in the Workforce
Committee for 8 years, and we dealt with a lot of these issues
on that committee. We passed the Workforce Innovation
Opportunity Act last year which was the reauthorization of the
Workforce Investment Act. There is a huge overlap between what
we are talking about today here with respect to the Department
of Energy and the various things that have been talked about
today and what the Department of Labor does. And I know the
Administration is trying to interface some of the agencies and
what they do.
And again, Mr. Chair and Ranking Member, this is something
I would like to be working with you folks on down the road,
sort of how can we get some of these agencies to talk to one
another and work together and streamline some of these
programs, maybe combine some of the efforts if possible? But I
do want to ask, and it is kind of an unfair question, I admit,
to all of you, because you are nodding. If you will, Doctor,
any thoughts about how we might be able to do that instead of
reinventing the wheel every time, having one department do
something, have another department do something that might be
similar to what that department is doing. Any thoughts about
that at all? I know it is throwing you folks for a loop here,
and maybe I am doing the same thing to my colleagues.
Mr. Wilson. Is there a way to make effectively a liaison
within each department that is meant to sort of see what the
overlaps are----
Mr. Loebsack. I think that would be a great idea.
Mr. Wilson [continuing]. With the Department of Commerce,
with the Department of Labor, where there is a person that
looks and sees, OK, what active efforts do you have?
Mr. Loebsack. Right. And the Department of Energy perhaps--
--
Mr. Wilson. Exactly.
Mr. Loebsack [continuing]. In the states.
Mr. Wilson. Then they all just effectively maybe do like a
sit-down once a month or whatever any new legislation that
comes out specifically for their groups.
Mr. Loebsack. Right.
Mr. Wilson. Is there a way to have maybe a liaison or
person----
Mr. Loebsack. That is a real possibility.
Mr. Wilson [continuing]. To reach out----
Mr. Loebsack. Thank you, Mr. Wilson. I appreciate that
because again, there are going to be a lot of things. Yes,
Doctor?
Mr. Krishnamoorti. I would like to add there are modes of
operations where there are collaborations between agencies,
interagency collaboration. Interior and Energy collaborate, for
instance----
Mr. Loebsack. Right.
Mr. Krishnamoorti [continuing]. In the off-shore space. And
that makes a big difference in being able to double-up training
programs for off-shore workers. Similar things can be done with
Labor. They have the data. Energy needs the data in order to
actually bridge that skill gap.
Mr. Loebsack. Right. I think that is great. We have a lot
of community colleges in Iowa, and we have got a lot of
connections between the community colleges and the wind energy
program for example, too, and we can do more with populations
who are under-represented in these areas. I have no doubt about
that.
And so I am going to look forward to trying to find a way
to interface these different departments and the different
programs so we can move forward on these issues. And my time is
up. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The chair recognizes the gentleman from West
Virginia, Mr. McKinley, for 3 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I had probably 5
minutes of questioning. We are going to try to cut it back down
to three. The first observation I had about this whole issue--I
was really looking forward to be educated about this, and I
think some of you have touched on it. But the primary issue is
about rural America. I think we struggle. Coming from West
Virginia in a small community is how do we have an educated
workforce, ready for manufacturing, energy, when we don't have
a critical mass? So I am applauding--what we did last year in
the last Congress, we introduced a bill. It was 3524 that tried
to focus funds going into economically deprived communities to
help out, to plus them up some in the grants and programs for
education. I think we ought to be looking at that as well. I
don't know whether any of you are familiar with that bill that
was introduced last year, but I know that Tracy, you got
something going at Penn College that is also at Pierpont where
we have a training program there for Shale NET.
Ms. Brundage. Correct.
Mr. McKinley. Can you explain some of the advantages of how
that has helped out? Because there at Fairmont is a small
community that is struggling. So this program may be helpful.
Can you share a little bit about some of the advantages and how
we might be able to spread that broader for other rural
communities?
Ms. Brundage. That is an excellent question. We have had a
lot of discussion about that within the consortium. Pierpont
recently became an affiliate of Shale NET. So they are kind of
a newcomer to the scene, and they are beginning to offer
training there because of our relationship with Chevron wanted
to have a hub in West Virginia to be able to have this
consistent training so that people, you can have that
consistency flexible program to meet industry needs.
Your question about--I think it is important to be able to
scale these, and I think I talked a little bit about the
stackable credential model and how that model is mobile and can
be moved to other locations depending upon the geography. If
they didn't want to do the training in the upstream side, you
can target it to other sectors of the energy industry. The
model with the stackable credentials and the various pathways
and continuums really work to make sure that you have that
consistent career pathway for individuals to move into.
So I don't know if that answered your question,
specifically?
Mr. McKinley. Well, as much as how we just need to keep
going, are you familiar at all with the bill that was providing
grants for economically depressed areas? Were you familiar with
that last year?
Ms. Brundage. No.
Mr. McKinley. I would like to get your feedback from that,
from an academic standpoint or so, how that might work. It was
3524 during the last Congress. And see whether or not there are
some advantages of us being able to focus on economically
deprived areas, particularly those in rural America. Thank you
very much.
Mr. Whitfield. Maybe you could look at that, and then Mr.
McKinley's staff could be back in touch with you----
Ms. Brundage. Absolutely.
Mr. Whitfield [continuing]. To get your views. At this time
I would like to recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green,
for 3 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank our
panel again. In fact, Ms. Brundage, our Natural Gas Caucus a
couple of years ago had a hearing in Williamsport,
Pennsylvania, at the facility there, talked about it. And
coming from Houston, I was surprised to see the technology in
the middle of Pennsylvania that we are actually doing at the
University of Houston in East Harris County, our community
college. So thank you.
Ms. Brundage. I remember you said a few words. I was in the
audience when you were there.
Mr. Green. Yes, great facility.
Ms. Brundage. Thank you.
Mr. Green. Dr. Krishnamoorti, as I stated earlier, I feel
like Texas and Pennsylvania are doing a lot of things in the
energy industry, but what steps has the University of Houston
taken to create the outreach and provide access to the
different communities to provide information about energy jobs?
I have the College of Engineering in our district, and our
district is 70 percent Hispanic, Mexican American. You have to
reach out to those high schools in those communities there to
provide that training.
Mr. Krishnamoorti. Thank you so much, Congressman Green.
The Energy Institute High School is a new high school close to
the university, within a mile from the university. Seventy
percent of the students there are Hispanic, 15 percent of them
are African American, and we have got an active collaboration
with them. We work with them developing curriculum. We share
with them labs at the University of Houston with them. But also
we are able to send our students, our undergraduate students
and graduate students as peer instructors in that school. And
that makes the biggest difference for them, having role models
who can come into the schools, show them by example. As Mr.
Wilson mentioned, examples of people who have succeeded, who
have learned and developed.
We have also taken the same strategy, worked with the whole
range of community colleges, nine community college systems in
the Greater Houston area, 60-plus community colleges across the
State of Texas, all of them focused on taking these stackable
credentials, finding ways of actually scaling them and
deploying them.
Mr. Green. I only have a few seconds left. Can you tell us
how can this bill and the Department of Energy further the
goals of the universities and the colleges and community
colleges that are already engaged in these projects? Is there
anything we could do that would make this bill better?
Mr. Krishnamoorti. I think the bill is right on the mark in
terms of helping the universities work with community colleges
and K through 12 education. I think getting that pipeline set
up is the critical piece, and this bill addresses that in a big
way. Thank you.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman from Ohio is recognized 3
minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Brundage, thanks
largely to the oil and gas industry, coupled with programs like
Shale NET that is in our state there at State College,
unemployment in shale counties in my district in Eastern and
Southeastern Ohio has fallen 66 percent since 2010. In fact,
these shale counties are the economic impacts, the positive
economic impacts. So the shale plays--that is what is driving
the unemployment rate down for our entire state.
And because of this, we have got to continually look for
opportunities like Shale NET to prepare our students for the
jobs that are here today and that are coming tomorrow.
Quick question. If the goal of Shale NET is to increase
capacity in terms of qualified workforce to meet the needs of
the industry, how successful in your view has Shale NET been?
Can you give us some specifics?
Ms. Brundage. Absolutely. I think many factors contribute
to the success of Shale NET, and I think the successes are
strengthened by the knowledge of partners. It is the strong
partnerships to place these qualified candidates with employers
and families sustaining careers. But we have the robust
selection, assessment process in place, evaluating student
candidates--all of these things can be transferred to other
areas, other institutions.
When we look at a success measure for employers is the
retention in employment a year after placement, which is
demonstrated by participation in Shale NET. And with that
return on investment, we almost take on some of the role of on-
boarding because we are helping to vet those people and have
them understand the expectations and give them the appropriate
skill sets so that they know what to expect as they move into
those jobs, hopefully retaining and allowing them to have
greater career mobility.
Mr. Johnson. Great. Well, I appreciate that. I am going to
be respectful, Mr. Chairman, and yield back the remainder of my
time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much. Mr. Sarbanes, you are
recognized for 3 minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank all
of you for your testimony. Ms. Martinez and Mr. Wilson, I
wanted to ask this question. Obviously in the STEM arena we
want to make sure that the academic curriculum that is offered
in the classroom for young people in that K-12 space is as
rigorous and holistic as it can possibly be. But I am also
interested in the opportunities to connect young people with
the experiences outside the classroom, in a sense, get them out
of the classroom in various ways so maybe their horizons are
broadened and they can see the connection to that pipeline
opportunity that exists.
So if each of you could just very briefly comment on that
idea of how we get young people in the K-12 space out of the
classroom and connected to these career horizons, that would be
helpful.
Ms. Martinez. Absolutely. And that was an excellent
question. In Michigan, there are certainly some schools that
work and partner with various companies, especially in the
Detroit region, and in those areas they do have mentorship and
sort of on-the-job activities that are happening. Part of that
is they are getting the students out of the high schools and
out of the middle schools and doing sort of a 1-day job
shadowing, job mentoring so that they actually can see what is
happening. DTE Energy, Marathon Oil, others are taking part in
that opportunity, so kids are able to see that real hands-on
opportunity and actually get that job shadowing while they are
in school, and they are also able to see that just as you can
say it, really who that person is and who they are. And it
gives them a real goal to achieve.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you.
Ms. Martinez. We find those have been successful.
Mr. Sarbanes. OK.
Mr. Wilson. For example, specifically in Phoenix, we have
created a program called Legacy I-3, and its purpose is to
partner with these community colleges and some of these
apprenticeship programs and such. There is a specific
partnership that is created with APS in Palo Verde Nuclear
Generating Station, and they have created an ambassador
program. So what they do is they actually come to the client
schools that we have in Phoenix, in the Phoenix Union District,
and takes the students from the class to different job sites so
that they are exposed to seeing that this is really what we are
telling you theoretically in the classroom. So I think that is
an example. If you partner with these member companies, they
will have volunteers and those within their organizations that
would love to come and then bring those students to their
worksite.
Mr. Sarbanes. Great. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. At this time I recognize the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Flores.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you
and also Ranking Member Rush for hosting this hearing today. I
also want to thank each of you for your testimony. Given the
timing and how little time we have left to vote, I am going to
commend each of you for the jobs that you have done. I commend
you for the quality of your testimony. Mr. Wilson, all I can
say is wow. What an awesome piece of testimony. Ms. Martinez,
thank you for what you are doing.
I think given the lack of time we have, I will just submit
my questions in writing. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you very much, and I am sorry we
were interrupted by these votes, but I think everyone had an
opportunity to ask some questions. And thank you all for being
with us, and we look forward to working with you as we try to
put this package together in an effective way. We will keep the
record open for 10 days for any additional submissions, and
thank you once again. And we will adjourn today's hearing.
[Whereupon, at 11:20 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

I am very excited about the ``Title II: 21st Century
Workforce'' discussion draft that we will be examining at this
hearing. I am even more excited about the bipartisan process
that led to it as well as the other titles in the new energy
bill that this subcommittee is working on. I want to
particularly thank Bobby Rush, Gene Green, Bill Flores and
Richard Hudson for their efforts to collaborate on a positive
energy agenda on which I hope we can all agree.
Creating jobs remains my number one priority as it does for
most of us, and America's energy boom offers a major
opportunity to do so. The good news is that the energy sector
continues to create a wide variety of jobs, and even if the
drop in oil prices has temporarily reduced some types of
upstream positions, there are still many others like those in
manufacturing that benefit from affordable domestic energy
prices. Manufacturing is making a comeback in Michigan and
across the country, and skilled workers are now in high demand.
The energy and energy-related jobs are there to be filled,
but job training has struggled to keep pace. There is often a
disconnect between the young men and women ready to launch
their careers and the skills necessary to take advantage of the
opportunities in energy.
The 21st Century Workforce bridges the gap. It takes the
existing Department of Energy job training programs and
redirects them towards the market needs of today and the
future. One important component of this discussion draft is to
make sure that more women and minorities can acquire the skills
needed to participate in America's energy and manufacturing
boom.
Affordable and plentiful supplies of American energy offer
long term employment opportunities for millions seeking well-
paying careers, and the 21st Century Workforce discussion draft
helps make sure that these opportunities are available for all
who seek them.
----------

Prepared statement of Hon. Bill Flores

Mr. Chairman,
Thank you for holding today's legislative hearing on the
21st Century Workforce.
I strongly support promoting this important issue along
with Mr. Hudson, Ranking Member Rush, Mr. Green, and the rest
of my colleagues on the committee. Our domestic energy security
greatly improved as a result of the American energy revolution;
and we now lead the world in oil and gas production. Increased
American energy security translates in to improvement in our
own economic and national security. The Energy Information
Administration forecasts increased energy production through
2020, and that will result in increased demand in the
workforce. Meeting these growing needs in all aspects of the
energy industry, including oil and gas, nuclear, coal, and
renewables provides hardworking Americans significant
opportunities for well paying jobs.
This bill ensures that we have the skilled workers to
continue to fuel our American energy revolution for years to
come.
----------

Prepared statement of Hon. Joe Barton

Mr. Chairman:
I am pleased that we are beginning our discussions with an
area I believe we can all embrace and that is jobs and the
economy. My colleagues Mr. Flores, Mr. Green, Mr. Hudson, and
Mr. Rush have worked in a bipartisan manner to bring this issue
to the forefront.
Earlier this week it was reported in a Wall Street Journal
blog that while the US economy continued to add jobs last
month, states that rely heavily on the oil industry experienced
significant cuts.

Texas has lost 25,400 jobs

Oklahoma has lost 12,900.

North Dakota has lost 3,000.

All told, 31 states and Washington, D.C., saw a
drop in employment in March, and only 18 states saw employment
rising.
Michael Feroli, the chief U.S. economist for J.P. Morgan
Chase JPM, said Monday that the scale of job losses in Texas is
so large that the state may be in recession.
The purpose of the bill before us is to direct the
Secretary of Energy to establish and carry out a comprehensive
program to improve education and training for energy and
manufacturing-related jobs in order to increase the number of
skilled workers trained in energy and manufacturing fields.
That is a great goal.
Of particular interest to me are the provisions creating a
clearinghouse because this could potentially streamline the
process for those seeking training and help eliminate
duplication. In light of the recent downturn in my home state,
I also strongly support the provision that directs the
Secretary to give special consideration to increasing outreach
to unemployed energy workers.
Although it is not the subject of this hearing, I do
believe a have part of the solution to the downturn in jobs. I
have proposed legislation to get rid of the ban on crude oil
exports. I believe that simple act alone could greatly help our
producers reverse the trend of job loss. I'm happy to discuss
this with anyone who would like to.
Again, I appreciate all the work that has gone into this
draft legislation and I look forward to working on the entire
package of the Architecture of Abundance.

[all]
