- A NATIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR THE REVIEW AND LABELING OF BIOTECHNOLOGY IN FOOD

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

A NATIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR THE REVIEW AND LABELING OF BIOTECHNOLOGY IN
FOOD

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 18, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-58

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

97-704                         WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                     Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          KATHY CASTOR, Florida
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina         Massachusetts
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TONY CARDENAS, California
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
CHRIS COLLINS, New York                  officio)
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Gene Green, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, prepared statement......................................     4
Hon. G.K. Butterfield, a Representative in Congress from the
State of North Carolina, opening statement.....................     4
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     8

Witnesses

Rick Blasgen, President and Chief Executive Officer, Council of
Supply Chain Management Professionals..........................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    13
Answers to submitted questions...............................   125
Todd W. Daloz, Assistant Attorney General, Office of the Vermont
Attorney General...............................................    27
Prepared statement...........................................    29
Answers to submitted questions...............................   129
John Reifsteck, Chairman of the Board and President, Growmark,
Inc............................................................    47
Prepared statement...........................................    49
Answers to submitted questions...............................   135
Gregory Jaffe, Biotechnology Project Director, Center for Science
in the Public Interest.........................................    60
Prepared statement...........................................    62
Answers to submitted questions...............................   139
L. Val Giddings, Senior Fellow, Information Technology &
Innovation Foundation..........................................    69
Prepared statement...........................................    71
Answers to submitted questions \1\...........................   141

Submitted Material

Statement of support from Members of the Agriculture Committee,
submitted by Mr. Pompeo........................................   110
Statement of support from the Coalition for Safe and Affordable
Food, submitted by Mr. Butterfield.............................   115
Statement of support from the biotechnology industry, submitted
by Mr. Butterfield.............................................   121
Statement of support from the National Association of
Manufacturers, submitted by Mr. Pitts..........................   123

----------
\1\ Mr. Giddings did not respond to submitted questions for the
record by the time of printing.

A NATIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR THE REVIEW AND LABELING OF BIOTECHNOLOGY IN
FOOD

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 18, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:03 a.m., in
room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joseph R. Pitts
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Pitts, Guthrie, Whitfield,
Shimkus, Murphy, Burgess, Blackburn, Lance, Griffith,
Bilirakis, Ellmers, Bucshon, Brooks, Collins, Upton (ex
officio), Green, Capps, Schakowsky, Butterfield, Castor,
Sarbanes, Schrader, Kennedy, and Pallone (ex officio).
Also Present: Representatives Pompeo and Welch.
Staff Present: Clay Alspach, Chief Counsel, Health, Sean
Bonyun, Communications Director; Leighton Brown, Press
Assistant; Karen Christian, General Counsel; Noelle Clemente,
Press Secretary; Carly McWilliams, Professional Staff Member,
Health; Tim Pataki, Professional Staff Member; Graham Pittman,
Legislative Clerk; Chris Sarley, Policy Coordinator,
Environment & Economy; John Stone, Counsel, Health; Dylan
Vorbach, Staff Assistant; Greg Watson, Staff Assistant;
Christine Brennan, Minority Press Secretary; Jeff Carroll,
Minority Staff Director; Eric Flamm, Minority FDA Detailee;
Tiffany Guarascio, Minority Deputy Staff Director and Chief
Health Advisor; Samantha Satchell, Minority Policy Analyst; and
Kimberlee Trzeciak, Minority Health Policy Advisor.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Pitts. Good morning. I ask that all of our guests today
please take their seats. The subcommittee will come to order.
The chair will recognize himself for an opening statement.
Genetically modified organisms, or GMOs, is a term that
refers to ingredients sourced from crops that have been
genetically engineered to express certain traits or
characteristics.
There are real sensitivities around these issues and all
issues regarding the food we eat and feed our children and
grandchildren. It is our job, as policymakers, particularly as
it relates to the public health, to establish a factually and
scientifically sound foundation prior to taking any action that
would impact consumers and our economy.
This hearing provides a great opportunity to put rhetoric
aside and do just that. Genetic engineering in agriculture has
occurred for centuries. Ingredients from genetically engineered
plants have been a part of the U.S. Food supply for decades.
In fact, as much as 90 percent of our corn, sugar beet, and
soybean crops are now genetically engineered and more than 70
percent of processed foods contain ingredients derived from
such crops.
The Food and Drug Administration oversees the safety of all
food products from plant sources, including those from
genetically engineered crops. These products must meet the same
safety requirements as foods from traditionally-bred crops. The
FDA currently has a consultation in place which developers of
the underlying technologies address any outstanding safety or
other regulatory issues with the agency prior to marketing
their products.
FDA has completed approximately 100 of such consultations.
No products have gone to market until FDA's safety-related
questions have been resolved. FDA officials have repeatedly
stated that the agency has no basis for concluding that
bioengineered foods are different from other foods in any
meaningful way, and the World Health Organization has confirmed
that ``No effects on human health have been shown as a result
of consumption of such foods.'' In fact, they can grow faster,
resist diseases and drought, cost less, and prove more
nutritious. Nonetheless, there have recently been a number of
State initiatives calling for the mandatory labeling of food
products that contain GMOs.
We will hear today from a number of witnesses who can speak
to such actions and the impact they would have. I am concerned
that a patchwork of State labeling schemes would be impractical
and unworkable. Such a system would create confusion among
consumers and result in higher prices and fewer options.
Finally, I want to commend Representative Mike Pompeo and
Representative Butterfield for their leadership on these issues
and look forward to learning more about their continued efforts
to work in a bipartisan manner on H.R. 1599, the Safe and
Accurate Food Labeling Act of 2015. All these efforts will
continue as the legislative process moves forward. I am
encouraged that the revised language circulated in advance of
this hearing has been informed by conversations between the
sponsors, the committees of jurisdiction, the implementing
agencies, and the impact of stakeholders.
I would like to welcome all of our witnesses for being here
today. I look forward to your testimony. And I yield the
balance of my time to distinguished vice chairman of the full
committee, Representative Blackburn of Tennessee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Joseph R. Pitts

The Subcommittee will come to order.
The Chairman will recognize himself for an opening
statement.
Genetically modified organisms, or GMOs, is a term that
refers to ingredients sourced from crops that have been
genetically engineered to express certain traits or
characteristics.
There are real sensitivities around these issues, and all
issues regarding the food we eat and feed our children and
grandchildren. It is our job as policymakers, particularly as
it relates to the public health, to establish a factually and
scientifically sound foundation prior to taking any action that
would impact consumers and our economy. This hearing provides a
great opportunity to put rhetoric aside and do just that.
Genetic engineering in agriculture has occurred for
centuries. Ingredients from genetically engineered plants have
been a part of the U.S. food supply for decades. In fact, as
much as 90 percent of our corn, sugar beet, and soybean crops
are now genetically engineered and more than 70 percent of
processed foods contain ingredients derived from such crops.
The Food and Drug Administration oversees the safety of all
food products from plant sources, including those from
genetically engineered crops. These products must meet the same
safety requirements as foods from traditionally bred crops. The
FDA currently has a consultation process in place in which
developers of the underlying technologies address any
outstanding safety or other regulatory issues with the agency
prior to marketing their products. FDA has completed
approximately 100 of such consultations. No products have gone
to market until FDA's safety-related questions have been
resolved.
FDA officials have repeatedly stated that the agency has no
basis for concluding that bioengineered foods are different
from other foods in any meaningful way, and the World Health
Organization has confirmed that ``no effects on human health
have been shown as a result of consumption of such foods.'' In
fact, they can grow faster, resist diseases and drought, cost
less, and prove more nutritious.
Nonetheless, there have recently been a number of state
initiatives calling for the mandatory labeling of food products
that contain GMOs. We will hear today from a number of
witnesses who can speak to such actions and the impact they
would have.
I'm concerned that a patchwork of state labeling schemes
would be impractical and unworkable. Such a system would create
confusion among consumers and result in higher prices and fewer
options.
Finally, I want to commend Rep. Mike Pompeo (R-KS) and Rep.
G.K. Butterfield (D-NC) for their leadership on these issues,
and I look forward to learning more about their continued
efforts to work in a bipartisan manner on H.R. 1599, the Safe
and Accurate Food Labeling Act of 2015. While these efforts
will continue as the legislative process moves forward, I am
encouraged that the revised language circulated in advance of
this hearing has been informed by conversations between the
sponsors, the committees of jurisdiction, the implementing
agencies, and impacted stakeholders.
I would like to welcome all of our witnesses for being here
today. I look forward to your testimony. I yield to ----------
------------------.

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome to all. And the chairman mentioned the food that we
eat and that we feed our children and grandchildren. I want to
add one category to that, what we feed our pets. And we are
concerned about that aspect also.
I do appreciate Mr. Pompeo and the assistance they have
given us as we look at pet food labeling. And the chairman also
mentioned that we have had these products in the marketplace
for decades. I would say we are talking about over 100 years.
Go back and look at what farmers did. And they would breed
cattle to get the best traits. Look at the work that George
Washington Carver did in his 40 years of teaching and research
at Tuskegee, looking for ways to improve the soil, looking at
different varietals of peanut and sweet potatoes and improving
the health of individuals in the south.
Genetically modified foods are components that are indeed
with us, and it is because of them that we have greater yields
per acre; we have more varieties, and that our farmers markets
that I visit every single weekend are full of beautiful
products that encourage people to access these fresh foods and
bring them into their homes and kitchens.
With that, I thank all for their work. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady.
Now I recognize the ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr.
Green for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Mr. Chairman, I was glad our vice chair of the
subcommittee worried about our pets. My problem is I had a dog
one time that ate pillows and curtains and everything else. I
think he ate everything he could get his mouth on.
Mr. Chairman, I have a statement I would like to put into
the record, but I would like to yield my time to Congressman
Butterfield.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Green follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Gene Green

Good morning and thank you all for being here today.
Genetically Modified Organisms, or GMO's, first hit the
market around 20 years ago and in the years since, have only
expanded in prevalence. Nowadays, most corn, sugar beets,
canola and cotton crops grown in the U.S. are genetically
modified.
Today, as we debate whether there is a need for a national
framework for the labeling of GMO ingredients, I feel it is
important to first talk about the safety and science of
genetically modified organisms.
The FDA has conducted evaluation after evaluation on GMOs
through their voluntary consultation process, and consistently
found no material difference between the GMO and their non-
modified counterparts. Moreover, there have not been any cases
where FDA found that a genetically modified organism was unsafe
for consumption.
Genetically Modified food is not only safe for consumption,
but has a positive environmental impact. A comprehensive study
by the National Academy of Sciences found that GMO's have
significantly increased crop yields while decreasing pesticide
use and soil erosion.
The benefits of GMOs are not limited to environmental
stewardship. Norman Borlaug, the father of the ``Green
Revolution'' and recipient of the Noble Peace Prize is credited
with saving a billion lives through his creation of Dwarf
Wheat, a genetically modified plant that doubled the crop yield
in Pakistan and India, dramatically improving food security in
those countries.
Even today, Golden Rice, a crop containing biosynthesized
beta-carotene is essential in combatting Vitamin A deficiency
in Asia. This GMO crop is credited with saving the lives of
670,000 children under the age of 5 every year. At this point,
it has clearly been demonstrated that GMO technology is not
only safe, but of immense benefit to society.
Most analysts estimate that 80% of packed foods in the u.s.
contain genetically modified ingredients or plants. When it
comes to mandatory labeling, food labels should impart useful,
scientifically-sound information to consumers. With that said,
consumers who want to know the origin and process of their food
should have access to that information through a voluntary and
certified GMO-Free label that they can be confident in. I feel
that H.R. 1599, the Safe and Accurate Food Labeling Act moves
us towards that goal.
At the same time, any proposed legislation that preempts
existing State Law must be considered with careful scrutiny.
Congress must have a compelling reason to create a national
standard. I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today on
the proposed legislation, science of genetically modified food,
and perspectives on the current state-by-state patchwork.
Thank you Mr. Chairman and I yield back.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. G.K. BUTTERFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA

Mr. Butterfield. Thank you very much, Mr. Green and Mr.
Pitts. Before beginning, Mr. Chairman, I just want to publicly
extend my condolences to the families of the nine victims in
Charleston, South Carolina who were horrifically murdered last
night while attending a prayer meeting. So thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for allowing me to digress for just a moment to offer
my sympathies to those families.
Mr. Chairman, I support H.R. 1599. I am the bill's lead
democratic co-sponsor. This bill is bipartisan. It proposes a
national labeling standard for foods produced with genetically
modified ingredients. The alternative is a complex and
unworkable patchwork of differing state laws that can only
cause confusion and do little to provide greater transparency.
Several states have moved forward with proposals that would
require foods containing ingredients to be labeled. This is in
response to unsubstantiated claims that foods containing
genetically modified ingredients are, in some way, dangerous in
human consumption. I take exception to these unfair and
downright dishonest claims.
Foods containing genetically modified ingredients are safe.
The FDA, USDA, National Academy of Sciences, AAAS, the WHO,
every major scientific and governmental organization agrees
with that statement. Even opponents of genetically modified
foods admit genetically modified foods have failed to produce
any untoward health effects. But the demonization of
genetically modified foods continues despite objective science
proving to the contrary.
Those opposed to genetically modified foods simply reject
science, and that is tremendously disappointing. And though I
stand with science and my belief that these foods are safe, I
understand the concerns expressed by the opponents and want to
be responsive. That is why I have worked with my friend, Mr.
Pompeo, and others in advocating for a Federal framework for
labeling and crop commercialization that puts the FDA and USDA,
our Nation's foremost food safety authorities, putting them in
the driver's seat. 1599 is a balanced approach that reduces
confusion by providing consumers with labeling uniformity
across state lines that addresses the concerns of those who are
opposed to genetically modified foods while not neglecting the
fact that our Nation's farmers and manufacturers grow and
produce foods that are so far and wide and not just within a
state's borders. Without a Federal standard, Mr. Chairman,
those farmers and manufacturers will be forced to comply with
uneven costly and potentially misleading and onerous state-by-
state mandates. Compliance will require new costly supply chain
infrastructure that would disrupt the Nation's food supply,
cause confusion and uncertainty. 1599 is reasonable. And most
importantly, it is workable.
I want to thank the more than 60 bipartisan co-sponsors for
joining me and Mr. Pompeo in agreeing that our bill is the best
way forward.
I yield the remainder of my time to Mr. Welch of Vermont.
Mr. Welch. I thank the gentleman. The issue here is not so
much whether GMOs are safe. The issue is whether individual
purchasers, consumers, who purchase food have a right to know
that GMOs are part of the food they are buying. It is a
consumer right-to-know issue. I agree with my colleagues that a
national standard would be good, but there is no national
standard in this bill. It is a voluntarily labeling, which
means there will be no labeling whatsoever.
Many states are reflecting the desires of their consumers
to basically know what is in the product they are buying, and
the consumer has the right to do that. They just do. And this
legislation is ironic in this sense: If GMOs are so safe, and I
am not here to challenge that assertion, but if they are so
safe, why not label so that folks who are getting what the
manufacturers assert is so safe know that their product will be
labeled and consumers can then make their own decision. My
question really is, if they are so safe, why would anyone be
afraid of labeling those products so that consumers would have
a right to know?
Now, in Vermont we have our assistant attorney general
here, Todd Daloz, who is going to talk about what we have done
in Vermont. Three States have passed labeling laws. Several
others are considering them. There have been referendums that
almost passed in California and it is reflecting this
groundswell of desire that consumers have to know what is in
the products that they are buying.
Now, I am going to play a little unfair here, Mr. Chairman,
because I am here today to give Mr. Pompeo----
Mr. Pompeo. Finally.
Mr. Welch [continuing]. And Mr. Butterfield a GMO free
labeled pint of the most nutritious product on planet earth,
and that is Ben and Jerry's ice cream. And this is labeled, and
it sells. People love this.
I will yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair recognizes the chair of the full committee, Mr.
Upton, 5 minutes for opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Good morning. We continue our examination of the
role biotechnology plays in our Nation's farms and in our food
supply. Our food, as we know, is literally our lifeline. It is
important for the public to be engaged. It is the job of this
subcommittee to establish a record based on the facts and the
science so we ultimately pass legislation that is in the best
interest of our constituents and our economy.
At the hearing that we held in December of last year and in
other venues since then, the FDA has been clear that the
premarket consultation process currently in place to review
food produced from genetically engineered crops is rigorous and
the agency has no basis for questioning its safety. The WHO and
every other legitimate health and scientific body that has
examined this evidence has echoed the FDA's findings.
Nonetheless, there are a number of state-specific labeling
requirements in various stages of consideration that are
inconsistent, potentially confusing to consumers, would
increase food costs that cast out over the safety of
biotechnology.
Mr. Pompeo and Butterfield have been working tirelessly on
a bipartisan basis in putting together a clear, understandable
national framework that maintains FDA'S current review process,
codifies Federal labeling standards and related requirements,
establishes a certification process that the Department of
Agriculture, consistent with current organic program, for the
labeling of products as being produced or developed without the
use of genetic engineering.
The draft amendment to H.R. 1599 circulated before this
hearing is another step in the right direction, and I commend
the Ag Committee for working with us to get the bill through
the House to ensure consumers will have a clear, concise, and
consistent system to assist in their food choices. I yield the
balance of my time to Mr. Pompeo.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Good Morning. Thank you Chairman Pitts for holding this
important hearing to further examine the role biotechnology
plays on our nation's farms and in our food supply. I
understand that this is a sensitive issue and one that folks
are passionate about. It is the job of this subcommittee to
establish a record based on the facts and the science and, as
we have done so many times this Congress, pass legislation that
is in the best interests of our constituents and our economy.
At the hearing we held on these issues in December and in
other venues since, FDA has been very clear that the premarket
consultation process they currently have in place to review
food produced from genetically engineered crops is rigorous and
the agency has no basis for questioning their safety. This
position is shared by the World Health Organization and every
other legitimate health and scientific body that has examined
the evidence.
Nonetheless, there are a number of state-specific labeling
requirements in various stages of consideration that are
inconsistent and would cast doubt over the safety of
biotechnology, confuse consumers, and increase food costs.
Fortunately, Congressmen Mike Pompeo (R-KS) and G. K.
Butterfield (D-NC) have been working tirelessly on putting
together a national framework that maintains FDA's current
review process, codifies federal labeling standards and related
requirements, and establishes a certification process at the
Department of Agriculture-consistent with the current organic
program-for the labeling of products as having been produced or
developed without the use of genetic engineering.
The draft amendment to H.R. 1599 circulated before this
hearing is another step in the right direction and I commend
the Agriculture Committee for working with us to get this bill
to the House floor as soon as possible. With that, I yield the
balance of my time to Mr. Pompeo.

Mr. Pompeo. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for yielding.
I want to thank Chairman Pitts and Ranking Member Green for
holding this hearing. I appreciate it. I very much want to
thank Mr. Butterfield, too. We have been working on this for
quite some time, and I think we are making fantastic progress.
I also thank Mr. Welch for the ice cream as well. I hope it was
Chunky Monkey. I couldn't see exactly what it was.
And I want to thank all the witnesses for being here today
as well so that we can get the facts about both the technology
and this legislation.
The fact is scientific consensus on the safety of
genetically engineered products is overwhelming. Precisely zero
pieces of credible evidence have been presented to show that
food produced with biotechnology poses any risk to health and
safety of consumers.
Before the idea that the government at any level should
step in and mandate that they be labeled borders on the absurd.
Expanding government at any level to enshrine preferences into
a costly legal requirement is bad policy.
What policymakers need to realize is that this bad policy
has real effects on families we represent in our districts.
Those who support mandatory genetically engineered product
leveling must stand up and admit they are willing to increase
the cost for foods for families in places like Wichita, and
Houston, and Grand Rapids, and New York in order to satisfy the
unscientific demands of anti-biotechnology activists. Our goal
here must be to ensure that families in America have access to
safe, nutritious, affordable food for their kids and families.
Having hundreds of different governments, state and local,
regulating food labeling, increases costs to families across
America and for no benefit.
We should also consider the effects of biotechnology on the
ability to feed the world. Providing affordable food around the
planet is something that Americans and Kansans are going to
need to be an important part of, and allowing biotechnology to
flourish will be an important part of getting this policy
right.
The potential amendment we are considering on H.R. 59 and
the one that we are reviewing today is the result of much
conversation between the Energy and Commerce Committee and Ag
Committee, and I appreciate their work alongside us. Like the
current language this amendment ensures that every new
genetically engineered plant destined to enter our Nation's
food supply goes through an FDA safety review.
Additionally, this amendment improves our bill by aligning
USDA and FDA responsibilities to ensure that a thorough and
complete review of these products is done. I have a letter from
over two dozen members of the Agriculture Committee, Mr. Pitts,
that I would like to enter into the record dated June 18th.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you.
The reality is that biotechnology, time and time again, has
been proven safe. This is simply not a debatable point. Our
policy ought to reflect that, and we shouldn't raise the price
for consumers based on a desire of a particular set of
activists.
Thank you, again, Mr. Pitts, and I look forward to the
hearing.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
Now I recognize the ranking member of the full committee,
Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes for opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today we will hear a range of views on why there should or
should not be mandatory labeling of foods from genetically
engineered or GE plants, and on why States should and should
not be allowed to impose such labeling requirements.
I have been long been a proponent of strong food labeling
requirements. I was an original co-sponsor of the Nutrition
Labeling and Education Act of 1990. I was a strong advocate for
the ACA provision requiring nutrition labeling on menus and
sponsored legislation last year, which I will be reintroducing
to update and strengthen current FDA nutrition labeling
requirements. And I have strongly opposed any attempts to
weaken existing labeling requirements, such as the Commonsense
Nutrition Labeling bill, which I believe would impede consumer
access to nutritional information on menus and restaurants,
pizza parlors, grocery stores, and convenience stores.
So I am inclined to be skeptical of legislation aimed at
limiting, rather than enhancing, information on a food label.
At the same time, I recognize that the differences between
nutrition labeling and GE labeling may warrant different
regulatory approaches. Nutrition labeling provides information
and enables consumers to make health-related choices on how
they eat. There is no question in my mind the Federal
government should food companies to put that information on
food labels.
GE labeling is about the breeding techniques used to make
agricultural crops. Food from such crops do not share any
particular nutritional or health-related properties. A GE label
provides no information on the consumption of the food or
whether--on the composition of the food on whether it is good
for bad for you, on whether it tastes good or bad, or on
whether it is safe or unsafe. There is no scientific evidence
that GE foods pose safety issues any different from non-GE
foods.
I have to admit, when I hear critics argue that GE foods
are dangerous, I feel the same way I do when I hear people deny
climate change, argue against vaccinating children, or say they
aren't scientists when asked if they believe in evolution. So
from a science or health perspective, there doesn't seem to be
a compelling government interest in forcing a food company to
label a food that is made with or without genetic engineering.
That being said, if the State of Vermont wants to require
food companies to put such information on their food labels, is
there a compelling Federal Government interest in prohibiting
them from doing so? Perhaps not. But I do think there is a
compelling Federal interest in preventing any labeling that is
false or misleading consistent with current law.
If mandatory GE labeling were inherently misleading, for
example, because it implied that GE food was somehow inferior
to normal food, that would seem to be a compelling reason to
prohibit it. I am so far not convinced that the requirement
imposed by Vermont would be inherently misleading. I would be
interested in hearing from our panelists today on that
question.
Now, there may be a compelling Federal interest from
preventing companies from having to face 50 different food
labeling regimes. In fact, it was a fear of such unworkable set
of State food labeling requirements that led food companies and
restaurants ultimately to support Federal requirements for
nutrition labeling. To avoid a 50-state problem, there are two
obvious solutions: We can band right-to-know labeling
requirements outright, or we can replace them with a uniform
Federal mandatory GE labeling requirement, but I personally
think a voluntary labeling approach is more appropriate for GE
labeling. I also don't believe in preempting State law without
good reason.
So I think this is an important hearing, Mr. Chairman.
There are a number of competing issues to weigh before moving
forward on legislation, and I hope we will take our time in
considering them. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
That concludes the opening statements of the members. As
usual, all written opening statements of the members will be
made a part of the record.
We have one panel today. I will introduce them in order of
their presentations. First, Mr. Rick Blasgen, president and
chief executive officer of the Council of Supply Chain
Management Professionals; secondly, Mr. Todd Daloz, assistant
attorney general, Office of Vermont Attorney General; thirdly,
Mr. John Reifsteck, chairman of the board and president of
GROWMARK, Inc.; then Greg Jaffe, Biotechnology Project
director, Center for Science in the Public Interest; and,
finally, Mr. Val Giddings, senior fellow, Information
Technology & Innovation Foundation.
Thank you, all, for coming. Your written testimony will be
made part of the record. You will each be recognized for 5
minutes to summarize your testimony.
You have a series of lights on the table; green, yellow
will go on with one minute left, red, we will ask that you
please wrap up. And if you want to take less than 5 minutes,
that is OK. We are going to have to run a tight gavel this
morning.
So, Mr. Blasgen, you are recognized for 5 minutes for your
summary.

STATEMENTS OF RICK BLASGEN, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, COUNCIL OF SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT PROFESSIONALS; TODD
W. DALOZ, ASSISTANT ATTORNEY GENERAL, OFFICE OF THE VERMONT
ATTORNEY GENERAL; JOHN REIFSTECK, CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD AND
PRESIDENT, GROWMARK, INC.; GREGORY JAFFE, BIOTECHNOLOGY PROJECT
DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR SCIENCE IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST; AND L. VAL
GIDDINGS, SENIOR FELLOW, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION
FOUNDATION

STATEMENT OF RICK BLASGEN

Mr. Blasgen. Thank you very much, and good morning,
Chairman Pitts and Ranking Member Green, and members of the
subcommittee. My name is Rick Blasgen. I am president and chief
executive officer of the Council of Supply Chain Management
Professionals representing well over 8,500 members globally.
Prior to joining CSCMP I was senior vice president for
Integrated Logistics and ConAgra Foods, and in similar
positions at Kraft Foods as well as Nabisco. I have been
president and CEO of CSCMP since 2005. In this capacity, I
serve as the primary issue expert relating to logistics and
supply chain management.
I want to thank you very much for inviting me to explain
the importance of national labeling frameworks. I will focus my
remarks on the costs associated with Vermont's labeling
mandate, a law that goes into effect on July 1, 2016, and
imposes incalculable burdens on our Nation's largest
manufacturing sector.
Grocery manufacturing is a high-volume, low-margin
business, and any increase in cost, even by a matter of cents,
can substantially affect a manufacturer and its supply chain.
The primary cost centers in the supply chain are the cost of
source materials, capital, operations, labor, storage,
distribution centers, transportation, maintenance, and, of
course, fuel. The supply chain for a processed food begins with
the raw commodity. The supplier sells the raw food to a
manufacturer, and the manufacturer stores the food at the plant
until it is processed into its ingredient form. That ingredient
may be the final product, such as in cooking oils, or it may be
used in products containing multiple ingredients.
Finished goods are sent to a manufacturer's distribution
center where they are stored until ready for transport into the
customer's distribution center. The customer may be a national
or regional chain or a regional distributor that sells to other
retail outlets. The customer stores the finished goods at its
center and distributes them to its retail outlets where they
are sold finally to consumers. A manufacturer typically plans
each stage of the supply chain to ensure it is handled as
efficiently as possible. The core unit in a grocery
manufacturer supply chain is the stock keeping unit, or SKU.
This SKU is simply a unique identifying number that applies to
each distinctly packaged and marketed product.
A single national SKU facilitates efficient storage,
distribution, and inventory tracking. Manufacturers do not
create different SKUs for different states. Vermont's legal
time clock is ticking, and manufacturers will have to determine
which products contain ingredients likely derived from GE
crops. Companies will navigate Vermont's exemptions, such as
foods bearing USDA-approved labels. Restaurant food is also
exempted, and this could impact segregation and transportation
costs. Each exemption provides more complexity to the supply
chain, less clarity for consumers, and more red tape for
manufacturers.
Manufacturers will have to make new labels with state-
approved text and design. Labeling materials are one of the
largest expenses affecting a manufacturer's bottom line. And
the inventory left over when a manufacturer implements a
labeling change must be discarded, which is a waste not only of
materials, but the money the manufacturer may have spent in
anticipation of using that stock. Waste and recycling charges
will also apply.
At the processing facility, let's assume it takes 5 minutes
to stop and start to accommodate the new package. This reduces
production time as the companies pay for the lost time and
labor, energy, and capital costs of depreciation.
Now assume a single plant with 10 lines running
simultaneously, each with one Vermont run per payday, over 300
days in the year. That makes 500 lost hours per year, or about
3 weeks of idle time. These assumptions are meant for
illustration with respect to only one single plant. Large
manufacturers may have dozens of plants, and each plant may
have dozens of production lines. The Vermont products would
then need to be segregated from the other products and be
placed on their own pallets. Pallets take up space wherever
they go. They will take up space in warehouses, on trucks, and
at customer distribution centers. These Vermont pallets must
have sufficient space to reduce the risk of product being
shipped to the wrong state; namely, product not intended for
Vermont ending up on shelves there.
Manufacturers would have to renovate or purchase new
storage space or real estate. Additional pallets means
additional trucks will be needed to transport products to
customers. The trucks are capital investments with ongoing
maintenance needs and associated labor costs. And this is just
on the manufacturing end of the supply chain. The products
intended for Vermont must then go through distributors and/or
retailer supply chain systems who purchase the product and
thus, then, own it exponentially increasing the costs to
service Vermont and also increasing the chance for error.
Despite best efforts, mistakes will be made. One
manufacturer calculates that 7 to 10 percent of non-Vermont
product could be shipped to Vermont in error. That manufacturer
will face penlites of $1,000 per day per product. For a large
company that has 2,500 SKUs, could translate to 175,000, or
$250,000 in daily fines. Multiplied by thousands of products
among multiple companies, these fines quickly reach tens of
millions of dollars. Products would long shelf lines greater
than 18 months that are currently in distribution or already on
the shelves will be subject to fines.
Mr. Chairman, from a supply chain logistical perspective,
this law really is a nightmare. U.S. Consumers benefit from the
safest and most efficient food supply in the world. I urge
Congress to protect our national food system from an
unnecessary patchwork of state-labeling schemes that will hurt
American employers and do nothing to protect consumers.
I thank you very much for your time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Blasgen follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
I recognize Mr. Daloz for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF TODD DALOZ

Mr. Daloz. Thank you. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Green,
Congressman Welch, and members of the subcommittee, thank you
for the opportunity to testify today. As you are well aware,
the State of Vermont has been deeply involved in the labeling
of food produced with genetic engineering, passing a law
requiring such labeling, which will take effect a little over a
year from now. Vermont's Attorney General, Bill Sorrell, is
tasked with the enforcement of this law and has adopted
regulations implementing the law. My name is Todd Daloz, I am
an assistant attorney general, and I am testifying today on
behalf of Attorney General Sorrell about the draft legislation
and the discussion draft of the H.R. 1599 and to discuss and
answer questions about Vermont's experience in labeling foods
produced with genetic engineering.
In my oral testimony, I want to highlight two main points
as we begin. The first is the role of states within our
democracy and the importance of the state and the Federal
Government in sharing responsibility for protecting consumers.
What is most troubling about the proposed legislation, both
the draft in front of you and the discussion draft, is that it
would cut short and prematurely end state efforts to label
foods before Vermont's law even takes effect. It also offers no
substantive replacement for the regulations Vermont has in
place.
Vermont does not oppose all of the Federal regulation in
this area, nor even all elements of the bill. What is important
to Vermonters is the ability to have accurate factual
information in front of them in order to make informed
decisions about their food purchasers.
And this is a historical design of our democracy. States,
in the famous words of Justice Brandeis, have long been the
laboratory of democracy, experimenting with social and economic
policy in manners that allow them to test how policy works and
determine the best course. And there is a robust history of
states leading the way towards ultimate Federal regulation.
Two simple examples that come to mind, the first is fair
credit reporting. Vermont and other states were among the first
to require credit reporting to consumers. And as we all know,
Congress ultimately moved forward with that, making it national
law.
Another example that was referenced by Mr. Blasgen is menu
labeling--I believe it was Rick--menu labeling, which New York
began requiring the labeling of certain nutrition facts at
chain restaurants. Vermont and other states followed suit, and
recently the FDA has implemented the same informational
labeling requirement nationwide.
Vermont's Act 120 is no different than that. It is the
state taking a lead role in requiring a factual disclosure, a
simple, four-word factual disclosure on the back of the
package, stating nearly, produced with genetic engineering. It
is not a warning. It is a notification. And it is a
notification that is there to provide consumers with accurate
information so, as the Vermont legislature found, they can make
intelligent choices about their consumption.
And that is the second point I want to talk about. Trusting
people to make their own decisions is a fundamental American
principle. And what Act 120 does is trust consumers to make
their own decisions. It trusts consumers to be intelligent and
make intelligent choices.
There was tremendously strong demand in Vermont for this
labeling bill. There is, in fact, strong demand across the
country for such labeling. The legislature found that giving
consumers this information enables them to make a choice
similarly to calorie counts, to cartoon figures on the front of
the package, to flavor. This is another piece of information
that consumers want in order to make a decision about whether
and how they will purchase their food.
And it is important that there is no state oversight of
what information is disclosed. It is nearly the presence of
materials that have been produced with genetic engineering.
This is not the state determining what is right for consumers
to know. This is the state simply providing information for
consumers to make decisions on.
Lastly, I want to briefly touch upon the fact that
Vermont's law also has flexibility in it. It doesn't mandate
exactly where the disclosure has to be placed. It doesn't
mandate the size of the font. It provides a floor for where the
font is and where the disclosure should go, and that kind of
flexibility, I think, is important as manufacturers and
retailers begin to comply with Vermont's law.
So I want to thank the committee and Chairman Pitts and
also Representative Pallone for inviting me here today, and I
am happy to answer questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Daloz follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Thank you.
Mr. Reifsteck, you are recognized for 5 minutes for your
summary.

STATEMENT OF JOHN REIFSTECK

Mr. Reifsteck. Thank you. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member
Green, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for holding
today's hearing. I am John Reifsteck, a grain farmer from
Campaign County, Illinois, and chairman of the board of
GROWMARK, a regional agricultural cooperative base in
Bloomington, Illinois. Our co-op is owned by local member
cooperatives and provides input such as seed, fuel, plant
nutrients, crop protection products, and grain marketing
services.
I appreciate the opportunity to testify before you today on
behalf of GROWMARK, the National Council of Farmer
Cooperatives, and the Coalition for Safe and Affordable Food. I
live in the farmhouse my grandfather built 101 years ago. The
farm has sustained three generations of my family. My father
and grandfather were good farmers, but the tools and the
practices they used in our farm back then would not be good
enough to meet the needs of our country and our world today.
Instead, each generation of my family has used new technology
to build on successes of the past.
Global Positioning System, automatic steering, and
biotechnologies are examples of new tools available today that
future generations will use to build a better agriculture
tomorrow.
I know firsthand the value biotech crops provide for my
operation. My farming experiences illustrate this. In the past,
I have abandoned parts and fields that were riddled with insect
damage or overcome by weeds. Harvesting those fields are not
just an economic loss, but it presents a real risk of fiscal
harm to my farm employees as did myself.
These are memories I won't forget. They represent past
challenges that biotechnology has helped me overcome. I am very
proud to say that GROWMARK has been a key part of the solution
to these problems. Our affiliated companies and farmer owners
have been directly involved with use of biotechnology crops for
a number of years. GROWMARK was at the forefront of providing
this technology to producers when it first introduced in the
1990s. I have successfully used biotech feeds in my farm since
it became available. I believe the rapid adoption of these
products reflects an understanding of their value and real-
world benefits.
Farmers also realize that crops they grow today benefiting
from biotechnology are just as safe and healthy as the crops
grown by their parents and their grandparents. This is
important to farmers and is providing our customers with safe
quality products as our number-one priority.
Biotechnology provides substantial benefits to producers,
to the environment, and to consumers. To reverse course now
would wreak havoc amongst America's agricultural industry. Make
no mistake, that is what a patchwork of biotech labeling laws
would represent, an unworkable step backward. A growing concern
among farmers and co-op managers is this patchwork would not
stop at the State level, but perhaps could extend down to the
individual cities, counties and even townships. Food and
agricultural companies, including cooperatives like GROWMARK,
would have no choice but to comply with hundreds, perhaps even
thousands, of varying, if not directly conflicting, labeling
laws. A near impossible task for us.
The Safe and Accurate Food Labeling Act introduced to this
Congress by Representatives Mike Pompeo and G.K. Butterfield
would ensure that the labeling of biotech ingredients of food
products is based on consistent standards using sound science.
It would allow those who wish to label their products as GMO
free to do so by utilizing a verified process offered through
the USDA, very similar to that of the Department's successful
certified organic program.
I encourage members of this committee and Congress to
support the Safe and Accurate Food Labeling Act. This bill
would ensure the consumers are provided with accurate and
consistent information about the food they purchase while
preserving the choices available to grocery shoppers and to our
Nation's farmers.
In conclusion, I strongly urge the subcommittee to support
a voluntary, uniform, and national standard for labeling food
products derived from biotech ingredients. The impact of not
taking action would have a devastating effect on food and
agricultural companies across the country, as well as farmers
whose livelihoods depend on the freedom to conduct their
business using the best methods available to them.
Thank you, again, for the opportunity to testify before
this committee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Reifsteck follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
Now I recognize Mr. Jaffe, 5 minutes for your summary.

STATEMENT OF GREGORY JAFFE

Mr. Jaffe. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Green, I want to
thank the House Committee on Energy and Commerce and the
Subcommittee on Health for having today's hearing and inviting
me as a witness on behalf of the Center for Science in the
Public Interest.
The issues surrounding the proper role of the Federal
Government in the oversight of genetically engineered crops and
the labeling of foods made with or without ingredients from
those crops are issues of obvious public concern that Congress
needs to address. It is critical that the Federal Government
ensures that all GE crops are safe and that whatever
information is provided to consumers about foods and
ingredients made from those crops be truthful, neutral, and
nonmisleading. I am here today as the director of CSPI's
biotechnology project. CSPI is a nonprofit consumer
organization established 44 years ago. CSPI works primarily on
food safety and nutrition and publishes our nutrition action
newsletter to educate consumers on issues surrounding diet and
health. CSPI receives no funding from industry or the Federal
Government.
CSPI has long advised consumers, journalists, and
policymakers that foods and ingredients from currently grown GE
crops are safe to eat. The current crops have also provided
tremendous benefits to farmers and the environment in both the
United States and around the world. CSPI has advocated for
improvements in current Federal oversight to ensure safety to
humans, animals, the environment, and agriculture.
I will limit my testimony today to the Federal Government's
oversight of food and feed safety issues, which are the
primarily responsibility of the FDA and directly related to
this hearing. FDA ensures the safety of food under the Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act. Under that law, FDA has established a
voluntary consultation process whereby developers of GE seeds
can provide FDA with safety data and their analysis of those
data to show FDA that the crop is substantially equivalent to
its conventional counterpart.
When FDA consultation is completed, FDA responds that the
seed developer by stating in a letter that FDA has ``No further
questions about the developer's determination that the GE crop
is substantially equivalent to its conventional counterpart.''
CSPI believes that FDA should determine the safety of all
GE food crops before foods from those crops enter our food
supply. FDA should review the safety data submitted by the
developer, conduct its own analysis of that data, and provide
the developer and the public with its opinion on whether foods
from GE crops are safe to eat by humans and animals. That would
be consistent with how most other countries ensure the safety
of GE crops.
H.R. 1599 goes only a small step towards what we believe is
the proper role of FDA to ensure the safety of GE crops and the
foods made from them. H.R. 1599 would codify the current FDA
voluntary consultation process. It does not require, however,
FDA to provide its opinion on each particular GE crop safety.
In addition, it does not put the burden of proof on the
notifier to satisfy FDA that the GE food crops or foods and
ingredients made from the crops are safe before marketing the
GE crop.
The recently announced amendments to H.R. 1599 does not
correct those major deficiencies and does not grant FDA any new
legal authority to ensure that GE food crops are safe. Instead,
it amends the Plant Protection Act to state that a GE crop that
has been granted nonregulated status under USDA regulations
cannot be marketed in interstate commerce until the USDA has
received from the developer the ``no further questions'' letter
it receives from FDA. FDA would still not need to make its own
independent determination that the GE food crops meet the
safety standard, and the amendment does not provide FDA with
the needed authority to prevent foods or ingredients from GE
crops from entering the food supply until the notifier
satisfies FDA of their safety.
H.R. 1599 and the amendment provides USDA's agricultural
marketing service with unique legal authority to establish a
certification and labeling system for food manufacturers who
wish to label foods that either contain or do not contain
ingredients from GE crops. CSPI supports the Federal
Government's oversight of GE and non-GE labels to ensure they
are truthful, neutral, and nonmisleading. There is no standard
definition of what it means to be a non-GMO, no standard way to
describe that claim in a neutral manner, and no way for the
consumers to know if that claim is accurate.
While CSPI believes that there is no benefit to consumers
from avoiding foods that contain ingredients from GE crops,
CSPI understands that some consumers do want to buy such foods.
The system that would be implemented at USDA if Congress passed
H.R. 1599 would go a long way towards uniform labels with
verifiable, nonmisleading claims.
Therefore, CSPI endorses that portion of this legislation.
I thank the committee for allowing me to testify, and I am
happy to answer questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Jaffe follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. Right on time.
The members are voting on the floor. We still have 12
minutes. So we are going to continue the witnesses' testimony
and some questions before we recess to go to the floor to vote,
and then we will come back.
Mr. Giddings, you are recognized 5 minutes for your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF L. VAL GIDDINGS

Mr. Giddings. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Green. I very
much appreciate the invitation to testify before you this
morning on behalf of the Information Technology & Innovation
Foundation on the safety and appropriate labeling for crops and
foods improved for biotechnology. ITIF is a nonpartisan
research and educational think tank whose mission is to
formulate and promote public policies to advance technological
innovation and productivity. We focus on innovation issues. We
have long been involved in the conversations about agricultural
biotechnology and how best to ensure its widely shared benefits
to humans and the environment are not burdened by ill-
considered policies, especially those based on fear and
misunderstanding.
I very much appreciate the opportunity to comment on these
issues here today and thank, in particular, Mr. Pompeo for
proposing this legislation, which I think is approaching
perfection as a solution to some of the problems we face in
this area on public policy.
The introduction of crops improved through biotechnology,
often called GMOs, has been one of the greatest booms to
humanity in the last 10,000 years of our history. No other
innovation in agriculture has been taken up more widely or more
quickly, and none other has delivered greater benefits to
humans, our livestock, and companion animals and the
environment. These crops have been grown over the two decades
on over 4 billion acres worldwide. Last year alone, they were
grown on 448 million acres by 18 million farmers in 28
countries legally, including a lot more where they were grown
by farmers without government sanction where the farmers could
get access to the seeds.
The farm gate value added has totaled more than $120
billion. And the environmental impacts of agriculture have been
reduced, on average, by 18 percent. This has entailed a 37
percent reduction in the use of pesticides, a 22 percent
increase in yields, and a 68 percent increase in farmer income.
The single most important element in the equation of credit
for this avalanche of global benefits is the science-based
regulatory process adopted by the United States in 1986 for
which you and your colleagues and your predecessors bear an
enormous amount of credit.
The bipartisan endorsement supporting the science-based
approach to regulation that has been in place in the United
States for the past four decades has been absolutely essential
and made it possible for this technology to be developed,
adapted, and disseminated. The intention of H.R. 1599 to extend
this legacy of bipartisan support for science-based regulation
is important as special interests seek to undermined its
credibility and authority with false claims and ill-considered
policy proposals at every level, particularly at the State
level. Congress clearly has authority to address these issues
and should formally preempt state level actions as the
Constitution directs in Article 1, Section 8, Clause 3, the
interstate commerce clause.
I am less enthusiastic and, indeed, would advise against
one provision before you in this legislation, which would
change the nature of the FDA safety review process for
bioengineered foods by making it mandatory. It widely
acknowledged that the biotech-derived foods on the market today
are safe, that they have all gone through this review process,
the review process has worked and is working well, does not
need any fixing; there are no safety issues outstanding, which
it fails to address.
I know that there are those who favor making this process
mandatory, but if Congress were to take that step, it would,
for the first time, step away from the science-based regulation
that has served us so well for decades. I say this because the
term ``GMO'' is an artificial construct, and it does not
represent a meaningful class of items deserving of special,
much less discriminatory, regulatory status or scrutiny. That
category further bears no meaningful relation to hazard or
risk. GM is a process. It is not a product. Provisions with FDA
regulations on labeling already in place mandate consumer
information about the contents of the foods that they buy and
consume.
So I would enter a plea that as you consider these issues,
please think carefully about what will help accomplish your
objectives and what will not. Making it clear to the States
that labeling is a Federal responsibility, that is something
that would be helpful. Actions that some will construe and
represent to be an acknowledgement that there are safety issues
or concerns where, in fact, there are none, would not be
helpful. Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you this
morning, and I am happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Giddings follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. The chair advise
the members, there is still 7 minutes left to vote, but some
382 members have not yet voted.
So I will begin questioning and recognize myself 5 minutes
for that purpose.
My first question is for each of you. Today's hearing is
not the first hearing this subcommittee has held on this topic.
Previously, the FDA has stated that their current consultation
process has provided appropriate oversight of new foods derived
from genetically engineered plants. FDA testified before this
subcommittee last December that the consultation process is
working well and provides for rigorous food safety evaluation
of such foods. I would like to ask each of our witnesses, do
you agree with the agency's assessment? Yes or no?
Mr. Blasgen?
Mr. Blasgen. Yes.
Mr. Pitts. Mr. Daloz?
Mr. Daloz. I don't believe I have a basis for agreeing or
disagreeing, but I trust the agency.
Mr. Pitts. Mr. Reifsteck?
Mr. Reifsteck. Yes.
Mr. Pitts. Mr. Jaffe?
Mr. Jaffe. No.
Mr. Pitts. Mr. Giddings.
Mr. Giddings. Absolutely yes.
Mr. Pitts. All right, thank you.
FDA also testified in December that there have not been any
material differences identified between genetically engineered
ingredients and those derived from traditionally-bred crops.
Again, would each of you please answer, yes or no. Do you have
any evidence to the contrary?
Mr. Blasgen?
Mr. Blasgen. No.
Mr. Pitts. Mr. Daloz?
Mr. Daloz. No.
Mr. Pitts. Mr. Reifsteck?
Mr. Reifsteck. No.
Mr. Pitts. Mr. Jaffe?
Mr. Jaffe. No.
Mr. Pitts. Mr. Giddings.
Mr. Giddings. There are some examples where there are
material differences as with cooking oils that have been
modified to be more heart healthy. But where those have
occurred, they have still been reviewed by FDA; they have
passed the safety reviews, and the differences are indicated on
the labels.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you.
Finally, FDA testified that there is scientific consensus
about the validity of the research and science behind the
safety of foods derived from genetically engineered plant
varieties. Do any of you disagree with that?
Do you disagree, Mr. Blasgen?
Mr. Blasgen. No.
Mr. Pitts. Mr. Daloz?
Mr. Daloz. No.
Mr. Pitts. I am sorry. I couldn't hear what you said.
Mr. Daloz. No.
Mr. Pitts. Mr. Reifsteck?
Mr. Reifsteck. No.
Mr. Pitts. Mr. Jaffe?
Mr. Jaffe. For the current crops that have been grown and
are being grown, I would answer no. But for each future crop,
we need to look at those on a case-by-case basis.
Mr. Pitts. Mr. Giddings?
Mr. Giddings. I am not aware of any area in science where
the consensus on safety is stronger than in this field.
Mr. Pitts. All right. Mr. Giddings, can you explain what
additional testing the Department of Agriculture conducts on
new plant varieties used in food before they are
commercialized?
Mr. Giddings. Well, the USDA does not necessarily do
testing for food safety per se. That is the province of FDA.
USDA does extensive analyses of a vast and broad amount of data
relevant to safety and potential impacts for U.S. Agriculture
and the environment. These are--the data that is submitted by
applicants comes in response to their filling out APHIS' Form
2000, which lists a series of questions relevant to the safety
of these crops on which the USDA wants data. The amounts of
data provided are voluminous. They go far beyond, in fact, what
regulators need to know to assess the safety of these crops.
These crops have been examined in more depth, in more detail,
in advance for safety than any others in human history, and
their record of safety is unblemished.
Mr. Pitts. All right.
Mr. Giddings, or any of you, I have heard from a number of
constituents who insist, despite this evidence to the contrary,
that GMOs are dangerous to their health and are harming the
environment. Why has this sentiment recently proliferated? Who
would like to speak to that? Mr. Giddings?
Mr. Giddings. Well, Mr. Chairman, there are very few issues
in our lives to which we are more emotionally attached than
food. And the idea of somebody messing around with our food
supply is inherently one of concern. And folks who have issues
with food, their concerns are heightened. And there is a very
well-funded campaign of special interests who have adopted
raising unwarranted fears in this way as their marketing tactic
through which they seek to expand their market share. This
campaign has been funded massively and executed across the
United States and around the world for years, and they have
succeeded dramatically in shaping the public view on these
issues to create an appearance of safety issues where, in fact,
they are absent.
Recent surveys have shown that the difference in opinion
between the public and between the scientific community on
these issues is wider than on any other major public policy
issues before us today, and this is the result of an ongoing
propaganda campaign designed to raise fears and mislead
consumers, and this mandatory labeling push is an integral part
to that.
Mr. Pitts. My time has expired.
We still have a minute and a half to vote. But 288 members
haven't voted yet, so the chair recognizes Ranking Member Green
for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank our witnesses testifying today on GMOs.
Dr. Giddings, one of my concerns, are you aware of any
instance where a GMO crop caused an adverse impact on human or
animal health? And, frankly, why don't we start with you and we
can go down the list.
Mr. Giddings. There are none, sir.
Mr. Green. Mr. Jaffe?
Mr. Jaffe. I am not aware of any, but when you genetically
engineer a crop, what you are doing is adding some DNA that
might produce a protein. And we do know that some proteins can
be allergens to humans. So I do think we need to check those to
make sure for example that does not occur for a new genetically
engineered crop.
Mr. Green. Would the bill that we are discussing today
correct that with the authority given?
Mr. Jaffe. So FDA looks at data from the companies on a
voluntary basis concurrently, and H.R. 1599 would make that
process mandatory. What I think is missing is FDA giving its
opinion on the safety of that food.
Mr. Green. OK. Mr. Reifsteck?
Mr. Reifsteck. In my farming operation, actually, GMOs have
increased the safety of my farming operation, because they have
allowed us to substitute GMO technology for other products that
are more dangerous for me to use on my farm.
Mr. Green. Mr. Daloz, anything to offer from the Attorney
General's Office?
Mr. Daloz. I am unaware of any such studies.
Mr. Green. Mr. Blasgen?
Mr. Blasgen. No.
Mr. Green. Mr. Giddings, are you aware of a situation where
an unknown consumption of GMO in grain has caused adverse
health reaction? Again, to all five of our witnesses.
Mr. Giddings. There are none on the record. And on the
issue of allergenicity, that is one of particular concern to me
because my son has a life-threatening peanut allergy. And I can
tell you, Congressman, that the only foods that are reviewed
before they are introduced to the market for allergenicity, the
only food so reviewed are biotech derived.
Mr. Jaffe. I am not aware of any harm.
Mr. Blasgen. I am not aware of any.
Mr. Daloz. I am not aware of any harms, but I am aware that
consumers have deep concerns about that issue.
Mr. Green. And I know the concerns, and I think the
legislation would probably would move it forward to help with
some certainty including FDA oversight.
One of my other questions, Mr. Reifsteck, and can you
explain how the state-by-state patchwork would affect farmers
and co-ops, and also Mr. Blasgen, then I will start with Mr.
Reifsteck first.
Mr. Reifsteck. Well, certainly, having to fulfill all the
requirements of every state is a difficult, time-consuming, and
expensive proposition. As you think about how we grow crops in
the United States, we grow corn; we grow soybeans. If we have
to identity preserve those crops to make sure they fit into a
marketplace, for example, non-GMOs, that adds a tremendous
amount of time and expense to the production of those crops
because we have to shepherd those all the way from the seed to
my farm, to the end user, and that will add cost and expense.
Mr. Blasgen. I will add also manufacturers typically
produce products for the Nation through a series of
distribution networks. That product is shipped, then, into the
retail network and then finally to the consumer shelf where its
purchased. So the right to know, the choice is very important,
that is why clear national standard is so critical to the
manufacturing community.
Mr. Green. It would seem to be the same thing on the
labeling, because I don't think we will ever have 50 different
labeling requirements, but if two or three states do it, then,
really that shows we need a national standard.
Mr. Blasgen. Right. The level of complexity with that type
of labeling would be an incalculable burden on manufacturing.
Mr. Green. OK. Mr. Chairman, I thank you. Appreciate it.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
Time has expired on the floor vote, so we will come back as
soon as we vote. There are two votes.
And the committee stands in recess for the floor vote.
[Recess.]
Mr. Pitts. The time of the recess having expired, we will
continue with the questions.
And, at this point, the chair recognizes the gentleman from
Kentucky, Mr. Whitfield, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank all of the witnesses for joining us
today on this very important subject. As a matter of fact, I
walked out of this hearing to go back to my office before I
went to the floor for a vote, and there were a group of seven
people in there who wanted to talk about this bill. So somebody
is really organized today, Mr. Shimkus. But it is an important
issue.
And, Mr. Jaffe, I would like to just ask for your comments.
FDA has made it very clear that their current consultation
process is rigorous, involves a number of experts well versed
in these methods, and is entirely, to use their words, entirely
sufficient for purposes of reviewing the safety of these
products.
And so, if the FDA is perfectly comfortable in the process,
feels that it adequately protects the public and food safety,
why are you arguing for new legal authority that FDA does not
believe it even needs?
Mr. Jaffe. So thank you very much for the question.
I agree with you that FDA is clearly the agency in the
government with the expertise on food safety. And if there is
any agency that should be deciding the safety of GM crops or
anything that goes in our food supply, it should be the FDA,
and I believe that they do have that expertise. So I agree with
you that they have the expertise and they are using that in
this consultation process.
But I think this consultation process works only because of
the good nature of the companies that are coming forward with
these genetically engineered seeds, with that data. They are
not required by law to do that. And while there are lots of
incentives for companies that are based in the United States to
do that, that may not be the case for imported foods that come
in from other countries.
So I can give you an example of China, which is now
spending $300 million a year doing research on genetically
engineered crops. And so they may be soon growing a genetically
engineered rice variety, and that rice variety may get turned
into different food products that get imported into the United
States. And those companies may not think of the voluntary
process as mandatory. And FDA may not know about those because
they weren't homegrown products that started with research
trials in a company or at a university here in the United
States. So USDA may not be aware of those.
And so FDA needs those tools to deal with those imports
that come into this country. They need that authority to make
sure that something is overseeing that those foods are safe.
Mr. Whitfield. So your primary concern is on imports?
Mr. Jaffe. That is one thing, and also on the exports. I do
a lot of work in developing countries and around the world, and
we do a lot of exports of our genetically engineered crops. And
those countries can't look to the FDA decision. There is no
opinion from FDA that these are safe.
And so those countries--many of our exporters from the U.S.
would like to say to those countries, ``Please defer to FDA
here. They have shown that this is safe.'' And many countries
in the world do that with lots of other foods or drugs that the
U.S. does approve. But, in this case, because there is no
approval, they can't do that, and so they have to have their
own process.
So it hurts both our exports as well as our imports.
Mr. Whitfield. And, Mr. Giddings, I get the sense that you
have an opinion about this, as well. So tell me what you think
about it.
Mr. Giddings. Mr. Whitfield, Mr. Jaffe and I have been
friends for three decades, and it gives me a great deal of pain
to have to disagree with him, but I think virtually everything
he said here is mistaken.
There are a couple things that we need to remember. Number
one is that FDA has absolute authority to require that all food
placed on the market in the United States be safe. That is all
the authority they need. It doesn't matter what process is
used; if it is food on the market, FDA has the authority to
ensure that it is safe.
The other thing to remember is that this category of GMOs
or GM foods or whatever you want to call it is based upon a
definition that is fundamentally at odds with the facts as we
find them in the real world. This category is an artificial
category. There is no meaningful basis to distinguish
genetically modified organisms from others that are not,
because everything on Earth is genetically modified.
There is no correlation between those products of the most
modern plant-breeding technologies and any hazard or food
safety risk. These things have an unblemished safety record. We
know what causes safety problems in the consumption of food,
and it is primarily the presence of pathogens. The only impact
that biotech-derived foods are likely to have is to reduce the
potential for pathogenic infestations.
So this whole idea that this is somehow a category that is
meaningful in a sense that is relevant to risk assessment or
safety is just contradicted by the facts, data, and vast
experience.
So the FDA is correct; there are no data, there is no
experience which suggests that they need additional authorities
or that there is a problem here in need of fixing.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Reifsteck, do you have a comment you
would like to make on this?
Mr. Reifsteck. Well, I am obviously not qualified to talk
about the regulatory process, but I will say that the American
farmers do trust our regulatory process. They believe that
these products are safe. And they do need a regulatory process
that delivers products to farmers in a timely manner to deal
with the issues we have to deal with in the future.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
To the attorney general of Vermont, I am certainly not an
expert in food safety. I buy a lot of food, though. But anytime
you go to a store and you see on a label ``this contains such
and such'' or ``this may contain such and such,'' it almost
seems like it is a warning label.
And just, without giving a lot of thought to this--and that
is why we enjoy these hearings--without giving a lot of thought
to it, I mean, I think that is one of the primary concerns I
would have about the Vermont law. It almost looks like it is a
warning label. And I'm not aware of any scientific evidence
that there is any safety issue involved, truthfully.
Would you want to make a comment on that?
Mr. Daloz. Certainly, Congressman. And thank you for the
question because I think it is an important distinction to make
with regards to Act 120 and the disclosure that Vermont's law
requires.
Fundamentally, the placement of that disclosure and the
size and the font and things like that--in looking at the issue
of how consumers are interested in this information and how
they can best access the information, the attorney general's
office intentionally chose to make the disclosure either--there
are choices for industry. It can be the same size as the
serving size disclosure on the nutrition facts panel on the
back that the FDA already requires or the ingredients listing
there, the goal being to say it has to be easily read and it
has to be easily found. Those are the standards.
It is not a clear and conspicuous warning. It is a simple
statement of fact on the back of the package, that if a
consumer is interested in finding the information, they can
look for it, they can read it, and they can make a choice
accordingly.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Pallone, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As I said in my opening statement, I don't think
genetically engineered foods pose special safety or
environmental risks or are otherwise different from non-GEO
foods. Therefore, it doesn't seem to make sense to require them
to be labeled.
At the same time, unless there is some harm created by
allowing Vermont to impose mandatory GE labeling, I don't think
we in Congress should be telling Vermonters what to do. And I
am hoping the panelists can help me figure this out.
Let me ask a question. One issue I have heard is that
requiring GE foods to have a special label would be inherently
misleading because it would indicate that there was something
different about those foods.
So let me ask Mr. Jaffe: I know CSPI is a staunch supporter
of strong food labeling. What are CSPI's views on that
question?
Mr. Jaffe. So, thank you for that question.
CSPI has been a strong proponent of labeling as something
very informative to consumers and important, but that labeling
has to be truthful, neutral, and nonmisleading. I think that is
critical.
We have also been a strong believer that only the most
important information should be mandated by the government. So
if we are talking about safety information, whether something
is an allergen, for example, would be something that, if people
don't know about that, they could end up in the hospital about
that; or nutritional information, how much salt or how much
calories are in it, because that has a direct relationship to
their diet.
As you said, genetically engineered foods are--the current
ones that are on the crop are safe. And so there is no safety
or nutritional reason to label those.
So, while we support the idea that there should be
transparency and consumers who want to find that information
about where their food comes from should be allowed to do that,
I guess our view is that, in terms of when the government
mandates labeling, those should be left for the most critical
pieces of information. If we mandate everything on a label, the
consumers don't know what is the most critical information.
So, for us, the things that are most critical are either
safety information or nutritional information. This doesn't
qualify there. So, while we think and we understand the
consumers want information about this, we think that there
should be ways to figure that out less than mandatory,
government-imposed labels.
Mr. Pallone. All right.
So let me ask Mr. Daloz why you don't think GE labeling is
inherently misleading.
I think one of my colleagues on the Republican side said,
you know, if you see the label, you are just going to say,
well, obviously, this is different or maybe this is bad, even
though it doesn't say that.
So why don't you think that the GE labeling is inherently
misleading?
Mr. Daloz. Thank you for the question, Congressman. There
are two answers to that, and I will start with one that came
along very recently.
It is important to remember that H.R. 5099 is not the only
challenge that Act 120 faces. The Grocery Manufacturers
Association and a number of other trade groups have of course
sued the State of Vermont to enjoin the law from ever taking
effect. And it is important for this body to remember that
there is a bound on what Vermont can do in terms of misleading
labels or anything like that----
Mr. Pallone. I know that I am interrupting, because I want
to ask another thing.
Mr. Daloz. OK.
Mr. Pallone. I just want to know why it is not misleading.
You have to tell me that.
Mr. Daloz. Well, I will say----
Mr. Pallone. I haven't decided what to do here, OK?
Mr. Daloz. To cut myself shorter, the Federal court just
ruled that it wasn't misleading, that it was, in fact, a
straightforward factual disclosure. ``Ruled'' is a strong word,
but agreed with Vermont's position and indicated that that was
how the court was looking at it.
And, again, that is the fundamental piece of Act 120, that
is it is a factual disclosure about a process involved in
making the product.
Mr. Pallone. All right.
Let me see if I can get--I only have a minute. My other
main question about the labeling is whether it imposes undue
burdens on industry.
So, Mr. Blasgen or Mr. Reifsteck--we don't have much time--
I understand that neither of you support mandatory labeling.
However, why would putting a statement such as ``produced with
GE ingredients,'' just that, ``produced with GE ingredients,''
on a label require a need to create new supply chain lines or
new distribution lines?
What problems do you foresee with the inclusion of just a
small statement like that that doesn't say it is good or bad or
anything, just ``produced with GE ingredients''?
Mr. Blasgen. I think if it is--thanks for the question.
I think if it is a clear national standard, manufacturers
can deal with it. If we had multiple States requiring different
labeling requirements for all of these products, it would be an
enormous burden on them to make sure that they got it right.
Manufacturers secure their supply chains. They are very
concerned about securing the ingredients and their finished
goods right up and to the point of consumption. In particular,
this issue is that the manufacturers find themselves liable for
product that is outside of their control. So that is one aspect
of it.
But they are----
Mr. Pallone. It sounds like you are saying you wouldn't
have a problem with that label.
Mr. Blasgen. Well, there clearly is a problem for multiple
labeling directions coming from many different entities.
Mr. Pallone. So what if it was one national standard,
``produced with GE ingredients''?
Mr. Blasgen. I think if there is a clear national standard,
that minimizes the risk in that. I think that they would have
an easier time dealing with that type of law versus many, many
different types of States imposing laws upon them.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. Mr. Reifsteck, do you want to respond?
Mr. Reifsteck. Please.
I think American farmers have demonstrated they can produce
very safe and abundant and inexpensive food. We have a history
of doing that. And I think if there is a demand for non-GMO
foods, American farmers will respond, and they will produce
those non-GMO foods.
Our challenge is we don't want consumers, maybe low-income
consumers, to have to pay burdensome costs for a supply chain
management program if they are not interested in purchasing
non-GMO.
So what this act does, it gives us a pathway. As a farmer,
I can decide if I want to grow GMO crops or non-GMO crops.
There is a standard that it can enter into the marketplace to
give consumers not only the right to know but a right to choose
products. And I think that is what is powerful about this
legislation.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And to my friend, Ranking Member Pallone, my question is
going to follow up on yours in two points.
So one is, that the country feeds the world. United States,
we feed the world. And I would argue, being from Illinois--and
I am glad John is here--Illinois and the Midwest is a
predominant producer of base commodity products that go around
the world.
So, John, these two questions are for you. First of all,
the last couple years, we had a pretty big drought. Had we had
that drought a decade ago or two decades ago, what would have
been the result? And what made our ability to withstand the
drought survivable?
Mr. Reifsteck. Well, droughts for farmers are years that
burn themselves into your memory. 1993--I can go through the
list of these droughts. And I tell people the drought of 2012
was different. Because even though we didn't have a good
rainfall and because we had very high temperatures, we still
had reasonable yields across much of the corn belt.
And it makes sense, if you can protect a plant from damage
to the root system, if you can protect the plant from damage to
the stems, if you can protect it from weeds, then it can
maximize the use of the water that is available.
Mr. Shimkus. And how do you do that?
Mr. Reifsteck. And you do that with biotechnology.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
Mr. Reifsteck. Biotechnology is the best solution for those
problems I just talked about by far. The safest, most efficient
way for me to get those kinds of results is by using
biotechnology.
Mr. Shimkus. And not just in the United States, but as we
assist other countries around the world to feed themselves, it
is through the great aspect of science that has allowed us to
do this. And, unfortunately, it is an untold story in this
debate, because without it and the population growth and the
climate changes, we could be in a disastrous position.
Let me go to the next question, because it really talks
about an individual producer. So the producer sometimes gets
lost in this debate. OK, so we have now this bifurcated system
of labeling and not labeling and a supply chain. Tell me how a
corn or a bean farmer in central Illinois who is planting 750
to 1,000 acres, what would you have to do?
Mr. Reifsteck. What would I have to do to----
Mr. Shimkus. To produce two sets of corn going for the same
product, one GMO, one non-GMO.
Mr. Reifsteck. Well, basically, it would start with the
selection of the seed. We would have to buy different kinds of
seeds. We would have to make sure that we keep the integrity of
that seed, that it only is planted in the field. We would have
to do----
Mr. Shimkus. You would have to stop the winds maybe?
Mr. Reifsteck. You would have to stop and clean planters
out. You would have to make sure that the right products get
incorporated into the field.
Mr. Shimkus. You would have to have different silos?
Mr. Reifsteck. You would absolutely have to have different
silos.
Mr. Shimkus. Different trucks?
Mr. Reifsteck. You would have to have--the trucks and the
harvesting equipment all would have to be cleaned.
Mr. Shimkus. So when it went to the food processing
facility, would they have to have different silos?
Mr. Reifsteck. Absolutely. Absolutely. You would go----
Mr. Shimkus. Two different whole chains?
Mr. Reifsteck. You would go to--special elevators where we
deliver grain would have special handling equipment that was
designed to handle that equipment and keep it segregated. So,
yes----
Mr. Shimkus. So I know that corn now is sold around the
world. And I was kind of surprised that sometimes they are in
containers and container----
Mr. Reifsteck. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. I always think they would be in a big hull,
you know, and you just pour all the corn in.
So what if it pulls up to a port and they do a sample and,
of the billions of kernels, they find one that is either/or?
Then what happens?
Mr. Reifsteck. Then that country or company that finds that
kernel will decide whether they want that shipment of corn or
not. If it is in their favor, they could decide to take it. Or
they could decide to reject it.
Mr. Shimkus. So this is really a big debate that we are
having, and I think we need to tread very careful.
I want to thank my colleague for taking the leadership on
this, Mr. Pompeo. I mean, he has the wheat story to tell, I am
sure, which is very similar to a corn or a bean story. And we
haven't even talked about segueing it into the livestock issue
and the feed issue and multiple, multiple other derivations
that this--so that is why I am a cosponsor and look forward to
working with him as he moves it forward.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentlelady from California, Mrs. Capps, for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing.
And I thank each of our witnesses for your testimony.
I firmly believe that consumers have the right to make
informed decisions about the food they eat. I hope this is a
point on which we all can agree.
And I think there is general agreement that a good Federal
standard for genetically engineered, or GE, labeling is
preferable to a confusing patchwork of State labeling rules.
But there is disagreement about exactly what that standard
should be. And I am not convinced that H.R. 1599 will assure
consumers that they have the reliable and clear information
that they are looking for.
Dr. Jaffe, do you think this bill meets consumer demands
for clear, consistent labeling of GE products?
Mr. Jaffe. So I think we don't have a good idea of what
consumer demands really are. So there are a number of polls,
and if you ask the question, do you want GE labeling, most
consumers say yes. If you ask them do they want pesticides
labeled, they say yes; if you want antibiotics labeled, they
say yes. And as a consumer myself, if somebody offered me more
information, why would I say no to that?
But there is a Rutgers poll where they asked open-ended,
what new information would you want on the label, and I believe
it was 7 percent who said GM labeling. And, again, when they
asked people what do they want for all of those different
things I just mentioned, everybody said 70 percent for each of
those.
So I guess I am not convinced that there is an overwhelming
number of consumers. And I think most of those polls show--the
Rutgers poll, which I think is a good, independent poll--and I
am happy to submit that to the committee.
Ms. Capps. That would be great.
Mr. Jaffe. That two-thirds of consumers haven't even had a
discussion about this in the last 3 years and don't know about
it.
So providing information without knowledge about what that
information means can inherently be misleading.
Mrs. Capps. Well, could you provide for us, within your
purview, the difference between organic, non-GMO, and natural
food products? How do these types of products differ from one
another? Just to set the record straight here.
Mr. Jaffe. So an organic product, there is an actual
definition. So USDA has a definition of what is organic.
Mrs. Capps. OK.
Mr. Jaffe. And if you follow that definition, then you can
call your food organic in the United States. And those have
certain procedures that have to be followed, certain rules that
have to be followed. It is not based on science. It is based on
did you follow the rule.
Mrs. Capps. Right. OK. That is clear then.
Non-GMO, is that----
Mr. Jaffe. So, currently now, there is no uniform
definition of what non-GMO is.
Mrs. Capps. Oh.
Mr. Jaffe. So there are private certifiers, such as the
Non-GMO Project, which have their own definition of it. There
are other companies that have come up with their own. And there
are countries that call non-GMO--sometimes they use a 1-percent
threshold, sometimes they use a 0.9-percent threshold----
Mrs. Capps. OK.
Mr. Jaffe [continuing]. A host of different things. So that
is not uniform.
Mrs. Capps. I understand.
Consumers, however, we all agree, should not be confused
about something as basic and fundamental as the food they eat.
And consumers should be able to trust that the labeling on the
food is accurate and truthful.
And FDA currently has a policy of self-regulation.
Producers have the option to voluntarily label their GE foods.
However, over 15 years after the implementation of this policy,
very few products on the market have been labeled as being
genetically engineered. Yet we all know there is a great number
of GE foods on the market.
The fact is consumers want to know if their food is GE, and
they are calling on policymakers to help make this information
more accessible. And I think that is why we are looking
carefully at Vermont's new law, because it is a reflection of
this consumer demand.
Mr. Daloz, can you explain how the Vermont law
differentiates between foods that are labeled as ``produced
with genetic engineering,'' and foods that are labeled as
``partially produced with genetic engineering''? What is the
difference there?
Mr. Daloz. Certainly, Congresswoman. And this is part of
the flexibility that Vermont's law has built into it.
If a product contains less than 70 percent GE material by
weight, then a producer can choose to use the statement
``partially produced.'' Otherwise, the standard statement is
``produced with genetic engineering''----
Mrs. Capps. I see.
Mr. Daloz [continuing]. And that has to occur on any
product.
Mrs. Capps. Well, I submit that we need to make sure that
labels are clear and informative for consumers, and H.R. 1599
falls short of this standard. But I hope we can work together
to find the right balance that works for both consumers, as
Vermont has done, or is doing, and industry as well.
And, with that, I yield back the balance. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady and now
recognizes the gentleman from Indiana, Dr. Bucshon, 5 minutes
for questions.
Dr. Bucshon. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I just want to say I support the consumer's right to know
what is in their food products, but I also think it should be
based on science. And I support Congressman Pompeo's
legislation.
I know it has been said, but I want to reiterate for the
record some quotes from organizations around the world, really,
talking about GMO.
American Medical Association: ``Our AMA recognizes that
there is no evidence that unique hazards exist either in the
use of GE techniques or in the movement of genes between
unrelated organisms. Bioengineering foods have been consumed
for close to 20 years, and, during that time, no overt
consequences on human health have been reported or
substantiated in peer-reviewed literature.''
Natural Academies of Science: ``Genetic engineering is one
of the newer technologies available to produce desired traits
in plants and animals used for food, but it poses no health
risks that cannot also arise from conventional breeding and
other methods used to create new foods.'' They go on to say,
``An analysis of the U.S. experience with genetically
engineered crops shows that they offer substantial net
environmental and economic benefits compared to conventional
crops. Generally, GE crops have fewer adverse effects on the
environment than on non-GE crops produced conventionally.''
And, finally, the World Health Organization: ``GM foods
currently available on the international market have passed
risk assessments and are not likely to present risks for human
health. In addition, no effects on human health have been shown
as a result of the consumption of such foods by the general
population in the countries where they have been approved.''
So, that said, as a medical doctor, I was charged with
advising patients on therapy that works, therapy that doesn't
work. And, of course, based on the Internet and other sources,
there are all kinds of proposed therapies for cancer and heart
disease out there that have been unsubstantiated that patients
frequently ask me about.
And so I guess my question to everyone on the panel is,
should people like elected officials or other people who are in
charge of informing the public, should we buy into what I see
is a movement without really substantiated reason to be there
in the first place? Or, for example, me, buy into a treatment
that is not proven to be effective? Or should I lead and should
I say to my patients or should I say to the general public what
the facts are and not buy into unsubstantiated claims?
And what I see honestly is really, for the most part, a
political and economic movement--political because of
misinformation and economic because of companies that want
their product to be labeled non-GMO so that they can compete
with everybody else.
So I will start at the end, and just comment on what your
thoughts are. Should we buy in, or should we inform the public
and stand up to what is clearly misinformation?
Mr. Blasgen. Right. As a consumer, I believe we should
inform the public, as you say. And I think that everyone here
believes there is a right to know and that choice is very much
of importance here. We care about consumer choice as consumers,
but we also want to understand the implications as an industry
person on what demands we are going to place on industry and
whether it is going to be effective, as well. And, in this
case, we don't think so.
Mr. Daloz. I think there is a challenge here, and that is
that to disable consumers from accessing information that they
are interested in having suggests that the government has a
role in controlling information people want----
Dr. Bucshon. I am going to interrupt just briefly. As a
medical doctor, should I promote a therapy that I know not to
be effective because the Internet says that it is?
Mr. Daloz. I respect the example. What I would say is that
there is no promotion going on in Vermont's law. All there is--
--
Dr. Bucshon. Well, there will be because people have a
misperception that GMO in some way is inferior to non-GMO
products. I am just taking the devil's advocate approach here.
Mr. Daloz. Absolutely understood. And I think what
consumers do with that information and why consumers want the
information is not necessarily the role that Vermont's
legislature chose to take.
What Vermont's legislature chose to do, after hearing a lot
of testimony and really looking at a lot of different sides of
the issue, was to say we are going to provide this information
to consumers. It is accurate, it is complete, and we are going
to let them do what they want.
Dr. Bucshon. Fair enough.
I want to get the other three in in my last 25 seconds
here.
Mr. Reifsteck. I believe Congress' responsibility is to
ensure that American consumers have an accurate, fair, and non-
misleading system for labeling foods.
Mr. Jaffe. I think it is Congress' role, I think it is
CSPI's role and everybody else to provide the facts to
consumers out there. I think the current crops that are
engineered are safe, and I think generally this is a safe
technology, but you have to look at each application on a case-
by-case basis.
Mr. Giddings. Congressman, it is important to recognize
that Vermont Act 120 and other similar legislation is a direct
consequence of attempts to mislead consumers as to the safety
of foods that are derived from crops and foods that are by
technology.
I have read every iteration of that law multiple times, and
the legislative record is very clear. The findings of fact
associated with it put forward a whole host of verifiably false
claims about the safety of these foods. And while the State of
Vermont, I am completely confident, does not intend to mislead
consumers, the folks who pushed them into adopting this
legislation and who are leading the campaigns have very
different motives.
And, you know, let me give an example of a couple of quotes
from them.
Dr. Bucshon. My time has expired. Can you submit the rest
of your response to that for the record?
Mr. Giddings. It is in my written remarks, and----
Dr. Bucshon. OK. Great.
Mr. Giddings [continuing]. To summarize very briefly, the
intention of the folks pushing these mandates for information
on labeling is directly to mislead consumers as to their safety
as a means of growing their market share.
Dr. Bucshon. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman, Mr. Butterfield, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, before getting started, I would ask unanimous
consent to have two letters inserted into the record, the first
one addressed to Members of the House and dated April 28. It is
signed by nearly 400 stakeholders, including the National
Federation of Farm Bureaus, as well as the State farm bureaus
from Alaska to Florida. It is worth noting that the Vermont
Farm Bureau is one of the signers. The letter expresses the
support of the 400 signers for H.R. 1599.
I offer this letter.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Butterfield. Additionally, the second one, Mr.
Chairman, addressed to Mr. Pompeo and me and dated April 16,
2015, is from 29 biotechnology industry stakeholders and state
biotech associations, including the North Carolina Bioscience
Organization and the Bio New Jersey Association. The letter
expresses, again, support for 1599.
I offer this letter.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Blasgen, I apologize for being in and out, but we are
multitasking today, and I think you understand that. But thank
you so much for being here today, and thank you for lending
this committee your expertise in supply chain management.
I have come to understand our Nation's food supply chain is
a vast and interconnected web that starts with seed development
and ends on the consumer's plate. The complex process of
feeding America is staggering. It is easy to appreciate why
upending manufacturing processes would cause significant
disruptions to the supply chain, ultimately will result in
consumers actually paying more for the same food that they buy
today.
Number one, considering that you have spent the last 15
years as a supply chain logistics expert, do you believe a
Federal labeling standard is in the best interest of both
American consumers and our Nation's food producers?
Mr. Blasgen. Yes, I do.
Mr. Butterfield. That is unambiguous. All right. Thank you.
I understand that there are concerns that the cost to
comply with the Vermont law could exceed food company sales
revenue for products that are actually sold in Vermont.
If companies decide to no longer sell products in Vermont
or any other state, as that goes, that has state mandates
because it is too costly for them to comply, it is the
consumer, not the company, that loses. That is my logic. Would
you agree?
Mr. Blasgen. I do. And as I mentioned in my statement, the
grocery manufacturers are very high-volume, low-margin, and
they do everything they can to keep very efficient and
effective manufacturing operations, as well as distribution
operations, right up until the time the consumer consumes the
product. Securing that supply chain is very important to them,
and they do everything that they can to make it the most
efficient possible so that we can pass on those savings to
consumers.
Mr. Butterfield. What are the practical impacts of
different state-by-state mandates on consumers? And why is a
national standard in the best interest of consumers, in your
own words?
Mr. Blasgen. Right. It would literally mean manufacturing
lines all across the country would have to stop and start and
stop and start over and over again to change labeling, change
packaging, create separate inventories of the same product
essentially, ensure that they are segregated so they can end up
in the right state. That would complicate things not only in
the manufacturing sector but also in the inventory management
sector because we would have to ensure those inventories are
segregated and tracked as best as possible to ensure they are
ending up in the right states. It is very difficult to do that
throughout the entire supply chain.
In particular, I will reiterate the fact that the
manufacturers have control of only so much of that supply
chain, and they turn it over to the retailers and wholesalers,
who redistribute that product to stores. And then it is their
job to make sure that product ends up where it is intended.
Mr. Butterfield. OK.
And now to the other end of the table, Dr. Giddings, and
thank you, sir, for coming.
At the December 2014 hearing, one witness said that some
food companies label their food as ``natural'' even though it
contains genetically engineered ingredients. He said that some
consumers thought that was intentionally misleading because
they believed exactly the opposite, that genetic engineering is
not natural.
While ``natural'' is not currently defined, the original
version of 1599 would have required FDA to do so. The amendment
in the nature of a substitute before us today, though, does
not.
Would you please share your views on the use of the term
``natural''?
Mr. Giddings. This is something that rabbis and Jesuits
could use years discussing.
This much I can tell you: It is not clear to me what the
term ``natural'' means when used in foods, because everything
that we eat has been modified from the form it took before
humans started to cultivate and care for livestock and so
forth. So it has all been changed. Even wild fish stocks we
have selected over generations and changed their genetic
makeup.
But this much I can tell you: foods derived from crops
improved through genetic engineering, so-called GMOs--the term
``GMO'' has been defined as something modified in a way that
does not occur in nature. But in the process of genetic
engineering, we scientists in the lab learned how to do these
things by observing these phenomena of genetic change happening
in nature. These phenomena are widespread; they are found
throughout the living world.
The techniques that genetic engineers use in the lab to
make these kinds of specific and directed changes with the
degree of precision that is unprecedented in the history of
humanity, these changes are all changes that we learned how to
do by seeing it happen in nature. We use enzymes that we take
from nature to make these things happen. If this is not a
natural process, I have no idea what a natural process is.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you, Mr. Giddings.
My time has expired, but you do believe we need a
definition for ``natural''? Would that be helpful?
Mr. Giddings. If you could come up with a definition, it
would be helpful. But I am not sure it is possible.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr. Collins, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This is a great hearing. I appreciate the witnesses'
comments. And, certainly, I am a big supporter of Mr. Pompeo's
bill.
As we move into an area that I like to equate to
hydrofracking, the scare tactics, the disinformation, the
misinformation, the outright lies surrounding the safety of
hydrofracking took on a life of their own for several years, to
the point New York State banned hydrofracking. And, lo and
behold, the EPA finally came out with an exhaustive study that
said without any doubt that hydrofracking, when done properly,
is absolutely safe and does not impose any risks on groundwater
contamination. But for 2 years, people were on the Internet
showing tap water coming out of the taps and putting a lighter
to it and starting it on fire and scaring the bejesus out of
the public, that, oh, my God, if that is hydrofracking, you are
going to be drinking contaminated water.
I compare that very similar to where we are today on this
GMO debate. The opponents of it, like hydrofracking, have
gotten out in front and basically said GMO equals bad, GMO
equals dangerous. And so now people are at a point where, if
they put anything to do with GMOs on their label, the average
consumer, from misinformation and disinformation, is going to
say, I don't want to buy that. Well, that is a tragedy for
America, for the American consumer, and it just is,
unfortunately, the facts of the life we live in.
Also, the other issue that I know is problematic is, if
every state creates their own labeling standards, if every town
and every county, if all 62 counties in New York create their
own labeling standard, the types of costs that are going to be
passed on to consumers would be mind-boggling.
We have a Cheerios plant just outside of my district, and
if every box of Cheerios, you had to create a thousand
different boxes because every village, every city, every town,
every county, every state in America decided to willy-nilly
pass their own laws, you wouldn't be able to afford a box of
Cheerios.
And, frankly, as the supply and demand chain goes for a
very small state with very few consumers, they would just stop
selling in that state. Vermont can go do what they want, but
somebody might say, based on the cost of serving a very small
market, I guess we will just no longer sell our product into
that market. That is what consumers seriously need to be
worried about.
So I am just very happy that the FDA would be--we are
asking them to do a study on the safety, like we asked the EPA
to do a study on the safety of hydrofracking and it came back
safe. And I am confident the same study will show that to be
the case for GMOs.
And I do think that Congress does have a role to play if
there is labeling. We need to be preemptive and cut out the
states from willy-nilly, putting out a thousand different sets
of regulations. I am a small-government, local-decision-making
guy, but this is a place for the Federal Government to step
forward.
But an observation and question, perhaps, to Mr. Blasgen:
Cornell University, just, again, outside my district, did a
study, and the study was: What would be the cost--now, this is
certainly an estimate, but they did an actual data-based
study--to the average consumer in America were these willy-
nilly labeling by state, by town, by county, by village to go
forward? And it was $500 at the end. They concluded the average
family would be paying an additional $500 a year just for these
labels on boxes. And $500 is a significant dent for getting
nothing more than the cost on the producers.
And I just wondered, Mr. Blasgen, have you seen similar
studies? Does that make sense? Let's be honest with the
consumers: do you want to pay an extra $500 a year?
Mr. Blasgen. I have heard about that study, and I think it
would probably even increase depending upon the number of
states, the number of products that might be magnified by such
labeling laws. The complications, the extra inventory, the
extra time associated would be quite substantial when you think
about all the manufacturers of food products, all the different
items, and all the different labels that potentially could be
on all these products.
Mr. Collins. Yes.
And do you also agree that there is certainly a risk that
if a city, town, village, state, especially a small one,
decided to pass a labeling law, there would be a fair chance
that the supply chain would just simply stop providing that
product into that market?
Mr. Blasgen. It is possible. It all comes down to whether
you can make a product, have a healthy margin so the
manufacturers----
Mr. Collins. You are going to look at your cost, you are
going to look at your return and say, you know what, sorry,
just not going to sell it into that market anymore. That is
what America is all about, with choice and competition.
Well, thank you all for your comments today. And I look
forward to a study showing that GMOs, in fact, are safe.
And, with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
We are voting on the floor. It just started, so we have 14
minutes left. We will go for a while. Then we will have to
recess and come back if there are still questions that haven't
been asked.
So, at this point, the chair recognizes the gentleman from
Oregon, Mr. Schrader, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I guess questions for Mr. Jaffe and Mr. Reifsteck: What is
the purpose of FDA labeling? What is the statutory requirement?
Why do we label food?
Mr. Jaffe?
Mr. Jaffe. So that the consumers have truthful, non-
misleading information about material issues that are
important.
Mr. Schrader. Mr. Reifsteck?
Mr. Reifsteck. That would be my understanding also. I am
not an expert on the science behind the food labeling, but that
would be my understanding, yes.
Mr. Schrader. Well, actually, it goes more specific. It
talks about nutrition. And the goal is health and safety,
obviously, of the American consumer.
I have been listening closely to the discussion. A lot of
it just seems like--I would say our bill covers a lot of the
concerns that we are talking about here, which is truth and
honesty in labeling.
And I think everyone has responded to the chairman and
other people's questions that there is currently no evidence
that the genetically modified or genetically engineered crops
we have to date cause health and safety problems. Our bill
provides for, should they do that in the future, they would
have to be labeled. This takes into account the fact that we
don't know, maybe at some point in time there could be a
problem, and FDA could regulate that. I think that is a good
thing. I think we all would agree with that at the end of the
day.
The bill also--for the right-to-know folks, in my state, we
had a big discussion about genetically modified organisms and
GE labeling--it also provides for the right to know. It
provides a mandatory labeling if you are going to claim that
your product is non-GMO. I think that is important. People need
to know.
And then there is a process by which FDA and the Secretary
can actually establish that. That is good. That allows the
consumer to know exactly what he or she is getting.
To the discussion on ``natural,'' there is a section here--
I agree with Mr. Giddings, it would be tough to define
``natural.'' As an organic farmer, with all due respect to Mr.
Daloz, who is talking about this partially produced, 70
percent--it is like being half-pregnant. As an organic farmer
and as an organic consumer, I want to know, is it organic or is
it not?
And right now I think it is important for members of the
committee and citizens in our country to know we already have,
a bioengineering label to some degree; it is called
``organic.'' As an organic farmer and, frankly, working on the
farm bill this last Congress, we spent a lot of time trying to
make sure that that meant something, that it was organic or it
was not, and that the USDA and FDA had tools in place to
actually make that statement.
I have conventional farming friends that also have organic
operations. And, yes, they have to use two separate facilities
and stuff; there is a cost to it. But they make a market play,
or it is a personal, philosophical thing that they want to do
that at the end of the day. And that is good. The consumer
benefits from that.
The most important thing that this bill does, in my
opinion, is it defines what a genetically engineered substance,
organism is. Because right now there is nothing out there.
There is the blogs, there is this hysteria, there is this--on
the other side, the people that say everything has been
genetically modified over time. To some extent, that is
probably true.
For the consumer that has a problem with stuff being done
in vitro--which, as a scientist, I would argue is probably
safer than traditional breeding, where you get inadvertent side
effects that you can't control, where you can control them by
just genetically splicing organisms at the end of the day. But
those people that are concerned about that this gives them some
certainty this is what this means. It gives the producer some
certainly as to what genetically engineered actually means.
And I think it has been clearly stated here that, to have a
patchwork of regulatory framework where it sort of means this
or it doesn't mean that, when we have food and produce that not
only goes across county lines but state lines and now
international lines, I think some sort of national standard is
crystally clear and needed.
This allows for those that are concerned about GE from a
political or philosophical standpoint, not from a food health
or safety standpoint, to get that stuff labeled and before them
in time.
I think this bill is a great piece of legislation. It
doesn't over-legislate. It gives the consumer the right to know
what they need to know, but allows American farmers, American
food manufacturers to still produce the safest, healthiest food
in the world that, I would point out, has increased yield,
reduces tillage, reduces use of pesticides--many things that
some of the very same people who are against any genetically
engineered organism really also want at the end of the day.
So I think this is an excellent compromise and would urge
the committee to adopt it at the end of the day.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. Thanks to the gentleman.
And I now recognize the gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Griffith, for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I will try
to be quick.
Mr. Jaffe, you indicated in one of the answers earlier that
you didn't--and correct me if I got it wrong--that you didn't
see any concerns today about allergens, that none of the foods
that are out there now that have been genetically engineered
have allergen problems, but you were concerned about the
future.
Can you get me information on that, if I got that
information correct from you originally? Was that correct, what
I thought I heard you say?
Mr. Jaffe. Yes. That is correct.
Mr. Griffith. Can you get me some information after the
hearing in regard to concerns or papers about concerns about
future allergens? As a father of a 9-year-old who has a lot of
food allergies, I would be interested in that. Would you do
that for me?
Mr. Jaffe. Sure.
Mr. Griffith. And, Mr. Daloz, industry is concerned about
potential for private actions against manufacturers. Under your
law, I believe the law is maybe unclear on that point.
Does Vermont's law block private rights of action against
manufacturers and suppliers? I am not going to ask you for an
answer today because we are short on time. I am going to ask
you if you would get us something on that.
And if the answer is no, what do you intend to do to limit
liability when a product, the person who manufactured it really
didn't intend for it to ever end up in Vermont but somebody
puts it on the shelf there anyway?
And if you could get me an answer to that at a later date,
I would greatly appreciate it. I am trying to make sure that
Mr. Pompeo gets an opportunity.
Thank you, gentlemen.
And, with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. I now recognize Mr. Sarbanes for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be shorter
than 5 minutes.
I want to thank the panel.
Mr. Jaffe, long time, no see. Thank you for your testimony.
I confess to you, my head is kind of exploding on this,
just trying to balance all of these different concerns. So I am
still absorbing a lot of the information and perspective
related to it.
I take it, Mr. Jaffe, that even though there is a system
now whereby the FDA, in effect, says that they think things are
OK because they issued this letter that says they don't have
any further questions, that you don't view that as an
affirmative enough judgment being rendered by the FDA with
respect to the safety of the item that is subject to the
letter.
Can you just elaborate a little bit more on why you feel
that a more proactive, affirmative statement or standard or
judgment or opinion on the part of the FDA would make sense in
the context of this proposal?
Mr. Jaffe. Sure. Thank you very much for that question.
The FDA letter that comes back at the end of these
consultations says--and I am sort of paraphrasing here but sort
of quoting--it says, ``The FDA has no further questions at this
time about your determination that you think the food is safe.
You are responsible for safe food.'' So the developers,
Monsanto or DuPont, that is what the ``you'' would be referring
to in that case.
So the public looks at that letter and says, FDA is not
saying it is safe; FDA is saying you have to rely on Monsanto's
determination that this is safe. And so I think that may not be
an issue of actual safety, but it is an issue of perception of
that. So FDA it not giving its opinion at all about that
safety.
When you look at--and the Congressman from Oregon mentioned
his state had a referendum on mandatory labeling. There have
been four states that have had those referendums. When you ask
the consumers--and almost 50 percent voted for those--why did
they vote for those, they say, ``Because we weren't sure these
foods are safe. We want to avoid them because we are not sure
they are safe.''
So the solution to that is not to label at the back end;
the solution is for FDA to confirm to consumers that those
foods are safe on an individual, case-by-case basis for each
individual product. And so I think that is what every other
country in the world does in this area before they approve
genetically engineered foods. Their food safety authority
equivalent to FDA does it.
And what is ironic about it, in the United States, USDA,
you can't plant one of these crops without USDA saying they are
safe, but we can eat the foods from them without FDA saying
they are safe. That is not a product of a policy decision. It
is a product of using old laws and fitting new technology into
that. And I think----
Mr. Sarbanes. Right. OK. Well, I appreciate that. My sense
is you would believe that having that new standard would help
address some of the anxiety that people legitimately feel about
whether there are safety concerns there or not. And, in so
doing, you might lessen the demand for the kind of labeling
that Mr. Giddings and others are reluctant to see imposed.
So I don't understand why there is a total departure
between the two of you on this topic, because it seems that one
would help the other to some degree.
I am going to switch gears, and I am going to try to wrap
up.
I gather that the Vermont labeling bill is one that would
require the producer, the manufacturer, whatever the right term
is here for the person putting the label on there, to indicate
that it is partially produced or wholly produced by GE, but
that a label saying ``may contain GE'' is not an option? Or is
it if there is no way to determine the origins?
Mr. Daloz. I think that is an important point to make. It
is an option. And producers can choose to qualify the
``produced with genetic engineering'' with the term ``may be''
if they, after reasonable inquiry, can't determine whether
their product is produced with genetic engineering.
Mr. Sarbanes. But if they can determine it, they cannot
choose to say ``may.''
Mr. Daloz. Precisely. It has to be accurate.
Mr. Sarbanes. That, to me, would be a solution to the
entire problem in some ways.
In any event, thank you all for your testimony.
I will yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
We are voting on the floor. We have 2-plus minutes left.
The chair recognizes the gentlelady from Indiana, Mrs.
Brooks.
Mrs. Brooks. Mr. Chairman, I heard yesterday from Beck's
Hybrids, a family-owned pioneer in the biotech world in seed
production, who is in strong support of this bill.
And I yield the remainder of my time to the gentleman from
Kansas, Mr. Pompeo.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you, Mrs. Brooks. I appreciate that.
And I thank you all for being here, as well.
Mr. Daloz, you said that you trust people to make their own
decisions. In fact, we saw Mr. Welch hold up a container that
said non-GMO today under the current law. Would that producer
still be able to produce that container after H.R. 1599 passed?
Mr. Daloz. That is not my understanding of H.R. 1599.
Mr. Pompeo. So, he would. You understand it incorrectly.
Because this is exactly what I wanted to address.
There is nothing in this legislation that denies any food
producer any ability to market their product as non-GMO as long
as that is a truthful statement and accurate. That proves my
point precisely. Chipotle could still sell you a 5,000-calorie
burrito that was non-GMO and tell you it was a good idea. As
long as it was truthful and accurate, they could continue to do
that. And this is exactly what I wanted to get at.
So you suggested that somehow H.R. 1599 denies anyone the
right to know anything. But it doesn't. Can you tell me where
in the bill you see that it would prevent someone from doing
that?
Mr. Daloz. I don't have the draft directly in front of me.
My understanding is that a portion of title 1 of the amendment
in the nature of a substitution suggests that it would be
misbranding if a product were labeled without following some of
the procedures laid out in title 2. I think it is 291(b) and
(c).
And my understanding of those is, at the point in time that
H.R. 1599 took effect, there would be no state laws that could
exist. And there would be up to a year, possibly longer, for
the regulations to come into effect, which would essentially
mean that, at the point in time H.R. 1599 took effect, it would
be a rollback of the status quo today and certainly would
eliminate----
Mr. Pompeo. There would be hundreds of thousands of state
laws still in effect. There just would be no ability for a
state to have mandatory labeling.
There would still be complete freedom for every company in
the world that wanted to market their products as being
something that was truthful, including non-GMO--they could
continue to do so. There is absolutely no denial of anyone's
right to know whether that product is there. And someone who
only wants to eat non-GMO ice cream can do so today, and they
can do so once we get H.R. 1599 passed.
And so, if I am right about that, you will come join me on
the podium when we celebrate its passage, I assume, and I will
look forward to that.
You also talked about there being lots of popularity for
this. Has this ever passed by referendum in any state in the
United States of America that you know of?
Mr. Daloz. In Vermont, it was passed through the
legislature----
Mr. Pompeo. My questions was a yes-or-no question. Has it
ever passed by referenda anywhere? When it has been put to the
people, have they ever approved what you are proposing?
Mr. Daloz. Not to my knowledge.
Mr. Pompeo. Right. So every time it has been on the ballot,
the American people have rejected it. And I think that is
important for folks to understand, because there is this idea
somehow there is this tidal wave of demand and everyone is
screaming for it.
In fact, Mr. Jaffe, a question to you. First of all, I want
to say thank you. I have appreciated your counsel through this.
You have been reasonable and rational and thoughtful, and I
greatly appreciate that. We differ a little bit on the front
end. I am happy to try and work with you to get that a little
bit better. And I appreciate that.
But you said 7 percent of the people want it. I don't know
exactly how many it is. But my bill, in your judgment, it will
allow those 7 percent of the people to continue to eat all non-
GMO food if they chose and to only purchase products that
contained a label that reflected that. Even after this bill
came to passage, they could continue to do that, and they could
pay the premium that was required, and life would be good for
them.
Is that correct?
Mr. Jaffe. Yes. If the bill was passed, I do think it is
important that for foods that are labeled non-GMO, that there
is a Federal standard for that. Because right now consumers
aren't necessarily getting what they are paying for.
So, again, I would say there is no need for a consumer to
want to purchase non-GMO food, but there are consumers who want
to do that. I think you do need a Federal standard for setting
what that means.
Mr. Pompeo. I appreciate that distinction.
I just want to clarify one thing to clean up something a
little bit. Mr. Daloz, you kind of gave an answer that I want
to just make sure I have right.
So when the FDA came to testify, Michael Landa testified,
he said that the FDA was confident that GE foods in the
marketplace today are as safe as their conventionally bred
counterparts. I asked Representative Kate Webb, the assistant
majority leader in Vermont, that question. She said she agreed
with it.
I assume you agree with that statement from the FDA, as
well?
Mr. Daloz. I do. I don't have any reason to disagree with
it.
Mr. Pompeo. So you agree with it too. Great.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for your
consideration and your help with this.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
That concludes the questions of the members who are
present. We will have questions in writing that we will submit
to you. We ask that you please respond.
I remind members they have 10 business days to submit
questions for the record. And that means they should submit
their questions by the close of business on Thursday, July 2.
Very good hearing. Very important hearing.
Thank you for your testimony and your expertise.
Without objection, the subcommittee hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:18 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
