- EXAMINING THE ADVANCING CARE FOR EXCEPTIONAL KIDS ACT

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE ADVANCING CARE FOR EXCEPTIONAL KIDS ACT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 7, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-158

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

21-907                         WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                     Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          KATHY CASTOR, Florida
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina         Massachusetts
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TONY CARDENAS, California
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
CHRIS COLLINS, New York                  officio)
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Gene Green, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     3
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     7

Witnesses

Jay G. Berry, M.D., M.P.H., Assistant Professor of Pediatrics,
Harvard Medical School.........................................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Answers to submitted questions...............................   151
Matt Salo, Executive Director, National Association of Medicaid
Directors......................................................    30
Prepared statement...........................................    32
Answers to submitted questions...............................   156
Maria Isabel Frangenberg, Project Coordinator, Family Voices.....    39
Prepared statement...........................................    41
Answers to submitted questions...............................   165
Tish West, parent of a child with medically complex conditions...    67
Prepared statement...........................................    69
Answers to submitted questions...............................   170
Steven Koop, M.D., Medical Director, Gillette Children's
Specialty Healthcare...........................................    76
Prepared statement...........................................    78
Answers to submitted questions...............................   174
Rick W. Merrill, President and Chief Executive Officer, Cook
Children's Health System.......................................    97
Prepared statement...........................................    99
Answers to submitted questions...............................   180

Submitted Material

Statement of the American College of Cardiology, submitted by Mr.
Pitts..........................................................   127
Statement of the Cooley's Anemia Foundation, submitted by Mr.
Pitts..........................................................   129
Statement of Medicaid Health Plans of America, submitted by Mr.
Pitts..........................................................   131
Statement of Seattle Children's Hospital, submitted by Mr. Pitts.   142
Statement of the Children's Hospital Association, submitted by
Mr. Barton.....................................................   144

EXAMINING THE ADVANCING CARE FOR EXCEPTIONAL KIDS ACT

----------

THURSDAY, JULY 7, 2016

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:15 a.m., in
room 2322 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joe Pitts
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Pitts, Guthrie, Barton,
Murphy, Burgess, Lance, Griffith, Bilirakis, Long, Brooks,
Collins, Upton (ex officio), Green, Engel, Schakowsky, Castor,
Matsui, Schrader, Kennedy, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Rebecca Card, Assistant Press Secretary;
Paul Edattel, Chief Counsel, Health; Graham Pittman,
Legislative Clerk, Health; Michelle Rosenberg, Detailee,
Health; Jennifer Sherman, Press Secretary; Heidi Stirrup,
Policy Coordinator, Health; Sophie Trainor, Policy Coordinator,
Health; Josh Trent, Deputy Chief Health Counsel; Tiffany
Guarascio, Minority Deputy Staff Director and Chief Health
Advisor; Rachel Pryor, Minority Health Policy Advisor; Samantha
Satchell, Minority Policy Analyst; and Andrew Souvall, Minority
Director of Communications, Outreach and Member Services.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Pitts. The subcommittee will come to order. The chair
will recognize himself for an opening statement.
Today's subcommittee hearing will examine a new discussion
draft of the Advancing Care for Exceptional Kids--the ACE Kids
Act, legislation championed by Mr. Barton and Ms. Castor.
The goals of the ACE Kids Act are laudable--to improve the
delivery of, access to, healthcare for children with complex
medical conditions served by Medicaid and who all share the
goals and want to prioritize the needs of these children.
The committee received robust feedback from stakeholders on
the introduced bill. Many expressed concerns with the bill's
ritual scope, approach and cost. So I applaud the co-sponsors
for working through the committee to address serious
stakeholder concerns by taking a new approach in the draft we
are discussing today.
Today, we will hear from witnesses representing a diverse
mix of Medicaid stakeholders representing parents, clinicians,
researchers, providers and Medicaid directors. Every child is
unique and every state program is a little different.
So we want to listen and learn about the ways in which
children with complex medical needs are served by the Medicaid
program currently. Medicaid already provides a critical safety
net for providing care for some of our youngest and most
vulnerable patients. Yet, when a child is born with a rare
disease or has medically complex conditions there can be unique
challenges.
In many ways, state Medicaid programs are already
successfully leveraging the expertise of providers and plans to
provide needed care for medically complex children. Yet, we
know challenges exist and the status quo can be improved.
So today we look forward to hearing from witnesses about
ways we can increase options, reduce barriers, enhance
analysis, and better align incentives to care for these
children.
Finally, let me just note that the discussion draft before
us represents one approach but, clearly, does not exhaust all
the good ideas others may have.
So moving forward, the committee welcomes feedback on how
we can improve care for children with medical complexity
without disrupting the successful approaches already in place.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:)

Prepared statement of Hon. Joseph R. Pitts

The Subcommittee will come to order.
The Chairman will recognize himself for an opening
statement.
Today's Subcommittee hearing will examine a new discussion
draft of The Advancing Care for Exceptional (``ACE'') Kids
Act--legislation championed by Mr. Barton and Ms. Castor.
The goals of the ACE Kids Act are laudable--to improve the
delivery of, and access to, health care for children with
complex medical conditions served by Medicaid. I know we all
share the goals and want to prioritize the needs of these
children.
The Committee received robust feedback from stakeholders on
the introduced bill. Many expressed concerns with the bill's
original scope, approach, and cost. So I applaud the cosponsors
for working through the committee to address serious
stakeholder concerns by taking a new approach in the draft we
are discussing today.
Today we will hear from witnesses representing a diverse
mix of Medicaid stakeholders--representing parents, clinicians,
researchers, providers, and Medicaid directors. Every child is
unique. And every state program is a little different. So we
want to listen and learn about the ways in which children with
complex medical needs are served by the Medicaid program
currently.
Medicaid already provides a critical safety net for
providing care for some of our youngest and most vulnerable
patients. Yet, when a child is born with a rare disease or has
medically complex conditions, there can be unique challenges.
In many ways, State Medicaid programs are already
successfully leveraging the expertise of providers and plans to
provide needed care for medically complex children.
Yet, we know challenges exist and the status quo can be
improved. So, today we look forward to hearing from witnesses
about ways we can increase options, reduce barriers, enhance
analysis, and better align incentives to care for these
children.
Finally, let me just note that the discussion draft before
us represents one approach, but clearly does not exhaust all
the good ideas others may have. So, moving forward, the
committee welcomes feedback on how we can improve care for
children with medical complexity without disrupting the
successful approaches already in place.
I yield the balance of my time to the Chairman Emeritus,
Mr. Barton.

Mr. Pitts. I will yield the balance of my time to the chair
emeritus, Mr. Barton.
Mr. Barton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to
applaud you and the ranking member, Mr. Green, and Mr. Upton
and Mr. Pallone for agreeing to this hearing.
We have a bill that we have been working on for 4 years.
Some of you in the room have been working on it a lot longer
than that. I think, Mr. Chairman, you can tell there's a lot of
energy in the room, a lot of positive energy, and we want to
build on that.
We have changed the focus of our bill. We have gone from a
facility-centric bill to a family-centric bill and that's
because we are open minded and we want to listen.
Today, we are going to hear from six witnesses. Unusually
for me, I actually read your testimony. I don't normally do
that, and it's all good. I want to applaud our witnesses.
Some of the testimony is very moving, Ms. West's testimony
about her daughter especially and all that they have gone
through. Mr. Koop, Mr. Merrill, who represents Cook Children's
Hospital in my district, I am especially pleased that you are
here, sir.
We want to have an open hearing, Mr. Chairman. We want to
put all the issues on the table. We want the American people to
see Congress at its best where we agree on a premise and then
we work together to find a solution.
I can't say enough about Kathy Castor and her efforts, Gene
Green and his efforts, Cathy McMorris Rodgers on my side of the
aisle and Congresswoman Beutler, who just had a brand new baby
boy who is totally healthy. But her first daughter would
qualify for this program if they were Medicaid eligible.
So we have 30 co-sponsors of the committee. Thirty members
of our committee are co-sponsors of our original bill. We have
almost 218 House members. We have over 30 senators on a
bipartisan basis.
So, Mr. Chairman, if we listen to these witnesses and then
work together we can have a markup in this Congress. We can
pass a bill through the House in this Congress. We can work
with our friends in the Senate and try to get this if not as a
standalone bill as part of a larger package that goes to the
president and we can do something for our kids working
together.
So with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman, and now I will
recognize the ranking member, Mr. Green, 5 minutes for opening
statements.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GENE GREEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I apologize for
being late. I was giving a statement in one of our sister
committees downstairs.
I'm an original co-sponsor of H.R. 546, the Advancing Care
for Exceptional Kids, or ACE Kids Act. I'm grateful to
Representative Barton and Castor for their commitment to
children with complex medical needs and their quest to improve
the system of care provided to these children.
I want to thank the chairman for having this hearing today
and our witnesses for their time and passion. The ACE Kids Act
aims to improve the delivery of care for children with complex
medical conditions served by Medicaid. It presents a great
opportunity for us to implement better care delivery and
payment models to support children and their families.
The bill seeks to improve coordination of care for
children, address problems or fragmented access, especially
when the care they need is available out of state and gather
national data to help researchers improve services and
treatments for children with complex medical conditions in the
Medicaid program.
The discussion draft we were examining attempts to address
the goals of the introduced bill in a manner that incorporates
and builds upon the diverse range of stakeholder feedback.
I want to thank the stakeholders, Texas Children's Hospital
in particular in our district area in Houston. My colleagues
are moving this important legislation forward.
Children with medical complexity require a lot of
healthcare and generate significant costs. According to one
study, there are 2 million of these children on Medicaid, 6
percent of the total Medicaid population, and they account for
40 percent of the Medicaid spending on children.
While that data is compelling, it's important not to reduce
these children and their families to statistics. We must do a
better job and ensure that all of those exceptional kids get
the care they need.
I had the pleasure to meet a remarkable young lady named
Adrianna, who was born with her heart outside her chest. Thanks
to the excellent care she received at Texas Children's
Hospital, she is a happy and thriving toddler. Her survival
would not be possible without the premier care she received and
this legislation will help more and make sure every child
regardless of where they are born has the same opportunity.
Like Adrianna, children with medical complexity have
multiple illnesses, disabilities, and often see six or more
specialists and a dozen more physicians and require the kind of
care that takes them across state lines.
Under the current system, parents of kids with complex
conditions struggle to coordinate the intricate multistate care
of their children. We need this legislation to make this care
more coordinated and seamless for the families.
This discussion draft is an important step forward. We must
ensure that the final legislation is robust and meaningful to
accomplish our shared goals in improving care and removing
barriers for children with complex needs.
I am happy to hear that we now have 218 co-sponsors to the
ACE Kids Act. It proves that the health care of our children is
an issue that is above partisanship and brings us all together.
I look forward to working with my colleagues to move this
legislation forward to give our children the bright futures the
deserve and I thank the chairman for calling the hearing and
our witnesses today and I yield the remainder of my time to my
colleague, the lead sponsor, Congresswoman Castor.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you, Congressman Green, and thank
you, Congressman Pitts, for calling the hearing today and I am
also appreciative to Chairman Upton and to Ranking Member
Pallone for all of their great staff work and their attention.
I really want to thank by colleague, Congressman Joe
Barton. Joe, you have been a tiger for these kids and families.
Joe Barton, you have taught me how to be a better legislator
because you just never give up and you never give in. And this
truly is a committee effort, and with the help of Congresswoman
Jaime Herrera Beutler.
Over 200 bipartisan co-sponsors in this fractious Congress
including Eliot Engel on this committee, Jan Schakowsky, thank
you--Doris Matsui, thank you--Joe Kennedy, Tony Cardenas, my
good friend, Brett Guthrie, Congressman Whitfield----
Mr. Barton. We are about to get Billy Long. He doesn't know
it yet.
Ms. Castor. Good. I would think so. I would think so. Cathy
McMorris Rodgers, Congressman Lance, thank you. Congressman
Bilirakis, my good friend from Tampa Bay, Congresswoman Ellmers
and Susan Brooks, thank you, Susan, very much.
I became an advocate for these families after meeting of
families and health professionals at St. Joseph's Children's
Hospital in Tampa including Tish and Bill West, who are here
today, and their daughter, Caroline.
They explained to me what they had gone through early with
fragmented uncoordinated care and how meaningful it was to have
a medical home where they could save time, save money but most
importantly get the best care for Caroline and that is what we
want to replicate all across the country for these families.
So I am grateful to everyone that has participated today
and over the past few years and I look forward to bringing this
bill to fruition and thanks again to Congressman Barton and to
Congressman Upton--Chairman Upton and Frank Pallone as well and
I will yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady. I will now
recognize the chair of the full committee, Mr. Upton, 5 minutes
for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and all of our
colleagues on both sides of the aisle.
We know that the Medicaid program is a very important
safety net that provides the needed medical care to millions of
kids to communities across the country and in 2013 roughly half
of all Medicaid enrollees were children.
Many of the kids are healthy, well and primarily just rely
on the program for routine medical care--preventive screening
and other treatment.
But we know that some of the kids served by Medicaid face
very serious debilitating, even life-threatening conditions
that make it so difficult for them to perform the activities of
their daily life.
The kids are often referred to as children with medical
complexity because they may face any number of rare diseases
and conditions which can force them to rely on very specialized
care.
We all want to ensure that the Medicaid program does right
by these kids and their families that depend on the program for
care, particularly the most vulnerable.
So today we are discussing another bipartisan bill
introduced by very good members of the committee. There's no
really bad members on the committee. They're all good members
of the committee.
But the ACE Kids Act, led by Barton and Castor, seek to
improve care for these kids. We first discussed the bill as
part of 21st Century Cures Initiative a few years ago and since
we have received a lot of feedback from our colleagues and
stakeholders, many of which I know are in this standing room
only room.
I am glad to see such strong interest in working together
to get the bill right and better serve the patients in need of
help.
So in that spirit of cooperation and collaboration I want
to stress we all agree on the goals. There is no question about
that--improving care coordination within a state, ensuring
access to care across state lines and ensuring that we are
leveraging the data to target interventions.
But each of us also wants to ensure that any targeted
improvements actually fix what is broken by building on what is
working without disrupting proven successful models of care
that help kids within the program today. I want to do
everything that we can to ensure that we enhance care and
protect choices within the program.
So that is why we have the witnesses today. We need your
feedback and we also want to hear from folks not on the panel.
Whether it's managed care plans, individual Medicaid directors,
physicians, nurses, the whole ball of wax.
We invite them to continue to share their insights so that
we can better understand what is working and how we might be
able to move forward. And I don't know if other members on my
side want any of my time, any of the co-sponsors? Susan,
anybody else. I know, you did a great--I yield back the balance
of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Today, the Medicaid program is an important safety net that
provides needed medical care to millions of children in
communities across the nation. In FY2013, roughly half of all
Medicaid enrollees were children.
Many of these children are healthy, well and primarily just
rely on the program for routine medical care, preventative
screenings, and other treatments.
However, some of the children served by Medicaid face very
serious, debilitating, even life-threatening conditions that
make it very difficult for them to perform the activities of
daily life. These children are often referred to as ``children
with medical complexity,'' because they may face any number of
rare diseases and conditions, which can force them to rely on
very specialized care.
I know we all want to ensure that the Medicaid program does
right by these kids and the families that depend on the program
for care-especially the most vulnerable. So today we are
discussing another bipartisan bill introduced by members of
this committee. The ACE Kids Act, led by Chairman Emeritus
Barton and Ms. Castor, seeks to improve care for these
children.
We first discussed this bill as part of the 21st Century
Cures initiative. Since then, we've received a lot of feedback
from my colleagues, and stakeholders--many of which are in this
very room. I'm glad to see such strong interest in working
together to get this bill right and better serve the patients
in need of our help.
So, in that spirit of cooperation and collaboration, I want
to stress we all agree on the goals of the ACE Kids Act--
improving care coordination within a state, ensuring access to
care across state lines, and ensuring we are leveraging data to
target interventions. But each of us also wants to ensure that
any targeted improvements actually fix what is broken by
building on what is working--without disrupting proven,
successful models of care that help kids within the program
today.
We want to do everything we can to ensure we enhance care,
and protect choices within the program.
That's why we have our witnesses before us today. We need
their feedback and insights to better understand the challenges
this population of children faces within the Medicaid program
today.
We also want to hear from folks not on the panel. Whether
it's managed care plans, individual Medicaid directors,
physicians, nurses, children's health advocates, or others--we
invite them to continue to share their insights and ideas about
how we can tailor solutions to improve care for children.
We want to better understand what's working and also what
opportunities exist for bipartisan improvements to give
beneficiaries, states, plans, and providers more tools to
design solutions that best serve these kids.
I yield the balance of my time to the Vice Chairman of the
full committee, Ms. Blackburn.

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now recognize
the ranking member of the full committee, Mr. Pallone, for an
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to our
witnesses for being here today. Few programs are as critical to
the wellbeing of our nation's citizens as Medicaid.
For over 50 years, the Medicaid program has provided
comprehensive health care coverage to America's most vulnerable
populations and while our hearing today is specifically about
medically complex children in Medicaid, I urge my colleagues
not to forget the important role that Medicaid plays broadly
for children in this country. Medicaid finances more than 50
percent of all births in this country and provides more than
one in three children with the chance at a healthy start in
life.
In 2015, the Medicaid and CHIP programs together covered
more than 45 million children, and children with complex
medical needs includes a very special subset of children in the
Medicaid program.
These children typically have chronic multi-system diseases
and demand intensive care and that is why Medicaid is
particularly crucial for their families under the Medicaid and
CHIP.
Children with complex medical conditions receive a broad
set of services that in many instances private insurance won't
cover. It's not an overstatement to say that Medicaid is
lifesaving to these children and provides a financial lifeline
for their families that struggle with insurmountable medical
expenses.
However, families and stakeholders agree that there are
several issues related to treatment for this population that
must be addressed. For example, many children with complex
medical conditions travel nationwide for care and report
significant difficulty coordinating care across state lines and
across many state Medicaid programs.
They need care that is family centered and is based on
comprehensive quality data that is simply not available
nationally for this specialized population of Medicaid.
H.R. 546, the Advancing Care for Exception Kids Act, known
as the ACE Kids Act, aims to address these shortfalls, to
revise discussions that are being examined today tries to
incorporate some of the feedback we have received to date from
stakeholder.
The new draft gives states the option to establish health
homes geared towards the treatment of children with complex
medical conditions and includes two years of enhanced payments
to states to help with implementation.
The draft also requires increased quality reporting,
transparency regarding payment across state lines and guidance
from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to states
on best practices for payments across state lines.
So I want to thank my colleagues, Representatives Castro
and Barton, for championing this legislation for many
Congresses and building extensive bipartisan support for such
an important issue.
The discussion draft under consideration is just that, a
draft for discussion. But I look forward to comments from
stakeholders including our witnesses today and I hope that we
can continue working in a bipartisan fashion, moving forward to
take a positive step forward for medically complex kids in the
Medicaid program.
And most importantly, I'm glad we share the common goal of
ensuring that these children receive the best possible
treatment. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman.
As usual, all members' written opening statements will be
made a part of the record. That concludes our opening
statements.
We will now go to our panel of witnesses. We have one panel
with six witnesses today and I will introduce them in the order
of their presentations.
First, Dr. Jay Berry, M.D., MPH, Assistant Professor for
Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, and Mr. Matt Salo,
Executive Director, National Association of Medicaid Directors.
Then Ms. Maria Isabel Frangenberg, Project Coordinator,
Family Voices. Then Ms. Tish West, parent of a child with
medically complex conditions. Then Dr. Steven Koop, M.D.,
Medical Director, Gillette Children's Specialty Health Care,
and finally Mr. Rick Merrill, President and Chief Executive
Officer of Cook Children's Health System.
Thank you for coming today. Your written testimony will be
made a part of the record. You will each be given 5 minutes to
summarize your testimony. There is a system of lights on your
table.
I think after four minutes the yellow should come and then
finally after 5 minutes the red. So we ask if you would respect
that, and we thank you for coming today.
We, at this point, will recognize Dr. Jay Berry for your
opening summary--5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF JAY G. BERRY, M.D., M.P.H., ASSISTANT PROFESSOR
OF PEDIATRICS, HARVARD MEDICAL SCHOOL; MATT SALO, EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF MEDICAID DIRECTORS; MARIA
ISABEL FRANGENBERG, PROJECT COORDINATOR, FAMILY VOICES; TISH
WEST, PARENT OF A CHILD WITH MEDICALLY COMPLEX CONDITIONS;
STEVEN KOOP, M.D., MEDICAL DIRECTOR, GILLETTE CHILDREN'S
SPECIALTY HEALTHCARE; RICK W. MERRILL, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, COOK CHILDREN'S HEALTH SYSTEM

STATEMENT OF JAY G. BERRY, M.D., M.P.H.

Dr. Berry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Barton, Ms. Castor,
committee members and staff for prioritizing today's discussion
on children with medical complexity for giving us here the
opportunity to share our experiences and perceptions caring for
these children and for taking a step far with legislation to
optimize a system of care for them. It is a dream come true to
be talking with you guys about these children today.
I am a general pediatrician. I have a decade of experience
working a clinic and a hospital-based team dedicated
exclusively to caring for children with medical complexity.
I am also a health services researcher who has been trained
to use health administrative claims data to identify this
population of children and to assess their health care resource
use and their outcomes.
When I think of children with medical complexity, I think
of children that have a lifelong chronic condition that most
often is incurable it's so severe that it affects multiple
organ systems of the body.
It also significantly impairs the functioning of the
children, their ability to eat, to drink, to digest food, to
breathe, to walk and talk independently.
These children have a variety of health care needs. It's
not uncommon for them to be on dozens of medications, lots of
durable medical equipment and to have 20 or more providers
taking care of them across continuum from primary care,
specialty care, social workers, surgeons, home nurses, school
nurses, et cetera.
The prevalence of this population of children is small. At
most, they account for a few percent of all children. But their
impact on the system is quite large where they account for 30
or 40 percent of total spending, especially in Medicaid.
The balance of their health care spending is also
interesting, where about half of it, we think, is going to
hospital care but a vast minority of it, 2 to 3 percent or so,
is going to primary care, community care and home care.
For the current state of health affairs for these children,
too many of them have unmet health care needs. Many of them
can't find local pediatricians and other clinicians who are
willing to help them, especially with urgent care matters.
Often, many of them have to travel great distances for
specialty care even outside of their state and some are stuck
without a provider truly owning their care.
This impacts the children. They are getting sick too often
and they are relying on the emergency department in the
hospital too much for their health crises. Their parents have
limited support in their home.
Many parents are running many hospitals in their home,
trying to care for their children and they are experiencing
immense caregiving time and effort which can result in loss of
employment, marital and family discord, and emotional distress.
It's just hard to take care of these kids. It's time
consuming. It takes a lot of people to do it. No one clinician
or one clinic can do it all.
It takes a lot of brain power. It's emotionally taxing,
especially just riding along with the families as they are
experiencing unbelievably dire health circumstances.
It's often not financially attractive. The providers for
these children, as we've talked about, are geographically
dispersed. It's hard sometimes to hold them accountable for
what they are doing and the health data are just not
forthcoming enough to really identify best practices for these
children.
So I couldn't be more excited about federal legislation in
health care policy that can help these kids. Anything that
could help redirect and stabilize health care spending for them
into the primary community and home care world that could
institute accountability and governance across all the
providers caring for them that could improve their
accessibility of care especially across state lines and could
optimize the Medicaid data that we have, making it more
reliable, standardized and useful to measure the quality of
care for these children and identify best practices.
Thank you so much for having me here today. I will be happy
to answer any questions for you after the other testimonies.
Thank you so much.
[The prepared statement of Jay G. Berry follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. No one has their
mic switch on, do they.
So staff is working on it and I apologize for the VA
system. At this point, I'll recognize Mr. Matt Salo for 5
minutes for your summary.

STATEMENT OF MATT SALO

Mr. Salo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Green, members of the
committee. My name is Matt Salo and I'm the executive director
of the National Association of Medicaid Directors and I too
appreciate the opportunity to testify before you today about
our efforts and our collective efforts to improve the health
care delivery system for all Medicaid patients but especially
the system for children with medically complex conditions and
we very much appreciate your hard work and your leadership to
help us help the children and the families who rely on
Medicaid.
And so on behalf of the Medicaid administrators and all 56
of the states and territories, we support the primary goals of
H.R. 546 of improving the coordination of care for kids to
address problems with fragmentation and uncoordinated care, to
think about how these issues work across state lines and very
much to relook and to examine the data on quality issues, on
clinical issues underlying how the health care system treats or
fails to adequately treat these populations.
Now, I am not a doctor but I have spent 22 years working on
behalf of state Medicaid agencies and governors in the Medicaid
space and so what I do know is that while the Medicaid programs
across the country do look very different from one another. The
commonality or the common theme and thread amongst the Medicaid
directors is a deep commitment and passion for trying to
improve the health care system, trying to improve the quality
and efficiency of services that we provide and improving the
overall patient experiences for all of the 72 million
beneficiaries who rely on Medicaid.
And I can report that every state is aggressively working
on multiple efforts to redesign the fragmented delivery silos
and to reorient the misplaced financial incentives that are
legion throughout the rest of the U.S. healthcare system.
These efforts take many forms, and I'm happy to go into
some of the details later. But suffice to say that we are
looking to try to do this on behalf of kids with medically
complex conditions, on behalf of adults with physical
disabilities, on behalf of frail seniors who are duly eligible
for Medicare and for Medicaid, and that each of these efforts
is undertaken in close partnership with patients, with
providers, with family members and, of course, with our
partners at the Centers for Medicaid and CHIP services.
And as Mr. Pallone said, I think it's important to note,
that many of the kids with medical complex conditions in
Medicaid are there not because they are poor, not because they
are on Medicaid, but let's face it, because the broader U.S.
health care system has failed to adequately address their needs
and they have ended up on Medicaid because of the cost or the
failure of the broader system and that is what we are really
trying to fix.
Now, clearly, challenges remain and I appreciate that
that's what we are trying to do here is to talk about how do we
effectively overcome some of those challenges and, again, this
is the beginning of a discussion.
We very much want to be part of this discussion and we want
to see something happen that can actually improve the care and
the coordination of that care in the field.
One important point I would make, though, is that the key
to long-term lasting success in this area and other areas is
that we ensure that we have a broad alignment of purpose,
organization and implementation of these reforms.
The core components of the failed health care system that
we are moving away from includes fragmentation, delivery silos
and financial incentives that simply do not reward improved
health outcomes.
And again, while the patient populations that we serve in
Medicaid may look very different from one another, it is
critical to our long-term efforts that we avoid defaulting back
into fragmentation.
And I appreciate Chairman Barton talked about wanting to
move away from a facility-based view of the world and more
towards a family and community-based view. So the components
here I think are really important, looking at a health home
model as an option for states.
This is a logical and sensible step for many states. This
is an approach that is known to us. It is known to providers.
It is known to stakeholders and I think the availability of
the enhanced match can go a long way towards providing the
right incentives to take this up but also really to provide the
adequate infrastructure that's needed to make these things
sustainable.
And then, finally, and I'm happy to talk much more about
this later. But the idea of creating, compiling, and sharing
best practices is critically important.
There is no currency in Medicaid quite like the fact that
something has succeeded in a state and the ability of one state
to say, we have done this and we have made this work in
Medicaid is an enormously compelling statement for their
colleagues and so we want to work with that.
And so I probably have much more to say but I will stop
there because I am over my time.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Matt Salo follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman and now recognized
Ms. Frangenberg 5 minutes for your summary.

STATEMENT OF MARIA ISABEL FRANGENBERG

Ms. Frangenberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking
Member and members of the committee. Thank you very much for
allowing me to testify today.
My name is Maria Isabel Frangenberg, and I am a Project
Coordinator for Family Voices, which is a national nonprofit
organization of and for families of children and youth with
special health care needs.
Prior to working with Family Voices, I served as a Latino
community liaison for the Virginia Family to Family Health
Information Center.
Family to Family Health Information Center, or F to F, are
the statewide federally funded centers that help parents of
children with special health care needs to navigate the health
care system.
As we know, one in five families with children have at
least one child with special health care needs and children, as
you have mentioned before, children with complex medical
conditions are a subset of children with special health care
needs.
These children may see multiple providers on a regular
basis and therefore care coordination is of the essence. In
addition, many of these children, as you have mentioned, need
highly specialized care from several different providers across
state lines.
Medicaid doesn't always provide the necessary care
coordination and access to out-of-state is often very
difficult. The ACE Kids Act addresses some of these barriers
and we at Family Voices fully support its goals.
So through my work many families from diverse backgrounds
have told me their stories about their need to get medically
necessary and culturally and linguistically competent and
appropriate care for their children.
Medicaid can be a lifesaver for children and families both
literally and figuratively. So let me tell you Cindy's story.
Cindy is a mother from Indiana and she told us that her family
went from two incomes to one when she left work to care for her
newborn daughter, Rebecca, who was born with multiple
disabilities and health care conditions.
Even with private insurance they were paying over $12,000
per year in pharmaceutical, medical equipment, expenses,
deductibles, specialists, out of pocket travel expenses and
other noncovered items.
However, since Rebecca has been on Medicaid their lives
have changed. They have paid of medical debt and are even
saving for college for their own two children. They peace of
mind knowing that they won't have to go into debt to provide
for Rebecca's complex medical needs.
So Cindy's story is, clearly, a Medicaid success story and
the reason that we are here today committed to building on that
success and improving access to its critical supports for
families.
However, access to Medicaid services is not always that
smooth and a complication for some families is the failure of
Medicaid agencies to provide written and oral communications in
the language of the child's family when that language is not
English.
Rosa from Massachusetts, whose son has Down Syndrome, told
me that she must wait weeks for Medicaid correspondence to be
translated into her language and days to speak to an agency
representative in Spanish.
Another example of barriers to accessing Medicaid services
came from Beth, a mother from North Dakota. Beth is a widow who
is raising two children with a rare and extremely painful and
incurable pancreatic condition, the same disease from which her
husband died.
Because of their extreme pain and the medications used to
treat it, the children have severe behavioral side effects. The
children's mental health providers and the medical providers
don't talk to each other. So there is no care coordination, and
Beth is left to connect all the dots on her own.
What is worse, her son's medical providers have accused her
of child neglect when Beth withheld pain medication following
the advice of her son's mental health provider.
Adding to her worries, Beth's full time salary is not
enough to cover all of her children's expenses. In a strange
twist of fate, her daughter lost her Medicaid waiver for lack
of use, really a reason that has Beth befuddled. Her son has
not qualified for Medicaid because of the income that he
receives from his father's death benefits.
But Beth is hopeful that some of these system issues will
be resolved to improve the coordination of care for her
children and reduce her financial and emotional burdens.
The ACE Kids Act would help to address such problems with
care coordination as well as barriers to getting care out of
state. Our written testimony provides several recommendations
that would improve the bill.
Among these we recommend that the administrator of CMS be
required to establish clear standards to ensure the quality of
health home services for children with complex medical
conditions.
We also believe that it is critical that the administrator,
the states and health home providers meaningfully engage
families in the development and implementation of health home
services.
And here I wish to acknowledge the outstanding work of the
Maternal and Child Health Bureau for their long-time commitment
to engage in the diverse constituents that they serve as full
partners at all levels of health care.
Very active engagement has had a profound impact on
appropriately meeting the needs of families and their
communities. Let me get back to Beth really quickly, the mom
from North Dakota.
When we were finishing our conversation she paused and she
said, you know, I'm really grateful that somebody is listening
to me. That was truly humbling.
So I think that we can agree that we can work harder to
give families like Beth's better reasons to be grateful.
[The prepared statement of Maria Isabel Frangenberg
follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady and now
recognizes Ms. West for 5 minutes for her summary.

STATEMENT OF TISH WEST

Ms. West. Thank you. My name is Tish West and I am the
mother of Caroline West.
On behalf of my daughter and the millions of medically
complex children in Florida and across the country I want to
thank all of you for devoting your time to discuss how we can
better serve the most medically vulnerable children in our
country.
I would particularly like to thank Congresswoman Kathy
Castor, our longtime champion and original sponsor of the bill.
I would also like to thank Congressman Gus Bilirakis, another
Tampa Bay member who cares deeply about this issue.
Additionally, I'd like to thank Ranking Member Frank Pallone,
who travelled to Tampa to see the Chronic Complex Clinic where
Caroline and nearly a thousand other children receive
lifesaving care at St. Joseph's Children's Hospital. Chairman
Upton, Pitts, Ranking Members Green and Pallone and the entire
subcommittee, I am deeply honored to be here today.
Our daughter, Caroline, is 19 years of age. She has a rare
neurological condition that affects approximately 800 people
worldwide. Her condition affects every aspect of her life. She
has seizures. She is fed by a tube into her stomach.
She is confined to a wheelchair. She is developmentally
delayed. She has cerebral palsy. She has been hospitalized for
full spinal fusion, chronic pneumonia and seizures that have
lasted as long as 12 hours.
She is currently on seizure meds that she takes three times
a day, has physical and speech therapy, is on a specialized
diet to control seizures.
Caroline's care is extremely rigorous. She needs my support
for every aspect of her life and it takes 29 different
specialty care providers to maintain her health and welfare.
Before Caroline was born, I was working in an executive job
and was on an advanced promotion career track. As is the case
with most parents of medically complex children, I did not have
the luxury of continuing to work.
Since we did not have a diagnosis, we were busy visiting
doctors, running tests to identify her illness. The first step
in treatment is diagnosis.
This diagnostic process took us across the country to
hospitals like Boston Children's and Johns Hopkins and others.
All of this travel and testing was funded personally. Insurance
would not cover our expenses.
During this time, our family was under an enormous amount
of stress, both emotionally and financially. I had just left a
high-paying job. We were paying out of pocket for travel. We
paid out of pocket for expensive medicines that were not
covered. Many of her necessary therapies were not covered.
These expensive tests at out of state hospitals were not
covered and we had been denied by Florida's Medicaid waiver
program. Our family was also in an emotional crisis. We were
unprepared for the isolation that having a child with
disabilities presents.
Since all of my friends were primarily my past coworkers, I
did not have a strong support system. We were navigating
uncharted territory alone. A medical home for complex kids is a
rarity.
We know firsthand. Caroline's first pediatrician was a
highly educated individual that we respected greatly. However,
he was not experienced in dealing with kids with chronic and
complex illness. We were an unusual sight in his office and did
not always feel comfortable visiting the doctor.
Our questions would often go unanswered. We were a puzzle
to our doctors. We were visiting many specialty doctors and had
a difficult time getting the doctors to consult with each
other.
There was an occasion in the diagnostic process where we
actually had to be admitted to the hospital just to get our
various providers to talk with each other. After years of
bouncing around with doctors, we learned about a new clinic,
the Chronic Complex Clinic at St. Joseph's Children's Hospital
of Tampa.
Moving to this clinic was a lifesaving event for our
family. All 800 patients of this clinic are categorized at the
highest level of complexity. The clinic is co-located on the
campus of St. Joseph's Children's Hospital with every
subspecialty on the same floor.
The doctors in the clinic are also hospitalists, which
means that if Caroline is admitted into the hospital she will
see the exact same doctors that she sees as an in-patient and
they in turn will be familiar with her. All the doctors that we
see know Caroline and understand her condition. This structure
is a true medical home.
This means faster treatment, less time in the hospital and
better outcomes. We are the norm at our clinic. We are not
outliers. Since coming to the clinic, Caroline's health has
improved and her hospitalizations have been reduced.
As you review ways to deliver medicine to children with
chronic and complex issues, I would urge you to look closely at
this clinic.
The criteria that you put in place for ACE Kids needs
ensure that these medical homes are for the most medically
complex and that the institutions like St. Joseph's Hospital
have all the resources to support this approach to care.
Diluting this care to every pediatrician would not accomplish
the outcomes that we have experienced through this model.
We were finally approved for the medical waiver program.
This allowed us to augment our private insurance with Medicaid.
This was a lifesaver for us.
We are hard workers and have always believed in taking care
of ourselves and not relying on the welfare of others. We never
imagined that we would need a government program to take care
of one of our children. However, I am grateful for the program.
Lastly, I am not here testifying just for myself and my
daughter. I am here for the thousands of families that are not
able to speak for themselves. This legislation is urgently
needed.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Tish West follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady and now
recognizes Dr. Koop 5 minutes for your summary.

STATEMENT OF STEVEN KOOP, M.D.

Dr. Koop. Good morning. I am Steven Koop. I am a pediatric
orthopaedic surgeon. I also serve as the medical director at
Gillette Children's Specialty Health Care.
Gillette is an independent nonprofit specialty hospital in
St. Paul, Minnesota. Thank you for allowing me to testify.
Your efforts to improve Medicaid coverage for the children
that you have heard about today is very important to them, to
their families and to those who care for them.
Today, I hope to make the following points. First, we
appreciate the approach of the new discussion draft of the ACE
Kids Act. Second, we believe it is critical to protect patient
access to skilled specialty care.
And third, it is important that we work together to gather
data and best practices so that we can inform and improve the
system that serves these children and their families.
Gillette was established in 1897 to serve children with
disabilities. That is still our mission today. In the past 5
years, we have served patients from all 50 states plus the
District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and more than 20 countries.
The children we have today, the children we serve, have
conditions such as cerebral palsy, spina bifida and a long list
of very complex conditions.
Gillette's patients include some of the most medically
fragile children, children who require lifelong care
coordination and multiple medical and surgical interventions so
that they can thrive and reach their full potential.
At Gillette, we have made the conscious decision to build
an integrated care model that focuses on delivering high
quality and effective care to narrow segment of the population.
In doing so, we have learned key elements of serving our
patients to the best of our ability.
First and foremost, patients and families must be at the
center of our collective work. Why? Because parents and family
members become the first experts in their child's unique
condition.
As a physician, I have learned to recognize and value this
expertise. Moms like Tish West have become my best teachers
over my 31 years of work.
When a child is born with a medically complex condition or
experiences serious injuries, as you have just heard, the life
and finances of a family are transformed. I do not think it's
necessary to say more about the challenges of Medicaid and
accessing this essential funding for their care.
We are encouraged by the new draft discussion of the ACE
Kids Act that is the subject of today's hearing. We believe it
moves in a positive direction for the following reasons. It
places children and families at the center and builds around
them. A state option to provide coordinated care through a
health home for children who have complex medical conditions is
key to achieving the goals of the ACE Kids Act.
New models should respond to the needs of children and
their families, should include data reports that will improve
care for children now and in the future, should allow families
to make choices amongst providers and it should ensure access
to the providers who are most appropriate for that child.
Secondly, it pursues facts and information that will
improve our understanding of medically complex children. We
believe any effort to improve Medicaid for children with
medical complexity must be data driven.
The provision requiring a study of children with medical
complexity will increase our knowledge of the children and what
they and their families experience, the models of care that
serve them well.
Third, it encourages sharing of knowledge that will improve
care for all exceptional children. The concept of an agency
such as CMS providing guidance to state medical directors
regarding best practices provides an opportunity to highlight
what works, thereby helping to improve the care that children
receive across the entire nation.
Additional and more detailed comments and recommendations
with respect to the discussion draft, the story of Gillette
Children's and our work and stories of the patients that we
serve are included in our written testimony.
I thank the original sponsors of the ACE Kids Act,
particularly Congressman Barton and Congresswoman Castor, for
their leadership in this bipartisan effort.
Thank you, Chairman Pitts and Ranking Member Green, for
allowing me to speak today.
[The prepared statement of Steven Koop, M.D. follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman and now recognizes
Mr. Merrill 5 minutes for your summary.

STATEMENT OF RICK W. MERRILL

Mr. Merrill. Well, good morning. Good morning. I'm Rick
Merrill, president and chief executive officer of Cook
Children's Health Care System, a not for profit integrated
pediatric health care system located in Fort Worth, Texas.
I am very glad to be here with you today representing
children's hospitals nationwide to discuss the Advancing Care
for Exception Kids Act, H.R. 546 and the discussion draft.
I wish to thank the original co-sponsors of the ACE Kids
Act, Chairman Joe Barton and Representative Kathy Castor, whose
leadership has galvanized strong bipartisan support for the
bill from over 200 of their House colleagues.
We would also like to thank Energy and Commerce Committee
Chairman Fred Upton and Ranking Member Frank Pallone and the
Health Subcommittee chairman, Joe Pitts, of course, and Ranking
Member Gene Green for holding this hearing on improving care
for children with very serious complex medical conditions.
We would also like to express our appreciation to
Representative Michael Burgess and more than a dozen additional
members of the subcommittee for their support of the bill.
Additionally, it is important to acknowledge the thoughtful
input offered on the current bill by other organizations
present and we look forward to continuing to work with these
groups as the bill moves forward.
Last year, Cook Children's treated children from more than
30 states, recorded nearly a half million child visits in our
60 pediatric subspecialty clinics, 240,000 visits to our
emergency department and urgent care centers and registered
over 11,000 in-patient admissions.
With over 1.3 million patient encounters in our system,
Cook Children's provides comprehensive and coordinated care
across this system including home health care services and a
health plan which enrolls over 100,000 Medicaid children, many
of whom have serious disabilities.
For many years now, we've taken care of some very sick kids
and we've done a good job of it in our part of Texas. But I'm
here today to tell you we could and should do better. As a
nation, we have an obligation to improve care for our sickest,
most vulnerable children who have complex medical conditions
and who largely depend on Medicaid for their health care.
We do our best today working with our Medicaid program but
we can do much better. While Medicaid is state-based, the
children we serve are not necessarily locally based.
As I mentioned, many of the patients travel great distances
across state lines for our specialized care. But right now, we
have no national data to accelerate best practice and quality
improvement work and no national quality standards to assess if
we're doing a better job.
These essential elements of improvement in service and care
cannot be achieved without changes in Medicaid. Thankfully, we
have seen great strides in the improvement of care in the adult
Medicare population that has been made possible through
national data and national standards informing best practices
and better care.
Don't we want the same for children with serious health
care needs? As it has been stated, the number of these children
with medical complexity is a small number, perhaps 6 percent of
the children on Medicaid.
The group accounts for 40 percent of the Medicaid's current
spend on kids yet each year the number of children with
multiple life-threatening disabilities grows.
Over the coming decade, the 2 million children with medical
complexity in Medicaid will greatly increase in numbers at the
current growth rate of 5 percent or more, and the $30 billion
to $40 billion we incur yearly in Medicaid costs for this
population will increase even more rapidly given medical
inflation rates. By strengthening Medicaid to improve
coordinated care for this population we can reduce spending
potentially by billions of dollars over a multiyear period by
decreasing unnecessary utilization of costly services.
Working together we can achieve the delivery reform
required to strengthen Medicaid for these children. Passing the
ACE Kids Act is key to this effort.
Meaningful reform cannot be accomplished by 50 different
Medicaid programs working independently. A national approach is
needed to create consistent systems of coordinated care across
states using common definitions and transparency of data,
driving care improvement and reducing Medicaid spending.
The ACE Kids Act would be voluntary for states as well as
families and health care providers and can be implemented
locally around the needs of the families, state Medicaid
managed plans, and health care providers.
We have these kinds of partnerships in place in several
communities across the country, mine included, and they are
achieving great results for children locally.
With a strong framework in place, states, health plans,
families, and providers can work together to improve care for
our nation's sickest and most vulnerable children.
On behalf of the children's hospitals and the thousands of
children and families served by Cook Children's, we look
forward to continuing our work with the bill's champions in
Congress to advance solutions that improve care for these kids.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Rick W. Merrill follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman. That concludes the
opening statements.
I have a UC request. I would like to submit the following
documents for the record: statements from the American College
of Cardiology, the Cooley's Anemia Foundation, three letters
from Medicaid Health Plans of America, a statement from the
Seattle Children's Hospital.
Without objection, those will be entered into the record.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
We are going to take a 5-minute break to let the staff
reset the mics. They say that way we can get rid of this static
and feedback. So, with your indulgence, we will break for 5
minutes.
[Whereupon, the above-mentioned matter recessed at 11:08
a.m. and resumed at 11:17 a.m.]
Mr. Pitts. OK, ladies and gentlemen. If you'll take your
seats we'll get started. I apologize for this. That's a little
better, I think.
Mr. Green. Appreciate help from our friends.
Mr. Pitts. Yes. So thank you very much for your patience.
We'll now go to questioning. I will begin the questioning and
recognize myself 5 minutes for that purpose and we'll start
with you, Dr. Berry.
In your testimony you wrote a bit about your research and
some of the challenges with defining the population of children
with medical complexity.
Can you explain please the definitional challenges and is
it fair to say many definitions risk being simplistic or one
size fits all and would you have concerns with Congress
mandating a single definition and writing it in federal
statute?
Dr. Berry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for that complicated
question. So, complexity really is a subject term, right. It's
kind of in the eye of the beholder who's trying to make a
judgment about it with a patient in front of him.
And, there are very specific ways at going about a
definition and then more broad ways. So, for instance, in our
clinic and other complex care clinics we have a very general
definition.
The kids have to have a chronic condition, it's got to
affect multiple organ systems of the body--at least three, we
say. They have to have functional limitations and that's about
it, and we get referrals every week from providers all over New
England sending us kids, with that definition in place.
We have no specific diagnoses. We have no specific
medications or anything else they need. It's just that, and the
kids are coming.
So I think from the clinical provider standpoint, even a
more generic definition like that it actually works for a
clinical program to get the kids what they need.
Now, when you're trying to carve out the data I think
that's when the definitions become a little bit more
challenging but you can definitely do it. Then you're arguing
in the fringes about what specific diseases are in or out or a
number of chronic conditions and all that kind of stuff.
But, themes and variations on that, no matter how strict
you get you're going to be able to identify that core set of
kids, I believe, regardless of the specifics. They could really
benefit from legislation like this, and over time you may
revise it and do things in the fringes but you really are going
to be able to get that core set of kids in there.
Mr. Pitts. OK. Thank you.
Dr. Koop, does Gillette serve children enrolled in Medicaid
managed care plans and if so can you discuss how you work with
those plans to coordinate care for these children?
Dr. Koop. We do. Those plans often have individuals who
communicate with us about the resources that they have and how
we're going to coordinate care. We place a particular emphasis
on working with the primary care physicians for our patients.
We want them to be connected to the primary care community. We
live in a reasonably rural part of the U.S. and many of our
patients travel long distances so that constant communication
and collaboration is essential.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you.
Mr. Salo, I know one of the concerns Medicaid directors had
with the original ACE Kids Act is that it upset the balance of
the federal-state nature of the Medicaid and may have given too
much authority to CMS instead of states.
How do Medicaid directors feel about this new draft and
knowing managed care is an important delivery system to many
states like Michigan? Do directors feel like the draft overly
incentivizes fee for service?
Mr. Salo. I think, and granted that the draft has only
been, I think, on the street for about a week or so so I can't
promise that all 56 of my members have looked at it and weighed
in it, but I can say with broad confidence that the concepts
behind the new draft are very much in keeping with the
direction that states are going because, as I alluded to
earlier there are a lot--states are very different from one
another.
The reforms in Pennsylvania versus the reforms in Texas on
one level look very different. So it's important that whatever
we do moving forward is able to accommodate that and so by that
I mean you do have a number of states who are moving forward in
kind of a traditional managed care organization reform model.
But you also have a number of states moving forward with
accountable care organizations or in a number of states like
Oregon and Colorado and others they even call them other
things.
There's RCOs and CCOs and endless acronympalooza there. But
this type of approach, the health home approach, is something
that can be blended into a more traditional managed care
approach.
It can be blended in with the ACOs and it can be used in
places like Arkansas where there is no real managed care
infrastructure at all.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you. Let me sneak one more question in.
Mr. Merrill, in your testimony you noted we lack national
quality measures tailored to the unique needs of children with
medical complexity.
Yet, I assume your health care plan, which has more than
100,000 children enrolled reports to the state of Texas on
quality measures and as your testimony suggests there are major
challenges with accurately defining the diverse population.
So is putting the car before the horse--is it putting the
cart before the horse to try to create new quality metrics for
this population? Why do you think current metrics are
sufficient?
Mr. Merrill. Great question, Mr. Chairman.
We do have quality measures and a lot of health plans
across the nation have quality measures that they are expected
to hold to.
But that said, they are quality measures that are specific
to our health plan and to our state, and if we want to try and
accelerate our opportunity to improve care sooner than later
for this patient population and create the budget certainty and
potential savings that this bill has or this resolution has in
mind, we need a common definition.
We need common standards and that is why we need to get
also to a common definition of who these patients are. We need
a common denominator and a common language that tethers all of
this effort across all of the states together so that we can
use that common language to accelerate the improvement in care
for these patients and ultimately the budget certainty and
savings that this contemplates.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. I have gone way
over my time. The chair recognizes Ranking Member Mr. Green 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. West, I want to thank you for your incredible moving
and illustrative story of what you've shared with us today. No
doubt in my mind that the care your daughter has received at
St. Joseph's in Florida has been lifesaving and life changing
for both your daughter and your family.
What elements of St. Joseph's model do you think are most
critical to the success of your child?
Ms. West. I think one of the great things is that the
clinic itself is adjacent to the hospital. So if additional
tests are needed when we go into the clinic we can just go
right over to the hospital for x-rays right away or any other
kind of testing.
Secondly, I think having the subspecialties co-located with
the clinic is really important. We've had situations where we
were in our clinic with our primary pediatrician and the doctor
was confused about something that was going on with Caroline
and they walked over to talk with the GI doctor, consulted and
then came back and we made a decision together--the two
doctors.
Mr. Green. OK. Is Florida in a managed care Medicaid
program? Does Florida have----
Ms. West. Yes.
Mr. Green. And is St. Joseph's Hospital on that managed
care?
Ms. West. Yes. Don't ask me too many specific details about
how the funding works for the hospital.
Mr. Green. OK. Well, I'm just wondering because I've had
issues for a long time that managed care may only cover certain
facilities in certain areas and in Houston, for example, I
asked my managed care folks you need to cover a general
hospital in a medical center--Texas Children's and MD Anderson,
because then you really are a health care provider because you
cover those things.
And so that's why I hope that managed care, whether it be
in Florida or Texas, would do the same thing.
Dr. Merrill, is Cook on the Texas managed care Medicaid
program?
Mr. Merrill. Yes, Representative Green, we are, and in fact
as you may remember or recall or know, the state of Texas is
trying to, like many states, find ways to better coordinate
care for this population.
We just launched Star Kids, which is similar to ACE Kids.
But, again, it's just one solution for the nation. But yes, we
do participate with our health plan in Medicaid managed care.
Mr. Green. Well, and our next question is is it across
state lines? Because I know Cook brings folks from Oklahoma and
everywhere else just like Texas Children's in Houston does.
That's the main issue we have to deal with, how we can do that,
and it's going to take federal rules to do it because Louisiana
is so different from Texas and Medicaid just like Oklahoma, I'm
sure, is.
But Dr. Berry, one thing that struck me as we were
listening to our witnesses here today is how complex is it to
coordinate across those lines in Medicaid. People often say
you've seen one Medicaid program you've seen them all. But that
is just not the case because of the differences. I found that
out when we had a lot of our evacuees come into the Houston
area--I'm sure in the Dallas area from Louisiana and Katrina.
The Medicaid program in Louisiana was so different from
what we were accustomed to in Texas. The same state innovation
and flexibility that made Medicaid able to respond to unique
needs of populations can have the same characteristics.
But in ped care for kids and complex medical issues I think
it's important that we make sure we get it right and move
forward.
Dr. Berry, can you please provide an example of variation
in care that occurs across state lines for children with
medical complexity?
Dr. Berry. Yes.
Mr. Green. Because I assume in the New England area you get
them from everywhere.
Dr. Berry. Yes, we do. We do. It's interesting. One of the
major reasons why I went into this field at all and had an
affinity for taking care of these children was an experience
that I had in medical school back in Alabama.
So they were working with our cardiologist--this is back in
the late '90s--they were transferring all of their high-risk
congenital heart disease surgery to Boston.
We're talking about some major stuff so kids born with
maybe three out of the four ventricles of their heart--big
stuff. And that sort of blew my mind as a med student because
I'm thinking, why don't you guys just do the surgery here--
you're a children's hospital--why don't you take this on.
And they said, well, we've gone all around the country
looking at the best outcomes for these children--we want to own
them and we want them to undergo surgery in a place that has
the lowest mortality rates, lowest complication rates and the
highest chance of success.
And so they were doing that, and I found that fascinating
that they were bypassing other states and going all the way up
to New England to have that done. And to save time----
Mr. Green. Did Alabama pay for that care?
Dr. Berry. We have Alabama Medicaid on board to do that.
Mr. Green. OK.
Dr. Berry. And without a lot of effect locally, right,
because, the hospital would probably have enjoyed building a
cardiothoracic surgery program around those kids. But they
didn't.
Now, understanding that and hearing experiences of children
from other surrounding states in the southeast who may not have
been offered that opportunity to go and may have been a part of
other programs that didn't have as great as an outcome that
sort of made me privy to the fact that sort of depending on
where you live you might have services offered to you more or
less depending on what's going on and certain families may not
even know that they're able to travel and find a place with the
best outcome.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I know I have--it is
good to call you Mr. Chairman again.
Mr. Barton. Temporarily.
Mr. Green. Thank you for the time.
Mr. Barton. This is Mr. Pitts' chair. I'm just substituting
for Mr. Pitts. We thank the gentleman from Houston and I would
now recognize myself for 5 minutes. Maybe ten or 15.
Mr. Green. The authority of the chair.
Mr. Barton. Yes. No, no. I played by the rules.
I have several statements that I ask unanimous consent to
put into the record. We have a statement of support for the ACE
Kids legislation from the Children's Hospital Association.
Then we also have a collection of 22 letters from different
stakeholders expressing general support for the legislation. Is
there objection?
Mr. Green. No objection.
Mr. Barton. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Barton. Before I ask my questions I want to make
another brief statement. I want to commend the committee staff,
both the majority and minority. The draft legislation that's
before us is obviously quite a bit different than the original
ACE Kids Act that was introduced last year.
We had a meeting with Mr. Pallone and Mr. Upton and Mr.
Green, Ms. Castor, Congresswoman Cathy McMorris Rodgers about 3
weeks ago in which it was very intense discussion.
But the outcome of that meeting was, for those of us that
are proponents of this legislation, that we really wanted to
get it right and we weren't hung up on pride of authorship, and
the committee staff took that to heart and they have
transformed the original legislation.
And Chairman Upton agreed to hold a hearing and that
hearing is being held right now, and that's not trivial. We got
five weeks of legislative days left before the election,
counting tomorrow.
So the outcome of this hearing is real important. If we
want to move the bill this year then we're going to have to
really listen and then you folks are going to have to interact
with us on both the majority and minority side so that Chairman
Pitts and Mr. Upton and Mr. Pallone and Mr. Green feel
comfortable going to a markup and subcommittee in early
September.
So I want to thank the committee staff on both sides for
working really hard on this to come up with a transformational
draft. That is nontrivial and I appreciate it.
My first question is a general question. The draft as it's
currently structured does not have a metric for a quality
standard at the federal level and I think most of you in your
comments indicated that that was a possible concern and could
be something we needed to add.
So I just want to go right down the line. We will start
with you, Dr. Berry. Do you think that we should amend the
draft and put in a quality standard metric for health homes?
Dr. Berry. I think you should absolutely consider it and
would be happy to collaborate in order to think about what
those metrics might be health research utilization wise,
measures of the child's health specifically, patient-family
experience, all the major domains of quality I think that we
would think would be the most important to track progress of
this and to show effectiveness.
Mr. Barton. OK. Mr. Salo.
Mr. Salo. Yes, and I would say that while I think that the
quality measurement and reporting component is absolutely
critical I would be cautious about putting a specific set of
quality components in there because until we are sure what
those are and I think it's important to also spend some time
looking at the data that we do have and, making sure that we're
focusing on a core implementable set of measures that can be
done by providers and that we have the infrastructure in place
to be able to do that and those are not unimportant things.
But absolutely it is critical to the success of this and
many other efforts that we are focussed on the quality metrics.
Mr. Barton. OK.
Ms. Frangenberg. I agree, and I would also add that it is
very important that we reach out to families to understand how
they are experiencing the system and we need to understand
their ease of access on some scale, whether it is for Medicaid
or for the systems that they are trying to access.
Mr. Barton. OK.
Ms. West. I agree we do need quality standards. Obviously,
that's very important. I would just urge the committee to make
sure that we don't build a more bureaucratic system and ease of
access for families is super important. So I think that's the
main thing I would ask you to think about.
Mr. Barton. OK.
Dr. Koop. I too support this. I would put a particular
emphasis on the impact of care for the children, what they
experienced, how the outcome of that care changed their life
and how it influenced the family of their life. The data in
that domain is much weaker than other domains and really needs
to be accounted for.
Mr. Barton. OK.
Mr. Merrill. Yes, I do agree that we should have strong
quality standards and not to be lost in all of that is data
reporting--not to be used as a stick but to inform best
practices so we can accelerate our ability to provide better
coordinated care for this patient population.
Mr. Barton. In your testimony, several of you mentioned--I
think Dr. Koop mentioned it and Ms. West mentioned it--that we
need to be sure that the decision of whether to enter into a
health home was the family's decision.
Is that something that we need to--the draft is ambiguous
about that. Is that something that we need to make explicit in
a revision? I'll start with, I guess, Ms. West.
Ms. West. I think the most important thing is to make it
accessible to families and families need to feel comfortable.
So like in our situation originally we weren't very comfortable
in our pediatrician's office. So we were looking for a place to
go. So it was our decision. So I'm going to say yes, I think it
should be a decision of the family.
But there are rural communities--I'm lucky enough to live
in Tampa, Florida, a big city where we have this fabulous
clinic. So if you're in a rural community you might not even
know about places to go.
So I think there will some forms of communication that need
to be established to communicate with these families.
Mr. Barton. Dr. Koop.
Dr. Koop. I think we should be explicit in saying that
families should be able to make the choices they think are
wisest for their children.
Families today routinely communicate with each other.
They're reliable weather vanes about pointing in the direction
of quality and we need to make sure that they can follow the
quality.
Mr. Barton. Mr. Salo, to get states to opt into the system,
which is voluntary, we have an eight-quarter or 2 year 90
percent federal funding match, which Chairman Upton has
indicated that we will fund to pay for. Is that something that
you think would help the state Medicaid directors make
decisions to become involved?
And I would also ask if that's the right match, too high,
too low? Because on the Republican side I can tell you that's
going to be one we are going to have a little trouble selling
to the most conservative members of my caucus.
We have been down that road with, as Mr. Guthrie pointed
out to me in private conversation, some police programs that we
established ten years ago and when the federal match ran out
then the state legislatures felt like they got left holding the
bag.
Mr. Salo. Right. So I don't know whether that's the exact
right amount. But I would argue that having an enhanced match
there is critically important for two reasons, one of which,
states often suffer from what we call opportunity fatigue.
There are so many potential demos or reforms or pilots that
are out there. They've got to be able to figure out which ones
do
Enhanced match is going to help cut through the clutter and
say all right, that's a little bit more enticing and I think
the real reason for that is that any of these efforts that
we're undertaking and specifically with children with medically
complex conditions the infrastructure that you need to build in
terms of designing--how do you structure a health home, how do
you make sure that you've got interconnected IT systems, how do
you think about some of the payments incentives or shared
savings to the physicians that might be a part of this.
All of that is going to require a lot of investment in
infrastructure and in time and energy, and at least, an eight
quarter enhanced match is going to allow for some of that
infrastructure investment. And so I think it's really critical,
if at the very least for that.
Mr. Barton. For some reason, my time expired 2 minutes ago.
I am going to have to chastise myself.
We want to recognize now one of the original co-sponsors,
Kathy Castor, who said nice things about me. Ms. Castor has
been indefatigable--it's a big word for a Texan--in her support
of this legislation and I think because of her we've got a
great chance to get across the finish line.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you, Congressman Barton. I'd also
like to recognize former Congressman Jim Davis, who is here in
the back of the room making sure we all behave and do the right
thing.
He represented Tampa, Florida, the district that I have the
privilege of representing, and has always been an advocate for
kids and families. So thank you, Jim, for popping in here
today.
Ms. West, could you take us back to the real world here and
talk about the difference for families without this type of
medical home, kind of a before and after and your experience
talking with families at the St. Joseph's clinic and what
changes in their lives and the lives of their children--this
type of coordinated care as well?
Ms. West. Well, it's sort of an emotional thing but I'll
just take you through--imagine going into a doctor's office
where your child is in a wheelchair and has tubes attached to
it and everything else and--attached to their chair, not to
them but sometimes to the child as well.
And then you go in and there are all these cute little kids
running around and families who are staring at you and don't
really know what to make of you and I know this sounds like a
simplistic thing, but it's very uncomfortable and you don't
feel like you're welcome in the doctor's office and people
don't know what to do with you. They don't know how to speak
with you.
The kids are wondering what's wrong with your child and
they're asking their parents. And so, you don't really want to
go to the doctor. I'm a strong person, educated, so I'm going
to go.
But I think there were people who would not go to the
doctor's because they would feel intimidated and uncomfortable.
So when you go to the Chronic Complex Clinic, everyone welcomes
you.
There's lots of kids who have multiple disabilities. They
know how to talk with our children, how to embrace them. The
doctors are asking great questions and spending a lot of time
not trying to rush us out.
In a regular pediatrician's office you would only be
allowed 5 or 10 minutes because they've got more kids that
they've got to get through. But at the Chronic Clinic we take
as long as we need.
Ms. Castor. So at St. Joseph's I've seen team of health
professionals and social workers that are there. Dr. Berry, at
Boston, talked to us about the typical care management team and
in fact in the draft bill we have a reference to the team of
health care professionals and we're going to need your input on
whether that's the right mix. Talk about the entire team that's
necessary to provide good care to these kids.
Dr. Berry. Right. So at our clinic we have social workers,
case managers, heavy on the nursing staff. We have
neurodevelopmental-trained pediatricians, general pediatricians
working on both the in-patient and out-patient side.
We also collaborate very, very closely with surgeons who we
sometimes embed into our clinics, palliative care physicians.
So a myriad of folks.
One thing that we hope from legislation, though, is that we
can elevate what we've got and really integrate it with the
other providers that you just can't mix in to these clinics.
So all the primary care docs throughout New England, home
nurses, community case managers, school nurses, even getting
the durable medical equipment vendors involved who are in
charge of getting all the equipment to the children's home in a
timely fashion.
Just thinking about any type of system where all those guys
are integrated and functioning as a team would be awesome.
Ms. Castor. Yes. What I've seen is, the family is so
focused on taking care of their child but there is so much
bureaucracy and red tape. There is so much paperwork and for
families that are going from doctor to doctor to doctor they're
kind of on their own.
But the benefit of having the medical home is you have
those caseworkers that know how to fill out the forms and know
how to pick up the phone and talk to folks at state Medicaid.
Maybe, Tish, you can talk a little bit about that directly.
Ms. West. Well, in the beginning of Caroline's life I used
to carry around these gigantic notebooks full of all of her
medical records and her films and everything else so as we went
from doctor to doctor I could explain what was going on with
her and what her illnesses were.
And the paperwork was tremendous as well and it would take
me 45 minutes to an hour just to explain what was going on with
our child to a new doctor.
Now at the clinic they have the medical records that are
electronic. Everyone there knows our daughter and also because
the subspecialties are right there on the same floor they know
our daughter.
They know what's going on with her. It's a real
collaborative effort and she is much healthier as a result of
that. We don't have to spend hours and hours.
And then we also talk about the Medicaid issue. It took me
7 years just to get approved from the Medicaid waiver program
in Florida. There wasn't a clear definition of exactly who got
approved.
It was very bureaucratic and there was tons of paperwork. I
had to write letters over and over and over again. My doctors
had to write letters. It took years for me to get on the
program.
Ms. Castor. Mr. Merrill----
Mr. Barton. The gentlelady's time has expired. I hate to--
--
Ms. Castor. Can I ask the witnesses to submit certain
documents though?
Mr. Barton. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Castor. Because one of the outstanding questions is
that this is going to be voluntary for states. It's a state
option and what's going to happen for kids where their states
do not opt in.
So Mr. Merrill and all of you, we really need to you
address what Congressman Barton said before, the incentives for
states and health professionals to participate, to ensure that
the kids across the country are getting the best care.
Thank you.
Mr. Barton. We thank the gentlelady.
We now recognize the gentleman from the Bluegrass state of
Kentucky for 5 minutes.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you very much and first, Ms. West, I
want to say thanks for coming in and sharing your stories
because it's powerful for us to hear your stories. And I have
never thought of the waiting room from your perspective as you
just said that and that's an image that's in my mind.
I went through some with my son. He was about 4 or 5 or--
about 6 months, when he was 8 we found a problem. Had to spend
a lot of time at a pediatric urologist.
Figured it out. He had surgery and there's no implications
from it now. But I remember distinctly being in the pediatric
urology. So if you're going to a pediatric urologist in a major
children's hospital there's a lot of issues with children there
and I have specifically a couple in mind.
I remember--he was 8 so I remember specifically a family
with a baby and they said does he need to be fed. They're
talking to each other and the dad reached over to get the
diaper bag out or the bottle bag or whatever and I'm thinking
oh, I remember those days when I used to have to do that and he
pulls out and pulls her dress up and gives her a syringe
through the stomach and it was, like, wow, this is--it just
really struck me and it struck me how much families struggle
and how much we thought we were struggling and how much
families struggle and being able to take those experiences that
you have and share them with us helps, and so I appreciate your
willingness to do so.
Ms. West. Well, thank you very much for having us here.
Thank you.
Mr. Guthrie. Thanks. But I do have a question. I'm the co-
sponsor for the bill and I know you, Mr. Salo, you touched on
this a little bit with Mr. Pitts, and he had to go take a vote
in another committee so I just want to make sure you touched on
it and maybe others can elaborate as well.
But I want to ask you, so the care coordination--Kentucky
has moved to managed care Medicaid and so 34 states, I think,
do managed care in Medicaid and coordinated care is with
complex medical needs through a managed care program. So
Medicaid is doing this.
Given this, can you outline or elaborate on the need for
the home health model described in the bill? Is this intended
for those states that don't have Medicaid managed care?
Mr. Salo. Not necessarily. I think I want to make it clear
that I think the home health option is and can be a very
attractive option for states that are on a broad spectrum from
managed care.
I mean, you can do managed care where you're just--you have
a managed care organization and then all they do is pay
physicians fee for service.
That's not all that much managing. You could have managed
care where the managed care association or organization is
employing patients that are in medical homes or other types of
intensive care coordination.
So this I would view as a tool that can be attractive for a
lot of different states. But I don't want to lead people to
think that this will be something that everyone will do because
this is not necessarily going to be the option for everyone,
which is why I think it's critical that the other components of
the proposal, sharing with the best practices and then really
investing into the research and the data underlying all of this
will help get at some of those other issues for others states.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. You're answering my question but I want to
just redirect a little bit and then if anybody else wants to
add in.
So in May, CMS issued the final rule on Medicaid managed
care. The new rule significantly strengthens a number of
requirements on managed care plans regarding quality monitoring
and oversight.
The new rule also has additional quality requirements
specific to pediatric services and although this rigorous
quality oversight is for all Medicaid managed care plans
there's no comparable for fee for service payment structure.
Considering that most home health models are paid via a fee
for service payment structure, are you concerned that the
proposed home health model in the discussion bill might put
children at risk due to lack of quality oversight?
So anybody can answer that. We're just trying to get to the
details.
Mr. Salo. Yes. No, I think what you will see in a health
home model and what you're seeing as the trend throughout
Medicaid is the gradual movement away from a fee for service
only, an uncoordinated fee for service model.
Again, there are different ways of doing this. One of the
things that some of the states say is that fee for service--and
again, to Ms. Castor's point, fee for service, abbreviated FFS,
for kids with medically complex conditions or other people with
severe needs the FFS really stands for fend for self and that
is not the ideal that we want and that's not where state
Medicaid programs are going. They are going there with managed
care, they are going there with ACOs, they are going there with
patient-centered medical homes.
But the whole point of this is to create an infrastructure,
to create a structure where you've got the case managers.
You've got the social workers. You've got the community health
workers who are bringing all of these fragmented silos of
services and it's not just hospitalizations.
It is the primary care. It is the behavioral health, the
mental health and it is the long-term services and supports
that are critical.
Mr. Guthrie. Well, I'm about out of time. That's exactly
what we want so I'm glad you're saying that.
Mr. Merrill.
Mr. Merrill. If I could add to that, Mr. Guthrie. As
providers of care and really what ACE Kids is about is--at its
core is coordinating the best are possible for these children
and since we own our own health plan we have insight into the
managed care part of this equation. And the managed care
organizations, with all due respect, are focused on claims.
We're focused on care as providers and if we truly want to
coordinate care with this population it needs to occur closer
to the providers and not so much on the claims side of the
equation.
That said, managed care organizations do play a key role in
this and all of us have to work together if we truly want to
achieve the goals and the aims of ACE Kids.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Barton. The gentleman yields back.
And we weren't able to have the managed care groups testify
today but we did ask them for a letter and they have presented
the letter and we will put that into the record and they do
express some continuing concerns about the legislation.
With that, we recognize the gentlelady from Chicago, the
co-chairman of the Czech Caucus with myself, Ms. Jan
Schakowsky, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I am so proud
to be a co-sponsor of the legislation, and I wanted to thank
you, Mr. Chairman and Congresswoman Castor, for your great work
on this, and I want to thank all the members of the panel who
are here today to support the ACE Kids Act and to learn more
about the challenges that we face to make the families and
health providers able to serve the children with complex
medical needs.
I especially want to thank you, Ms. West, for taking the
time. I am just so thrilled. I had to walk out during your
testimony but read it and just so thrilled to read currently
Caroline is a happy child with an infectious smile and a happy
disposition due to the care that you were able to, after many
struggles, find.
Recently, a Chicago mother came to my office with her child
who has complex medical needs, Antoine, and before they were
able to find a medical home they really, really struggled.
They finally found it at Advocate's Children's Hospital in
the Chicago area where he receives care and coordinated care
for children with a medical complexity program. That's what
it's called.
The coordination of Antoine's care, as you all know, is no
small task and as you can see from his complex care map, I have
a map that I can show the witness and the committee. And even
with the assistance of Advocate's Children's Hospital,
Antoine's mother remains his primary caregiver.
Despite these challenges, Antoine's family is definitely
one of the lucky ones that it's able to live close to his
health home and has a skilled medical team supporting him at
the coordinated care for children with medical complexity
program.
So, Ms. West, you mentioned how Medicaid has been in
supplementing your family's private insurance to ensure that
your daughter Caroline receives the care she needs.
Can you discuss why it's important for families that have
children with complex medical needs to have access to both
private insurance and Medicaid and how Medicaid coverage has
helped Caroline to receive the health services she needs?
Ms. West. Yes. The insurance programs often do not cover
some of the medicines that these kids need. So there were
certain seizure meds that weren't covered that were very
costly. The insurance programs limit the number of therapies
that you can have per year or the types of therapies.
Even though the doctors are writing prescriptions for these
things the insurance companies do not allow you to continue to
have those therapies.
So Medicaid would pick up anything that our private
insurance didn't pick up after our deductible. So, we buy
insurance. We meet our deductible and then our insurance picks
up and then we have Medicaid pick up the balance.
So many families don't even have the safety net of a
private insurance and so they are going to the hospitals, to
the emergency rooms particularly, costing the system a lot of
money--more money than they would cost if they were going to a
really good clinic for care.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you so much.
Some people think that managed care plans within a state's
Medicaid program can do this work, coordinating care for some
of the most complex and vulnerable kids.
And I'm not saying that a managed care plan doesn't
necessarily do some very good care coordination work. But it
seems like what I'm hearing today goes far beyond what a remote
health plan provides.
Ms. Frangenberg, in your testimony you discuss some of the
reasons why managed care plans might struggle to really offer
the family-centered care coordination that these families rely
on. In fact, in some instances certain claims denial practices
or narrow networks just flat out don't work for this
population.
So can you explain more about that?
Ms. Frangenberg. Sure. Thank you for that important
question.
So managed care plans are not normally equipped to handle
the highly specialized needs of children with highly complex
needs.
So their networks are usually narrow and as we have heard
today, many of these children need to cross state lines to get
the care that they need and managed care plans are usually not
very good at doing this.
Also, this population doesn't usually have the funding--I'm
sorry, the managed care plans don't usually have the funding to
pay the personnel to do the very complex care coordination that
these children need.
So I would say that it's important we consider
organizations such as family organizations who already have
parents like Ms. West and that know the system, who would be
able to provide guidance in that are coordination.
Mr. Barton. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you.
Mr. Barton. We now go to Dr. Murphy of Pennsylvania who
yesterday passed his mental health reform bill on the House
floor 422 to three.
Mr. Murphy. To two.
Mr. Barton. To two.
Mr. Murphy. We convinced----
Mr. Barton. Who's counting? So congratulations and you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for this
bill.
So you had just said that it's really a landmark mental
health bill. It makes a lot of changes and this committee and
the Oversight Committee which I chair has done a couple years'
worth of hearings on this and everybody on this committee has
played a role in trying to help this.
But as part of this we recognize that those children with
any medical problem it is an incredible psychological time--
financial and emotional strain on the family.
And you know that when you have a chronic illness or an
acute condition but certainly chronic, there's a much higher
incidence of depression which oftentimes is completely
overlooked in the pediatric population but we know is there.
You're also aware, I'm sure, that pharmaceutical costs are
high in the extent that they are not followed. People may
realize they are expensive. They don't understand. As you know,
multiple physicians may prescribe different drugs. That's part
of the problem that you need care coordination for.
We know that 72 percent of psychotropic drugs are
prescribed by a non-psychiatrist and we know that over 90
percent of psychotropic medication for children is prescribed
off label with massive errors.
But then again, we don't have enough child and adolescent
psychiatrists. We have 9,000. We need 30,000. Part of what this
bill does is create more incentives for child and adolescent
psychiatrists, more psychologists and a lot more funding in
there to do more pilot programs for tele mental health.
So this gets in a couple issues I want to talk about as we
move forward in this. As you know, the people with a medical
condition or let's say a psychological condition that's a
particularly serious mental illness, 75 percent have at least
one co-occurring chronic medical illness. Fifty percent have at
least two. Thirty-three percent have at least three.
So along these lines, Dr. Berry, I want to ask you that--
and I see you have an undergraduate degree in psychology, which
makes you brilliant.
Dr. Berry. The Harvard part is iffy at that.
Mr. Murphy. But the extent of children with medical
complexity that a have serious mental illness and serious
emotional disturbance what is the status of coordinating that
physical and behavioral health care in dealing with a health
care home? Could you address that issue?
Dr. Berry. I mean, I think those children are the most
vulnerable of the vulnerable, right. I mean, to have it on both
sides, the emotional health and physical health component
interacting is just unbelievably serious.
And we lean on our psychiatry/psychology teams a lot to try
to get help coordinating their care. I think the problem is,
and hopefully your bill is going to really help address this,
is that there is such an insufficient number of them that the
vast majority of the care that they're providing now is acute
care for emotional health demise that's occurring when the kids
need to come in to the hospital for an acute episode to treat,
et cetera.
We don't have that great community infiltration to maintain
the emotional health of children after they come out of that.
So, I would hope that in all of this that mental health is
hugely recognized as a major co-morbidity if not a primary
condition for the children with medical complexity that we're
thinking about to be included in these efforts and anything
that helps integrate that mental health-physical health
continuum would be fantastic.
Mr. Murphy. I know the Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh
has the warm handoff in the pediatrician's office where when
they know when they make the referral right away to the family
90 percent compliance plus.
If they say, here's a number, call them back, particularly
people on Medicaid, it drops well below 50 percent.
You have some who struggle to get to the office the first
place, taking multiple buses and et cetera and now you say come
back another day, one of the things this bill changes is to
allow the same day doctor rule to be dropped.
But I want to ask, in the context of this how--is there
something else we need to do in this bill or other bills to
help--allow more if this care home for the medical complex to
really coordinate those two issues, and I'll open this up to
anybody here.
Dr. Berry. Specifically for the transportation and sort of
getting to the----
Mr. Murphy. Well, no. Just in terms of what you need for
having a good health home and medicine and Medicaid, et cetera,
any comments by anybody to strengthen the bill? You don't have
to have an answer. If you have one in the future--I want to
submit that as a question for all of you.
Mr. Salo. I guess I would just offer that I completely
agree with your sentiment about this as being one of the
greatest challenges that we do have.
You know, I think the emerging good news is that this
exactly is an issue that many, many state Medicaid programs are
full on embracing and tackling right now is how do we better
integrate.
I talk a lot about silos and physical and long-term care
and pharmaceutical and behavioral health are all silos.
One of the things that many, many Medicaid programs are
trying to do right now is to better integrate the behavioral
health and the acute care within Medicaid and, again, it's
within a lot of different contexts--some managed care, some
health homes and that's why I think it's important for our
approaches when we're looking at a more targeted area like kids
with medically complex conditions to make sure that we've got
the ability, again, not to just pigeonhole this as an area that
we kind of put off the side over here in a new silo but to
allow it to blend in with some of these other efforts that are
integrating behavioral health, that are integrating long-term
care and those types of things.
So that's just to keep it--my advice to keep it broad so
that it accommodates the directions that states are already
going in that area.
Mr. Murphy. Mr. Chairman, I'll submit the questions for the
record for the rest of the panel. I hope you can address that
because we know this is critically important. I thank you for
your time today.
Mr. Barton. OK. Seeing no other members on the minority
side, we now go to the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Bilirakis,
who's an original co-sponsor of the bill.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, thank you for
holding this very important hearing and thanks for being so
persistent along with Representative Castor on advancing this
very important bill.
In the Tampa area we have St. Joseph's Children Hospital--
--
Mr. Barton. We have late breaking news. Dr. Murphy has just
co-sponsored the bill.
Mr. Bilirakis. Awesome.
Mr. Barton. Let's give him a round of applause.
Mr. Bilirakis. I didn't have anything to do with that.
In the Tampa area, we have St. Joseph's Children's
Hospital, which has been successfully running the Chronic
Complex Clinic for Children.
I had the opportunity to visit the clinic at least once and
it's one example of how to successfully treat children with
complex medical conditions. I am pleased that Ms. West is here
as well and, her daughter, of course, is a patient at St.
Joseph's.
Ms. West, can you talk about how successful or unsuccessful
the treatments before you came to St. Joseph's were and what
it's like now for your daughter to be a patient at St.
Joseph's?
Ms. West. Well, she's 19 years of age so we do have a
diagnosis and we pretty much are in a routine of managing her
care at this point. But earlier in her life we didn't have a
diagnosis and so the diagnostic process was pretty crazy,
trying to go across state lines and visit doctors who had
various expertise.
And I always wondered, who's the case manager and found out
that I was the case manager and that was shocking to me because
I didn't have the expertise. So I had to quickly get the
expertise.
When going to the Chronic Complex Clinic there are social
workers there, case managers, people who were educated to help
me navigate the health care system, the Medicaid system, and it
was huge, not only just for me but now also for Caroline's
overall health we were seeing doctors in a more timely fashion.
When we needed to see a gastroenterologist sometimes we
could get the appointment the next day through the clinic
instead of having to go home, get on the phone, make an
appointment, wait a month.
Those kind of issues are really, really important and all
of that worked seamlessly through the Complex Clinic.
Mr. Bilirakis. What was her medical condition at the time?
Ms. West. She has a rare disease called alternating
hemiplegia of childhood. You don't need to remember that. It's
complicated, but she presented with seizures, low tone cerebral
palsy, posturing, nystagmus eyes bouncing all over the place.
It was a mystery because at first they thought she might
have seizures and so we hooked her up to EEG and she wasn't
having seizures. So then after that test was over we would be
dismissed so then we had to continue to pursue there was
something wrong with her.
It's not seizures. It's something else. So eventually we
did get a diagnosis of alternating hemiplegia, which is a rare
neurological disorder by a spontaneous genetic mutation.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK. As a mother of a child with a complex
medical condition, how important is it for good care
coordination for both the patient and the caregiver?
Ms. West. Well, I mentioned earlier in my testimony that at
one point before we went to the Chronic Complex Clinic that we
actually had to check in to the hospital to get all of our
doctors to communicate with each other and that was pretty
costly to the system, I think, plus also to our family. Well,
that doesn't happen now.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK. Question for the panel--is there a
standardized definition of a medically complex patient? Who
would like to go first?
Dr. Berry. I think across the country we've pulled together
a lot of stakeholders to try to pull that together and I think
most agree on that the core attributes are a lifelong chronic
condition that affects multiple organ systems to body that
leads to significant impairment and even just that in itself
really helps articulate and carve out the kids that we really
think are complex.
Mr. Bilirakis. Anyone else want to----
Ms. West. I would just like to urge everyone to please work
on a definition that is clear because I would hate to see this
get diluted. I think it's important to keep it focused on kids
who do have complex illnesses. As I mentioned earlier, going to
a typical pediatrician's office was not a really healthy
experience for any of my family or for my daughter.
But so going to a clinic where there are lots of kids who
have medical complexity is much better. The doctors are more
educated. We get things done faster and more efficiently and
our daughter is more healthy.
Mr. Bilirakis. Anyone else want to elaborate on that?
OK. I know I only have a few seconds, Mr. Chairman. Care
coordination is obviously so important, especially for parents
with severe conditions. How do we promote greater care
coordination in fee for service framework? Who would like to
take that first?
Mr. Merrill. I would say that the intent is to move
actually away from fee for service and if you look at the
intent of ACE Kids it's actually to move to an at-risk model.
And so if we're able to ramp up through shared data a
common definition, quality standards and reporting at the
national level that will allow us to accelerate our ability to
better coordinate care, reduce waste, the fragmentation of
care, the episodic care that occurs with this patient
population today and ultimately move to the budget certainty
that this bill or this act contemplates.
Mr. Bilirakis. Anyone else want to chime in?
Mr. Barton. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Barton. Dr. Berry looked like he was just about to say
something so we'll give him----
Dr. Berry. Well, I will say here is just one anecdotal
example. But the Michigan Medicaid program has instituted a
policy for reimbursing clinicians and their fee for service
model for non-face-to-face health care encounters for children
with medical complexity--phone calls, paperwork, developing
care plans, multi-disciplinary team meeting and just doing
that, I think, has incentivized the providers to take on those
clinical activities and do them well. It's a Band-Aid but it's
working.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you so much. Appreciate it.
Mr. Barton. Thank the gentleman. And now Mr. Long, who
actually is a sponsor of the bill so we appreciate that.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that and I
just want to say for the record how we do ourselves a honor or
privilege, I guess, or do ourselves right when we work on
legislation like this in a bipartisan fashion that can do so
much good for so many people.
And before I get into my question, I'd like to thank
Representative Barton on the Republican side and Representative
Castor on the Democrat side for all of their bipartisan work
and hard work on this legislation and also our great children's
hospitals in the state of Missouri and they have been tireless
advocates for this legislation. I appreciate that very much.
And our oldest daughter--we have two daughters--our oldest
daughter just finished up her first year of residency at the
University of Missouri in pediatrics. So this is near and dear
to my heart.
Mr. Merrill, in your testimony you referred to a necessary
range of providers need to implement a care plan for a
medically complex child. Can you expand briefly on what medical
specialties this range typically includes and how broad it may
need to be in order to properly serve these children?
Mr. Merrill. Yes, and thank you for the question.
I think as we've heard through the testimony these children
with medical complexity require the services and care of
multiple pediatric specialists and it's pulmonologists, it's
orthopaedic surgeons, it's neuro surgeons. It's cardiologists.
Just go down the line, and what children's hospitals are
able to bring to the table is comprehensive services across
multiple pediatric service lines to help better care for these
patients. And in fact, because of the services that we offer we
are the safety net for a lot of these families.
That said, we are not the equation but we are a key part of
the equation. We play a key role in coordinating care. But
other providers must be part of the equation as well including
the specialty hospitals like Gillette, the HMOs, the home
health care companies and, of course, as we've heard earlier
the mental health services for this patient population.
Mr. Long. Are you able to touch on some examples of
barriers that prevent a medically complex child from receiving
care from the appropriate range of providers under the Medicaid
system?
Mr. Merrill. Yes. So as a regional children's hospital not
just for Texas but really for all of the southwest, we do
receive a number of children from other states and
unfortunately the comprehensive services that are offered at
full service children's hospital aren't available in every
state.
And so I could give you multiple examples and in fact I'd
be happy to send your staff and the committee some examples of
patients that come from states like New Mexico and it is an
absolute struggle to get these children approved through
Medicaid in New Mexico, to get them over to Texas to receive
the high-level care, the services that we offer here. The
travel, the difficulty of the long distances all come in to
play and they create multiple barriers for these families.
Just one very key important point, though, if ACE Kids is
passed the idea is to create these networks of care that allow
us to push the care back into the community so that these kids
can stay in those communities longer.
Mr. Long. You mean when it's passed, don't you?
Mr. Merrill. When it's passed. Thank you. Thank you. Thank
you for the correction, Mr. Representative.
And so that would include enhancing the care and expertise
of the local providers that are there in those communities.
Home monitoring, for example, and then more importantly ACE
Kids does create a clear pathway for these children to move
across state lines more easily if in fact that care is needed.
Mr. Long. OK. Thank you. And Mr. Chairman, being an
auctioneer I can do 5 minutes in 3 \1/2\ minutes. So I yield
back the rest of my time.
Mr. Barton. All right. We appreciate that.
Seeing no other members present who haven't already had an
opportunity to ask questions, we are ready to conclude the
hearing.
We would like to give Mr. Green an opportunity for a few
closing comments if he wishes.
Mr. Green. Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you and both my
colleague, Kathy Castor, for bringing this bill up. It's been a
work in progress and it still is.
But after we've had a good hearing, I think, today that
brought the issues out that, I'll be looking forward to working
with both of you all to see we move the bill out of the
subcommittee.
Mr. Barton. OK.
Mr. Green. And on to the full committee.
Mr. Barton. Mr. Engel just walked in. Do you wish to ask
questions, Mr. Engel?
Mr. Engel. Yes.
Mr. Barton. All right. You're recognized for 5 minutes
starting right now.
Mr. Green. And Mr. Chairman, the Missouri fellow said he
could do 5 minutes in 3. Congressman Engel is from New York and
he always talks faster than any Texan does.
Mr. Barton. We just met with Mr. Trump this morning. He
sends greetings to his fellow New Yorker, Mr. Engel.
Mr. Engel. Talking about someone who talks fast, Mr. Trump
is certainly in that category.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Ranking Member
Green, for holding today's hearing. You know, it's difficult
for members on either side of the aisle sometimes to find
common ground.
But I think I speak for everyone here when I say that
ensuring that children have access to quality medical care is
an issue on which we can all agree and that is why I am a co-
sponsor of the ACE Kids Act and I applaud my colleagues--you,
Congressman Barton, and Congresswoman Castor for their work on
this important bill and I thank the witnesses today for their
contributions and I hope that today's conversation helps to
move this package forward so that we could have better care for
children living with complex medical conditions.
Dr. Berry, in your written testimony you describe the key
concepts of care activities for children with medical
complexity and explain that such activities can help to, and to
quote you, ``optimize the health of children with medical
complexity who are at high risk for poor health outcomes and
excessive health care utilization.''
Can you elaborate bit on who those high risk children are?
I'd like to know who are the particular populations
disproportionately affected by complex medical conditions and
if that's the case what can we do to address such disparities.
Dr. Berry. You can think about complex chronic conditions
that affect any sentinel organ system and on the severity
spectrum all of those kids are at risk. So complex congenital
heart disease, neurological disease, urinary disease,
digestive, all down the line.
Now, for some of these conditions, for example, cystic
fibrosis might be one sometimes the care for those kids may be
a little bit better coordinated and organized because the
pediatric pulmonary providers are stepping up to the plate to
really own the kids and maybe take care of their non-pulmonary
problems.
In our experience, we think that the children that have
underlying neuromuscular diseases are often the ones that sort
of fall through the cracks a bit and don't get as good of care
just because they tend to have more co-morbidities and
sometimes the neurology workforce is just not equipped to
manage all the problems.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. Let me ask you a follow-up concerning
quality data in order to identify and address these
disparities.
We need reliable and comprehensive data regarding children
with medical complexity and I believe it's also important that
such data is prescribed and collected at the CMS level so that
we can have countrywide comparable information on this entire
population because obviously without solid information about
the issues affecting these children we cannot possibly hope to
meet their needs. So let me ask you this, Dr. Berry.
Can you speak to the importance of high-quality national
data on children with medical complexity and what data
specifically do you feel it would be important to gather?
Dr. Berry. It's great that right now we do have Medicaid
claims data from all of these states, right, that include all
their health care encounters across the continuum so that we
can see how often these kids are engaging the system, where
their spending occurs, et cetera, which is a wonderful base.
There is such variation in the quality and the depth and
the organization of those data across states that it sometimes
makes it impossible to look at one state and compare the
experiences of a kid in the state versus another.
So just knowing on the Medicare side of what they have and
they've been able to pull together this nationally clean data
set that's readily accessible for use to quickly assess best
practices, variation in care and outcomes for their patient
population, to elevate what we have now with the Medicaid data
and bring it on that trajectory to get to that Medicare side
will be phenomenal.
Mr. Engel. OK. Thank you. It's 101, Mr. Chairman, so I
listened to Mr. Green and became a fast-talking New Yorker.
Mr. Barton. We thank the gentleman from New York.
I will remind members that they have ten business days to
submit questions for the record and if they do I ask our
witnesses to respond promptly.
The questions should be submitted by close of business on
Thursday, the 21st of this month. Now, my final question to the
panel--I am not asking you do you endorse the bill as drafted.
But does everybody on the panel support the concept in the bill
and encourage us to try to move the bill year?
Mr. Berry.
Dr. Berry. Unwavering enthusiasm. Can't thank you guys
enough for all the background work that led up to this
unbelievably excited about the potential law.
Mr. Barton. So that's a yes?
Dr. Berry. That's a yes.
Mr. Barton. Mr. Salo?
Mr. Salo. Yes, we absolutely support the concepts behind
the bill and we'd be more than happy to work with you towards
fruition.
Mr. Barton. That's important. Thank you, sir.
Ms. Frangenberg. Absolutely, without a doubt.
Mr. Barton. Thank you.
Ms. West. Yes. It's just so exciting to be here after 20
years of going through the medical system kind of alone to see
all these people working together to come up with something
that's going to be better for all these children and I applaud
all of you for doing it. Thank you so much.
Mr. Barton. Thank you.
Dr. Koop. Yes. This discussion draft that we went through
today is something we would support.
Mr. Barton. Thank you.
Mr. Merrill. On behalf of the children's hospitals, yes.
Mr. Barton. OK.
Is there anybody in the audience that doesn't support it?
All those in favor say aye. I mean it. Raise your hands. Let's
see it.
Let the record show every hand went up.
The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:22 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
