- EXAMINING PUBLIC HEALTH LEGISLATION TO HELP PATIENTS AND LOCAL COMMUNITIES

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING PUBLIC HEALTH LEGISLATION TO HELP PATIENTS AND LOCAL
COMMUNITIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JANUARY 27, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-5

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

95-851 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

_____

Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          KATHY CASTOR, Florida
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina         Massachusetts
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TONY CARDENAS, California
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
CHRIS COLLINS, New York                  officio)
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Gene Green, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     3
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Joseph P. Kennedy, III, a Representative in Congress from
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, opening statement...........     8
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, prepared statement........................     9

Witnesses

Ben Chlapek, Public Safety Training Coordinator, Mid-America
Regional Council, on Behalf of the National Association of
Emergency Medical Technicians..................................    11
Prepared statement...........................................    13
John L. Eadie, Director, Prescription Drug Monitoring Program
Center of Excellence, Brandeis University......................    20
Prepared statement...........................................    22
Blaine Enderson, M.D., Chairman, Trauma Center Association of
America........................................................    27
Prepared statement...........................................    29
Nathan B. Fountain, M.D., Chair, Professional Advisory Board,
Epilepsy Foundation of America.................................    37
Prepared statement...........................................    40
D. Linden Barber, Partner and Director, DEA Compliance
Operations, Quarles & Brady, LLP...............................    49
Prepared statement...........................................    51
Answers to submitted questions...............................   163

Submitted Material

Report of the Pew Charitable Trusts, ``Prescription Drug
Monitoring Programs: An Assessment of the Evidence for Best
Practices,'' September 20, 2012, by Thomas Clark, et al.,
submitted by Mr. Guthrie \1\...................................    83
H.R. 235, the Veteran Emergency Medical Technician Support Act of
2013, submitted by Mr. Pitts...................................    84
H.R. --------, the National All Schedules Prescription Electronic
Reporting Reauthorization Act of 2015, submitted by Mr. Pitts..    88
H.R. --------, the Trauma Systems and Regionalization of
Emergency Care Reauthorization Act, submitted by Mr. Pitts.....    99
H.R. --------, the Access to Life-Saving Trauma Care for All
Americans Act, submitted by Mr. Pitts..........................   103
H.R. --------, the Ensuring Patient Access and Effective Drug
Enforcement Act of 2015, submitted by Mr. Pitts................   106
H.R. 4299, the Improving Regulatory Transparency for New Medical
Therapies Act, submitted by Mr. Pitts..........................   112

----------
\1\ The information has been retained in committee files and also is
available at http://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF14/20150127/102844/
HMTG-114-IF14-20150127-SD054.pdf.
Statement of National Council for Prescription Drug Programs,
January 27, 2015, by Stephen C. Mullenix, Senior Vice
President, Public Policy and Industry Relations. submitted by
Mr. Whitfield..................................................   117
Report of the National Council for Prescription Drug Programs,
``NCPDP Recommendations for Improving Prescription Drug
Monitoring Programs,'' March 2013, submitted by Mr. Whitfield..   121
Article of January 12, 2015, ``The Prescription Opioid and Heroin
Crisis: A Public Health Approach to an Epidemic of Addiction,''
by Andrew Kolodny, et al., Annual Review of Public Health,
submitted by Mr. Guthrie.......................................   141
Statement of the National Association of Chain Drug Stores,
January 27, 2015, submitted by Mrs. Blackburn..................   157
Letter of January 22, 2015, from American Pharmacists
Association, et al., to Mrs. Blackburn, et al., submitted by
Mrs. Blackburn.................................................   161
Letter of January 22, 2015, from John M. Gray, President and
Chief Executive Officer, Healthcare Distribution Management
Association, to Mrs. Blackburn, et al., submitted by Mrs.
Blackburn......................................................   162

EXAMINING PUBLIC HEALTH LEGISLATION TO HELP PATIENTS AND LOCAL
COMMUNITIES

----------

TUESDAY, JANUARY 27, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11:16 a.m., in
room 2322, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joseph R. Pitts
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Pitts, Guthrie, Whitfield,
Shimkus, Blackburn, Griffith, Bilirakis, Long, Bucshon,
Collins, Upton (ex officio), Green, Capps, Butterfield,
Sarbanes, Matsui, Schrader, Kennedy, Cardenas, and Pallone (ex
officio).
Staff present: Brenda Destro, Professional Staff Member,
Health; Andy Duberstein, Deputy Press Secretary; Carly
McWilliams, Professional Staff Member, Health; Katie Novaria,
Professional Staff Member, Health; Chris Sarley, Policy
Coordinator, Environment and the Economy; Macey Sevcik, Press
Assistant; Adrianna Simonelli, Legislative Associate, Health;
Heidi Stirrup, Policy Coordinator, Health; John Stone, Counsel,
Health; Ziky Ababiya, Democratic Policy Analyst; Jeff Carroll,
Democratic Staff Director; Eric Flamm, Democratic FDA Detailee;
Hannah Green, Democratic Policy Analyst; Tiffany Guarascio,
Democratic Deputy Staff Director and Chief Health Advisor; and
Meredith Jones, Democratic Director, Outreach and Member
Services.
Mr. Pitts. The subcommittee will come to order. The Chair
will recognize himself for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Today the subcommittee will consider some unfinished
business from the last Congress in the form of six bills.
The Veteran Emergency Medical Technician Support Act,
sponsored by Representative Adam Kinzinger, would assist States
in streamlining their certification requirements for those
veterans with emergency medical technician training who want to
work in the civilian workforce.
The National All Schedules Prescription Electronic
Reporting Reauthorization Act, or NASPER, sponsored by
Representative Ed Whitfield, would reauthorize the NASPER
program to support State prescription drug monitoring programs.
The Trauma Systems and Regionalization of Emergency Care
Reauthorization Act, sponsored by Representative Burgess and
Ranking Member Green, would reauthorize certain trauma care
programs through fiscal year 2019.
The Access to Life-Saving Trauma Care for All Americans
Act, to be sponsored by Representative Burgess, Ranking Member
Green, would reauthorize trauma care--centered care grants.
H.R. 471, introduced by Representative Marino, Blackburn,
Welch, and Chu, the Ensuring Patient Access and Effective Drug
Enforcement Act of 2015, would improve law enforcement efforts
regarding prescription drug diversion and abuse.
And the Improving Regulatory Transparency for New Medical
Therapies Act, which I introduced, along with Ranking Member
Pallone, last Congress and will be reintroducing shortly, seeks
to improve the transparency and consistency of the Drug
Enforcement Agency's scheduling of new FDA-approved drugs under
the Controlled Substances Act.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Pitts. I look forward to hearing the testimony of all
of our witnesses today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Joseph R. Pitts

Today, the subcommittee will consider some unfinished
business from the last Congress, in the form of six bills.

The Veteran Emergency Medical Technician Support
Act, sponsored by Rep. Adam Kinzinger, would assist States in
streamlining their certification requirements for those
veterans with emergency medical technician (EMT) training who
want to work in the civilian workforce.

The National All Schedules Prescription Electronic
Reporting Reauthorization Act, or NASPER, sponsored by Rep. Ed
Whitfield, would reauthorize the NASPER program to support
State prescription drug monitoring programs.

The Trauma Systems and Regionalization of
Emergency Care Reauthorization Act, sponsored by Rep. Burgess
and Ranking Member Green, would reauthorize certain trauma care
programs through FY2019.

The Access to Life-Saving Trauma Care for All
Americans Act, to be sponsored by Rep. Burgess and Ranking
Member Green, would reauthorize trauma center care grants.

H.R. 471, introduced by Reps. Marino, Blackburn,
Welch, and Chu, the Ensuring Patient Access and Effective Drug
Enforcement Act of 2015, would improve law enforcement efforts
regarding prescription drug diversion and abuse.

And, the Improving Regulatory Transparency for New
Medical Therapies Act, which I introduced along with Ranking
Member Pallone last Congress, and will be reintroducing
shortly, seeks to improve the transparency and consistency of
the Drug Enforcement Agency's (DEA) scheduling of new FDA-
approved drugs under the Controlled Substances Act (CSA).
I look forward to the testimony of all of our witnesses
today.

Mr. Pitts. I yield the remainder of my time to
Representative Whitfield.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, Chairman Pitts, thank you very much
for having this hearing today on the important topic of public
health and for including the NASPER reauthorization draft as
part of that discussion.
I am delighted that Mr. John Eadie is with us today, and we
look forward to his testimony. He has 35 years or so of
experience with the drug monitoring issues.
And I look forward to your testimony.
I might add that we have reached a point, unfortunately, in
America today where more people are dying from drug overdoses
than they--from prescription drug overdose than they are from
automobile accidents.
And I would just say that, back in 2001, the Appropriations
Committee, without any authorization from the authorizing
committee, started a drug monitoring program, which turned out
to be a very good program. In 2005, this committee came back,
through Congressman Pallone and Mr. Pitts and myself and
others, and we authorized NASPER, a National All Prescription
Drug Monitoring Program for the entire country. We had great
difficulty obtaining funding for it because the appropriators
always funneled the money through the drug monitoring program
at the Department of Justice. NASPER was at HHS. And so, ever
since 2005, we have had sort of two different programs.
Unfortunately, the one at HHS was not getting any funding
basically.
Today, most States do have drug monitoring programs, but we
still have these separate programs--one at DOJ and one at HHS.
And so, hopefully, we tried to explore about a year ago a way
to sort of combine these programs to just make it more
efficient and more helpful to the American people. And I don't
think we have totally resolved that yet, but I do think it is
important we reauthorize this program.
And I look forward to maybe having some discussions with
you, Mr. Eadie, and others that have an interest. And is there
a way that we can still try to get these programs together?
And, with that, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now, recognize the ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr.
Green, 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GENE GREEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And good morning to our witnesses for you all being here
today.
This hearing is called to examine six proposals which will
strengthen public health, each which is the product of
bipartisan efforts.
I thank the chairman for having this hearing. It is not
only an opportunity to further these important pieces of
legislation. But it also serves as a reminder of the great work
this committee can accomplish when we work together to advance
our healthcare system.
The Veteran Emergency Medical Technician Support Act, as
led by Representatives Kinzinger and Capps, the legislation
will save lives--will help States utilize the skills of our
Nation's veterans and address emergency medical technician
shortages by streamlining the certification and licensure
requirements of returning veterans who have completed military
EMT training.
The Improving Regulatory Transparency for New Medical
Therapies Act--that is the last time I will say that--provides
a solution to current delays experienced by patients in need.
The amount of time the DEA has asked before acting on FDA
recommendations has lengthened in recent years, delaying the
availability of new therapies. Led by Chairman Pitts and
Ranking Member Pallone, this legislation will improve patient
access by bringing clarity and transparency to the process of
scheduling new FDA-approved therapy.
Representatives Marino, Welch, Blackburn, and Chu
introduced the Ensuring Patient Access and Effective Drug
Enforcement Act. This legislation would promote patient access
to medically necessary controlled substances and, with the
DEA's authority, to suspend a DEA registrant acting in a manner
that puts public health and safety at risk.
The National All Schedules Prescription Electronic
Reporting or NASPER Reauthorization Act, by our Ranking Member
Pallone and Representative Whitfield, will reauthorize the
improved prescription drug monitoring programs--are essential
to part of our Nation's effort to combat the epidemic of
prescription drug and opioid overdose. The reauthorization of
NASPER will help States implement and improve their PDMs, which
improve clinical decisionmaking and reduce diversion.
The final two bills that are being considered today are the
Trauma Systems and Regionalization of Emergency Care
Authorization Act and the Access to Life-Saving Trauma Care for
All Americans Act. My good friend and fellow Texan Dr. Mike
Burgess--I wish Mike was here to hear me brag about him--and I
have led these legislative efforts. I thank him and his staff
for their continued dedication and hard work. Both bills will
reauthorize important programs that are designed to ensure that
availability and effectiveness of effective use of trauma care.
Trauma is the leading cause of death under age 44. Federal
investments in trauma centers and systems will save lives,
improve patient outcomes, and provide downstream cost savings
to the healthcare system.
Again, I want to thank Dr. Burgess for his partnership on
this issue and the chairman for bringing these legislative
proposals before the committee today. I thank my colleagues on
both sides of the aisle for their thoughtful and worthy
proposals and their commitment to improving access and delivery
of health care.
I look forward to working on a bipartisan manner on many
issues before our subcommittee, including our solutions with
the expiration of the Health Centers Fund in September. Unless
we take action, community health centers will reduce an
immediate 60 to 70 percent funding cut. Health centers alone
are bipartisan. And letting the fund expire without a solution
in place will severely limit patient access to the cost
effective primary and preventive care that is provided to
millions of Americans.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Green follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Gene Green

Good morning and thank you all for being here. This hearing
was called to examine six proposals that will strengthen public
health, each of which is the product of bipartisan effort.
I thank the chairman for having this hearing. It is not
only an opportunity to further these important pieces of
legislation, but it also serves as a reminder of the great work
this committee can accomplish when we work together to advance
our health care system.
The Veteran Emergency Medical Technician Support Act is led
by Representatives Kinzinger and Capps. This legislation will
help States utilize the skills of our Nation's veterans and
address emergency medical technician shortages by streamlining
the certification and licensure requirements for returning
veterans who have completed military EMT training.
The Improving Regulatory Transparency for New Medical
Therapies Act provides a solution to current delays experienced
by patients in need. The amount of time the DEA has taken
before acting on FDA recommendations has lengthened in recent
years, delaying the availability of new therapies. Led by
Chairman Pitts and Ranking Member Pallone, this legislation
will improve patient access by bringing clarity and
transparency to the process of scheduling a new FDA-approved
therapy.
Representatives Marino, Welch, Blackburn, and Chu
introduced the Ensuring Patient Access and Effective Drug
Enforcement Act. This legislation will promote patient access
to medically necessary controlled substances and protects DEA's
authority to suspend a DEA registrant acting in a manner that
puts public health and safety at risk.
The National All Schedules Prescription Electronic
Reporting, or NASPER Reauthorization Act, led by Ranking Member
Pallone and Representative Whitfield, will reauthorize and
improve prescription drug monitoring programs. PDMPs are an
essential part of our Nation's effort to combat the epidemic of
prescription drug abuse and opioid overdose. The
reauthorization of NASPER will help States implement and
improve their PDMPs, which improve clinical decisionmaking and
reduce diversion.
The final two bills being considered today are the Trauma
Systems and Regionalization of Emergency Care Reauthorization
Act and the Access to Life-Saving Trauma Care for All Americans
Act. My good friend and fellow Texan Dr. Mike Burgess and I
have led these legislative efforts. I thank him and his staff
for their continued dedication and hard work.
Both bills will reauthorize important programs that are
designed to ensure the availability and effective use of trauma
care. Trauma is the leading cause of death under age 44.
Federal investments in trauma centers and systems will save
lives, improve patient outcomes, and provide downstream cost
savings to the health care system. Thank you again to Dr.
Burgess for your partnership on this issue and to Mr. Chairman
for bringing these legislative proposals before the committee
today.
I thank all of my colleagues from both sides of the aisle
for putting forward these thoughtful and worthy proposals, and
for their commitment to improving access and delivery of health
care.
I look forward to continuing to work in a bipartisan manner
on the many issues before our subcommittee, including on a
solution to the expiration of the Health Centers Fund in
September. Unless we take action, community health centers will
experience an immediate 60-70 percent funding cut.
Health centers have a long history of bipartisan support,
and letting the fund expire without a solution in place will
severely limit patient access to the cost-effective primary and
preventive care they provide to millions of Americans.
Thank you, and I yield the remainder of my time to the
Congresswoman from California, Lois Capps.

Mr. Green. With that, Mr. Chairman, I would like to yield
the remainder of my time to my colleague from California, Lois
Capps.
Mrs. Capps. I thank the ranking member for yielding.
And, Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this important
hearing today.
I am pleased to, again, be working with Representative
Kinzinger to introduce the Veteran Emergency Medical Technician
Support Act, as we did in the past two Congresses, to see it up
for discussion today.
While our military men and women receive some of the best
technical training in emergency medicine anywhere, when they
return home, they are often required to start back at square
one to receive the same certification for civilian jobs. At the
same time, military medics with civilian credentials often must
let these civilians certificates lapse while they are defending
our country. Either way, this keeps our veterans out of the
civilian workforce and withholds valuable medical personnel
from our communities.
Vets EMT is a small but straightforward bipartisan bill to
help States streamline their certification processes to take
military medic training into account for civilian licensure. I
look forward to testimony today about the training these men
and women have already received, the need for this bill, and
the impact it could have as written or if expanded.
I, also, must again plug my Emergency Medic Transition Act,
a more comprehensive bill to help develop appropriate fast-
track military-to-community programs which also deserves a
hearing. I am hopeful we can continue to work together in a
bipartisan way to move these important pieces of legislation
out of the committee so that we can help these talented
professionals join our healthcare workforce and improve the
care in our communities.
And I am out of time.
I will yield back and thank my colleague for yielding to
me.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
I now recognize the chairman of the full committee, Mr.
Upton, for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In the last Congress, this committee established an
impressive record of success with 51 bipartisan bills signed
into law, many of which are now helping improve public health.
Families in local communities expect us to work together to
solve problems, and we look forward to using our prior success
as a springboard to further boost the public health that this
new--in this new Congress. Today, we are going to examine a
half a dozen bills that collectively will help our Nation's
veterans; address the prescription drug abuse crisis; secure
access to trauma systems; and, yes, improve the Controlled
Substances Act.
First, we are going to hear testimony on our bill authored
by Mr. Kinzinger, the Veteran Emergency Medical Technician
Support Act, passed by the full House in February of 2013,
which would help military medics in those States with a
shortage of emergency medical technicians.
We will also discussed the National All Schedules
Prescription Electronic Reporting Reauthorization Act led by
Mr. Whitfield to help address the prescription drug crisis
here.
We are also going to hear testimony on two trauma bills,
led by Dr. Burgess and Ranking Member Green. The Trauma Systems
and Regionalization of Emergency Care Reauthorization Act,
which was passed to the full House in June of last year, would
help support State and rural development trauma systems.
The second bill will reauthorize language from the Public
Health Service Act to fund trauma care centers.
And, finally, the subcommittee will hear about two bills
related to the Controlled Substances Act: Improving Regulatory
Transparency for New Medical Therapies Act, led by Chairman
Pitts and Ranking Member Pallone, which would amend the CSA to
improve and streamline the DEA's process for scheduling new
drugs approved by the FDA; ensuring Patient Access and
Effective Drug Enforcement Act, led by Vice Chair Blackburn and
Reps Marino, Welch and Chu, would help prevent prescription
drug abuse, establish clear and consistent enforcement
standards, and ensure that patients have access to medications
by promoting collaboration among Government agencies, patients,
industries, stakeholders.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

In the 113th Congress, the Energy and Commerce Committee
established an impressive Record of Success with 51 bipartisan
bills signed into law, many of which are now helping improve
public health. Families and local communities expect us to work
together to solve problems, and we look forward to using our
prior success as a springboard to further boost the public
health this new Congress. Today we will examine a half dozen
bills that collectively will help our Nation's veterans,
address the prescription drug abuse crisis, secure access to
trauma systems, and improve the Controlled Substances Act.
First, we will hear testimony on a bill authored by Mr.
Kinzinger. The Veteran Emergency Medical Technician Support
Act, passed by the full House in February 2013, would help
military medics and those States with a shortage of Emergency
Medical Technicians.
We also will discuss the National All Schedules
Prescription Electronic Reporting Reauthorization Act led by
Mr. Whitfield to help address the prescription drug abuse
crisis.
We will hear testimony on two trauma bills led by Dr.
Burgess and Ranking Member Green. The Trauma Systems and
Regionalization of Emergency Care Reauthorization Act was
passed through the full House in June 2014 and would help
support State and rural development of trauma systems. The
second bill will reauthorize language from the Public Health
Service Act to fund trauma care centers.
Finally, the subcommittee will hear about two bills related
to the Controlled Substances Act. The Improving Regulatory
Transparency for New Medical Therapies Act, led by Chairman
Pitts and full committee Ranking Member Pallone, would amend
the CSA to improve and streamline the Drug Enforcement Agency's
process for scheduling new drugs approved by the Food and Drug
Administration.
The Ensuring Patient Access and Effective Drug Enforcement
Act, led by Vice Chairman Blackburn and Reps. Marino, Welch,
and Chu would help prevent prescription drug abuse, establish
clear and consistent enforcement standards, and ensure patients
have access to medications by promoting collaboration among
Government agencies, patients, and industry stakeholders.
I thank the witnesses for attending today's hearing, and I
look forward to their testimony and recommendations as we begin
to build upon our strong record of bipartisan success.

Mr. Upton. Thank you all for being here, and I yield to Mr.
Whitfield.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much.
I would like to ask unanimous consent to set in the record
a statement from the National Council for Prescription Drug
Programs and a white paper on recommendations for improving
prescription drug monitoring programs.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. All right. The gentlemen yields back.
I would like to ask unanimous consent--since the ranking
member, Mr. Pallone, is not here--to yield his time to
Representative Kennedy.
Without objection, Mr. Kennedy is recognized for 5 minutes
for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF
MASSACHUSETTS

Mr. Kennedy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will take about 30
seconds, I hope. But thank you for yielding and recognizing me.
I want to thank the witnesses for their testimony today and
Mr. Whitfield and Mr. Pallone for their work on the NASPER
reauthorization.
This is an issue that is of particular importance for me
back in my home district. At the end of 2014, there were about
209 heroin overdoses in Taunton, Massachusetts, alone. In less
than 20 days into 2015, there have already been 10 suspected
overdoses.
We can often trace the origin of those overdoses back to
opioid addiction and prescription drug abuse. Tufts Health Care
Institute's Program on Opioid Risk Management released a report
in 2011 with some alarming findings. They estimated that the
societal cost of opioid abuse in the U.S. are substantial, with
total societal costs being $55.7 billion and healthcare costs
about $25 billion. The annual cost per patient diagnosed with
opiate abuse dependance and misuse are considerably higher than
those with patients without such diagnoses.
I was a prosecutor for several years before running for
Congress. I saw the effects of opioid addiction every single
day in the courtroom through property crimes, breaking and
entering, larcenies, and other such crimes that would end up--
this addiction would drive people to such lengths to break the
law to try to continue to feed an addiction.
Prescription drug abuse programs and prescription
monitoring programs are an absolutely critical part to trying
to come up with a comprehensive plan to combat this epidemic.
And I applaud Mr. Pallone and Mr. Whitfield for their efforts
on this.
And I would like to yield 1 minute of my time back to Mr.
Butterfield.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you very much, Mr. Kennedy, for
yielding.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman, and the ranking member for the
opportunity to sit in Mr. Pallone's seat for just a few minutes
and to claim some of his time this morning.
But, Frank, I will be moving on in just a minute. I have
got one or two other places to go.
But, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the opportunity to discuss
a number of bipartisan bills that many of us have worked on in
the past. In particular, I was a supporter of the Trauma
Systems and Regionalization of Emergency Care, the
reauthorization act, and the Regulatory Transparency for New
Medical Therapies Act that we handled in the 113th Congress.
Finding innovative ways to improve access to care in rural
communities, particularly ones like mine in eastern North
Carolina, can mean the difference between life and death. The
ACA went a long way. It went a long way toward improving rural
health care and created or reauthorized the four programs
included in the Trauma Systems Act. We must reauthorize this
program and put our money where our mouths are by fully funding
these programs.
Furthermore, the New Medical Therapies Act would improve
access to care by accelerating the process to help patients
access important medicines.
I thank you, Mr. Kennedy.
I yield back to you, sir.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you, Mr. Butterfield.
I think I yield my time, which was Mr. Pallone's time, back
to Mr. Pallone.
Mr. Pitts. Mr. Pallone, you have 2 minutes left.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just wanted to say briefly that I think that these six
public health bills are important. They all aim to address
important public health issues within our communities. I am not
going to go into all the details about them.
The first two, the Improving Regulatory Transparency Act,
speeds up Drug Enforcement Administration decisions on
scheduling of new FDA-approved drugs with regard to controlled
substance.
And the second one, Ensuring Patient Access and Effective
Drug Enforcement, adds two definitions to controlled
substances. The goal of that bill is to help drug distributors,
pharmacies, and others work with DEA to achieve the difficult
balance between keeping controlled substance prescription drugs
away from drug abusers but not from patients who need them.
The next bill, the veterans bill, authorizes a
demonstration grant programs for States to streamline
certification and licensure requirements for returning veterans
to become emergency medical technicians. We had some great good
hearings with this.
And I want to thank Congresswoman Capps for her work on
this issue.
And then we have the two bills reauthorizing a number of
trauma programs, which are very important, because traumatic
injury is the leading cause of death for children and adults
under the age of 45. And it is critical that States are
equipped to deliver these medical services.
And the last one the subcommittee will review is the NASPER
bill, which I coauthored with my colleague from Kentucky, Mr.
Whitfield. And this legislation helps States establish and
maintain prescription drug monitoring programs in order to
combat drug abuses, which is an epidemic in the United States.
So it is critical that we continue to support a program like
this through Federal funding.
Many of these bills passed our committee in the House last
Congress with broad bipartisan support, as you know, Mr.
Chairman. And I look forward to working with my colleagues to
do the same this year. Thanks.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Thank you, Chairman Pitts, for holding this hearing on the
six public health bills before us today. All of the bills aim
to address important public health issues within our
communities.
The Improving Regulatory Transparency for New Medical
Therapies Act would speed up Drug Enforcement Administration
(DEA) decisions on scheduling of new FDA-approved drugs
containing controlled substances, so that they could get to
patients more quickly. It also would speed up the DEA
registration process allowing the manufacture and distribution
of controlled substances for use only in clinical trials. The
bill aims to ensure that there are not unnecessary delays of
medicines getting to patients in need. I want to thank Chairman
Pitts for working with me on this bill last Congress and
committing to move forward early this Congress.
The Ensuring Patient Access and Effective Drug Enforcement
Act would add two definitions to the Controlled Substances Act
to better focus DEA's enforcement activities. It also would
require DEA to provide registrants an opportunity to submit an
action plan to correct any violations for which DEA is
considering revoking or suspending their controlled substance
registration. The goal of the bill is to help drug
distributors, pharmacies, and others work with DEA to achieve
the difficult balance between keeping controlled substance
prescription drugs away from drug abusers but not from patients
who need them. I thank Representatives Blackburn, Marino,
Welch, and Chu for introducing this legislation.
The next bill, the Veterans Emergency Medical Technician
Support Act, authorizes a demonstration grant program for
states to streamline the certification and licensure
requirements for returning veterans to become emergency medical
technicians. Returning vets have important skills and
experiences that make them highly qualified for jobs in health
care and particularly in emergency medicine. This bill passed
both the committee and the House last Congress, and I want to
thank Congresswoman Capps for her work on this issue.
We are also considering two bills reauthorizing a number of
trauma programs. The Trauma Systems and Regionalization of
Emergency Care Reauthorization Act, which passed the House last
year, is aimed at planning and implementing trauma care systems
in the States and establishing pilot projects for innovative
models of regionalized trauma care. The second bill, the Access
to Life-Saving Trauma Care for All Americans Act, reauthorizes
two additional trauma programs that expire this year that aim
to increase the availability of trauma services, as well as an
interagency program for basic and clinical research on trauma.
Traumatic injury is the leading cause of death for children and
adults under the age of 45, and it is critical that States are
equipped to deliver these medical services. I would again like
to thank Mr. Green and Mr. Burgess, who are both leaders on
trauma care, for their work on these bills.
Finally, the subcommittee will review the National All
Schedules Prescription Electronic Reporting Reauthorization
Act, which I coauthored with my colleague from Kentucky, Mr.
Whitfield, during the last Congress. This legislation helps
States establish and maintain prescription drug monitoring
programs in order to combat prescription drug abuse, an
epidemic in the United States. It is critical that we continue
support for this program through Federal funding.
Many of these bills passed our committee and the House last
Congress with broad bipartisan support. I look forward to
working with my colleagues to do the same this year.

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlemen.
That concludes the opening statement of the Members. As
usual, all Members' written statements--opening statements will
be made a part of the record.
I would like to thank the witnesses for the efforts they
made to be a part of the hearing today, especially in light of
the hazardous travel conditions due to wintry weather. Since we
announced a 1-hour delay in the start of our hearing today, one
of our witnesses, Mr. John Eadie, has informed that he may need
to leave early because of travel constraints. But thank you for
all the effort that you made to get here.
I want my colleagues to be aware of this so they can form
their questions with this in mind. So thank you.
On our panel today, we have five witnesses: Mr. Ben
Chlapek, deputy director of Central Jackson County Fire in Blue
Springs, Missouri; Mr. John Eadie, director of Prescription
Drug Monitoring Program Center of Excellence at Brandeis
University; Dr. Blaine Enderson from the Department of Surgery
at the University of Tennessee Medical Center; Dr. Nathan
Fountain, professor of neurology and director of the F.E.
Dreifuss Comprehensive Epilepsy Program here on behalf of the
Epilepsy Foundation; and Mr. Linden Barber, partner and
director of DEA Compliance Operations at Quarles & Brady.
Thank you for coming today. Your written testimony will be
made a part of the record. You will be each given 5 minutes to
summarize your testimony.
And, Mr. Chlapek, we will begin you. You are recognized for
5 minutes for your summary.

STATEMENTS OF BEN CHLAPEK, PUBLIC SAFETY TRAINING COORDINATOR,
MID-AMERICA REGIONAL COUNCIL, ON BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIANS; JOHN L. EADIE,
DIRECTOR, PRESCRIPTION DRUG MONITORING PROGRAM CENTER OF
EXCELLENCE, BRANDEIS UNIVERSITY; BLAINE ENDERSON, M.D.,
CHAIRMAN, TRAUMA CENTER ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA; NATHAN B.
FOUNTAIN, M.D., CHAIR, PROFESSIONAL ADVISORY BOARD, EPILEPSY
FOUNDATION OF AMERICA; AND D. LINDEN BARBER, PARTNER AND
DIRECTOR, DEA COMPLIANCE OPERATIONS, QUARLES & BRADY, LLP

STATEMENT OF BEN CHLAPEK

Mr. Chlapek. Thank you, Chairman Pitts, Vice Chairman
Guthrie, and Mr. Green, and members of the subcommittee. My
name is Ben Chlapek, and I am here to discuss the issue of
military medics veterans who are honorable transitioning into
the civilian EMS field. I am representing the National
Association of Emergency Medical Technicians that represents
roughly 40,000-plus EMTs, paramedics, and first responders of
all delivery models, fire-based, hospital-based, privates,
third services, industrial, and military medics.
I currently serve on the Board of Directors and as the
chair of the Military Relations Committee; recently retired as
the deputy chief of Central Jackson County Fire; and have been
a registered paramedic, nationally registered, for over 30
years. Also, recently retired from the United States Army as
Lieutenant Colonel and have 36 years of service in the Army,
starting in 1975, with one small break.
Bottom line up front is we have an obstacle course when a
military medic transitions from the military and tries to get a
civilian EMS license. Currently, the Army and Air Force
graduate their medics at the Joint Training Facility in San
Antonio with a National Registry EMT card. The Navy does not.
They almost meet the criteria, but the medics split off at one
point and get their specialty training or specialized training.
We have a lot of people who are helping us with this. And
when they have to repeat it, it is a waste of their skills.
They are doing the same thing over and over. In addition, a lot
of military medics gain advanced skills, such as suturing and
doing other forms of advanced medicine that civilian medics
don't.
One of the biggest concerns--and it is voiced by Sergeant
Major Harold Montgomery, the senior medical enlisted advisor of
Special Operations Command at MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa,
Florida, his biggest concern is that we lose the knowledge and
advances we have gained in Iraq and Afghanistan and Kosovo and
don't use those, don't learn from them, and they will be lost.
These military medics that are transitioning have that ability.
For example, many law enforcement agencies across the country
now carry combat tourniquets and hemostatic agents, which have
saved some lives. It has been documented by the first
responders, the officers being able to use these skills.
There is a shortage in rural America of paramedics. And
when these medics get out, even as EMTs, they need to advance
to paramedic. We have gone the gap analysis. We know what needs
to be done. And House Bill 235 is a great, big jump in getting
that achieved.
It won't solve all the issues. But we have done the gap
analysis. There are many States now passing legislation--over
30 at this point--to help veterans and streamline the process
to become civilian medics because the State licensing
procedures differ. They aren't the same.
Another thing we have done is written an interstate
compact, and that is being presented to the States now.
We need a common registry. The Senate bill would help make
a solid jump to get this achieved. This is near and dear to my
heart. I have deployed with fire department medics, with
private medics who have gone back and tried to integrate back
into their services. Some have. Some haven't. The National
Registry of EMTs has gone a long way toward helping. The
National Association of EMTs has led this charge. I had 40
medics and EMTs on one tour and worked very hard for them to
keep their certification.
I suffered a traumatic brain injury in 2008 in Afghanistan.
It was moderate, and I still receive therapy today at the
Kansas City VA, who does a great job. This--this initiative is
near and dear to my heart, and I thank you for letting me speak
today. God bless.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Chlapek follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Mr. Eadie, you are recognized for 5 minutes for
your summary.

STATEMENT OF JOHN L. EADIE

Mr. Eadie. Thank you, Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Green,
and Representative Whitfield for providing this opportunity to
testify regarding proposed legislation to help fund State
prescription drug monitoring programs, PDMPs, through the
National All Schedule Prescription Electronic Reporting Act,
i.e., NASPER.
I am John Eadie. I have worked on public health for 45
years and specifically on PDMPs for 30 years. I currently serve
as director of the Prescription Drug Monitoring Program Center
of Excellence at Brandeis University, where we identify what
makes PDMPs effective and help them reach their full potential.
For example, through a partnership with Pew Charitable Trust
and support from BJA, we have published a white paper on PDMP
best practices.
PDMPs are operating in 49 States and Guam with another
authorized for the District of Columbia. They are essential
ingredients in the Nation's effort to reverse the epidemic of
prescription opioid overdoses and deaths and rising heroin
abuse. The health and safety of families across America depend
on PDMPs being as effective as possible.
The Center of Excellence reviews PDMP's performance and has
found that they improve clinical decisionmaking and patient
care by prescribers and pharmacies; identify and reduce doctor
shopping; impact on controlled substances availability and
prescribing; help improve health outcomes; reduce drug and
medical costs related to inappropriate prescribing; reduce
diversion into illegal use; and assist drug investigations;
monitor compliance in drug abstinence; assist in substance
abuse treatment and medical examiner practices; assist in drug
abuse prevention and surveillance efforts.
Some Sates have recently issued broad mandates on
prescribers to obtain and review PDMP data prior to issuing the
first scheduled controlled substance to each patient and
periodically thereafter, for example, every 3 months. Kentucky,
Tennessee, and New York report rapid increases in prescribers
registering for PDMP use, increases in requests for PDMP data--
over a 300 percent increase in Tennessee, over 500 percent in
Kentucky, and over 10,000 percent in New York--decreases in the
prescribing of some commonly abused controlled substances and
decreases in doctor shopping.
Florida, in 2011, implemented its PDMP and other
initiatives. The Florida Medical Examiner has just reported for
2013 that there was an 8.3 percent decrease in 1 year in the
number of deaths in which 1 or more controlled substance
prescription was identified as the primary cause, while
oxycodone deaths declined by 27.3 percent.
Further developments are needed. One example, after
proactively analyzing their data, PDMPs should proactively send
out unsolicited reports to prescribers, pharmacists, healthcare
professional licensing boards, and law enforcement. This is one
of the most effective best practices. But more than two-thirds
of PDMPs still need to fully implement that.
A second example. Medicaid/Medicare, workers compensation,
and other third-party payers need to protect their enrolled
patients' health and safety and do so by helping prescribers
and pharmacists avoid issuing and dispensing prescriptions that
will cause harm to their patients. But this can only be done by
PDMPs providing secure patient data access to third-party
payers. And this is not a common practice today.
In order to reduce the opioid epidemic, PDMPs need to adopt
the most effective practices, and this requires money. But the
cost is miniscule compared to the price in lives and dollars if
PDMPs do not rise to their full potential.
The reauthorization of NASPER, with proposed changes, will
assist States by adding important funds that complement other
initiatives. States need NASPER to encourage the technological
development of PDMPs' interoperability with electronic health
records and health information exchanges.
This development will allow PDMP data to reach prescribers
and pharmacists in their normal workflow, increase clinicians'
ability to properly treat their patients and avoid prescribing
or dispensing to doctor shoppers or persons counterfeiting or
forging prescriptions. Importantly, NASPER can help States
sustain critical PDMP operations.
I thank the bill sponsors for their efforts to improve
NASPER and encourage the Subcommittee on Health to approve it.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlemen.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Eadie follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Dr. Enderson, you are recognized for 5 minutes
for summary.

STATEMENT OF BLAINE ENDERSON

Dr. Enderson. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Green, and
members of the committee, thank you for holding this hearing on
examining public health legislation to help patients in local
communities and for inviting the Trauma Center Association of
American, TCAA, to speak.
TCAA is a nonprofit 501(c)(6) association representing
trauma centers and systems across the country and is committed
to ensuring access to lifesaving trauma services.
TCAA, along with our advocacy partners--the American Trauma
Society, the American Association for the Surgery of Trauma,
the American College of Surgeons, the American College of
Emergency Physicians, the American Burn Association, the
American Association of Neurological Surgeons, the College of
Neurological Surgeons, the Emergency Nurses Association, the
Society of Trauma Nurses, the American Academy of Orthopedic
Surgeons, and the Eastern Association for the Surgery of
Trauma--are on the forefront of providing trauma and emergency
care to millions of Americans. And it is out of that commitment
that we submit these comments for your consideration.
As organizations that care deeply about access to trauma
and emergency care, we would like to thank you for passing the
Trauma Systems and Regionalization of Emergency Care
Reauthorization Act, H.R. 4080, last session and express our
strong support for the passage of this vital legislation again
this session.
We would also like to thank Dr. Burgess and Representative
Green for their continued leadership and recognize the
importance of these systems of care in saving lives.
Trauma is a major public health issue, as we have heard. In
the United States, approximately 35 million are treated every
year for traumatic injury. It is the leading cause of death
under age 44. And at an annual cost of $67.3 billion, trauma is
the third most expensive medical condition.
The value proposition for trauma care is well documented.
The care provided by trauma centers, including specialist
physicians, nurses, and their entire trauma team, has a
dramatic and cost-effective impact on a patient's subsequent
quality of life. In fact, trauma care is more cost effective
than many other interventions, including dialysis for kidney
failure.
Victims of traumatic injury treated at a level 1 trauma
center are 25 percent more likely to survive than those treated
at a general hospital. Unfortunately, 45 million Americans lack
access to major trauma centers. And if they are taken to
nontrauma centers, the risk of death increases to 30 percent
within 48 hours.
The Trauma Systems and Regionalization of Emergency Care
Reauthorization Act would reauthorize two important grant
mechanisms: The Trauma Care Systems Planning Grants Program and
the Regionalization of Emergency Care Pilots Program, each
authorized at $12 million per year.
The Trauma Care Systems Planning Grant supports State and
rural development of trauma systems. The Regionalization of
Emergency Care Pilots Program funds pilot programs to design,
implement, and evaluate innovate models of regionalized
emergency care.
Unfortunately, in 2015, we still lack effective
regionalized care systems for infectious diseases, like Ebola,
or even for cardiac or stroke patients. The vast majority of
hospitals addressing patients with these conditions also serve
as our Nation's regional trauma centers. These hospitals must
have the tools and capabilities to care for all of these
patients with emergent, time-sensitive, and life-threatening
conditions, whether it is trauma, stroke, or Ebola. The funding
to support these hospitals must follow and support their
willingness to provide care to the sickest Americans in the
greatest hour of need.
In addition to the Trauma Care Systems Planning Grant and
Regionalization of Emergency Care Pilots, there are two other
programs contained in the Public Health Service Act, said to
expire this year, which need to be addressed by Congress. The
Access to Life-Saving Trauma Care For All Americans Act would
reauthorize these vital programs to prevent more closures and
improve access to trauma care.
The Trauma Care Center Grants are authorized at $100
million per year in an effort to prevent more trauma center
closures by supporting their core missions, curtailing losses
from uncompensated care, and providing emergency award to
centers at risk of closing. Also, the Trauma Service
Availability Grants, authorized at $100 million per year, are
channelled through the States to address shortfalls in trauma
service and improve access to and the availability of trauma
care in underserved areas.
In addition, the Interagency Program for Trauma Research is
in need of reauthorization. This program is designed to
facilitate collaboration across the National Institutes of
Health on trauma research.
All the programs are designed to ensure the availability
and effective use of trauma care to save lives, cost, and
improve patient outcomes. Trauma can happen to anyone any time
and anywhere, as demonstrated by the Boston Marathon bombing
and other recent casualties. And yet trauma care is not
available for millions of Americans, especially in rural areas.
We would encourage the Congress to reauthorize these vital
programs to maintain trauma services for Americans in the
United States. And if there are any questions, please feel free
to contact the Trauma Center Association of America. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlemen.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Enderson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Dr. Fountain, you are recognized for 5 minutes
for your summary.

STATEMENT OF NATHAN B. FOUNTAIN

Dr. Fountain. Thank you, Chairman Pitts and Ranking Member
Green, for allowing me to testify on behalf of the more than
2.8 millions Americans living with epilepsy and, of course,
their families.
As chair of the Epilepsy Foundation's Professional Advisory
Board, I am here to support a legislative initiative that I
know is important to the committee. The reintroduction of and
passage of last year's Improving Regulatory Transparency for
New Medical Therapies Act. The Epilepsy Foundation is extremely
grateful for the committee's leadership for what we believe is
an important problem that has a reasonable and workable
legislative solution.
The most important thing I can tell you today is that the
delay caused by the lack of a timeline for the Drug Enforcement
Agency in making FDA-approved drugs available to patients
threatens the lives and health of Americans. The magnitude of
the problem is astounding by every reasonable measure.
The timeline for DEA approval has increased significantly,
when comparing the era of the late 1990s. So if you look at the
period from 1997 to 1999, compared to late 2000--so 2009
through 2013--the average time between FDA approval and then
DEA final scheduling of a controlled substance has increased
substantially. If we look at the late 1990s, it was 49.3 days.
And it increased, then, in the most recent era, to 237 days. So
many days--it is probably more appropriate to look at it in
months. So from 49 days to almost 8 months.
There is a particular anti-epileptic drug called Fycompa
that was approved by the FDA in 2012, but the final scheduling
by the DEA occurred almost 400 days later. Now, we have to talk
in terms of years instead of months or days.
The delay in drug approval by the DEA, as addressed by this
legislation, is particularly important to people with epilepsy
because epilepsy is common; it causes serious problems,
including death; and previously approved epilepsy drugs that
are scheduled by the DEA are not subject to abuse by any major
we can identify. So it appears that there is a delay of
potentially lifesaving treatments without a compelling reason.
And, of course, this applies equally to people with other
conditions that might very well die while waiting for new drugs
to be approved. So you can imagine how this would apply to
someone with cancer or heart disease that is advancing while
waiting for a drug to be approved.
But, today, I will specifically address this issue as a
representative of the Epilepsy Foundation, which is the leading
national voluntary health organization that speaks on behalf of
the 2.8 million Americans with epilepsy. I serve as chair of
our medical advisors, but I am also a practicing neurologist at
the University of Virginia and director of a large epilepsy
program, where I have firsthand experience with the problems
caused by the delays in drug approval. I would like to share
information about epilepsy so that you can better understand
why our organization is steadfast in support of this bill.
Epilepsy is any condition of the brain that causes
seizures. So you can imagine it has diverse causes; acquired
things like head trauma or stroke, or you can be born with a
genetic predisposition and otherwise be perfectly normal.
Approximately 1 in 26 people will develop epilepsy. That is a
lot of people; 1 in 26 people develop epilepsy at some point in
their lives. The onset is greatest in childhood and in older
adults. That is why epilepsy is the fourth most common
neurological condition--after migraine, stroke and Alzheimer's
disease, then comes epilepsy. So that might beg the question,
``What is a seizure,'' for your own curiosity.
A seizure is an electrical storm of the brain. The storm
can be confined to just one small area of the brain and cause
something as isolated as just staring and responsiveness or
jerking of one arm, or it can involve the whole brain.
The type of seizure most people are familiar with is a
generalized tonic-clonic or grand mal seizure, during which the
whole brain is involved. The person becomes stiff, straightens
out, falls to the ground, is unconscious and jerks all over for
a few minutes. Afterwards, their brain is entirely exhausted
and so is the person. They are unresponsive, but then they
recover to normal over the course of typically about an hour.
You can understand that this can cause injury from falling,
choking, crashing a car, drowning. Even milder seizures that
consist only of staring and confusion can cause serious
problems. During confusion, people may put their hand into
boiling water, thinking they are stirring it with their arm,
for instance; pick up an iron by the hot face and not realize
it; or be chopping vegetables and not realize it becomes part
of them that they are cutting.
In addition to the direct injury that seizures can cause,
it can also result in the tragic circumstance of sudden,
unexpected death in epilepsy or SUDEP, S-U-D-E-P, sudden
unexpected death in epilepsy, which is the most common cause of
epilepsy-related death.
SUDEP occurs when someone with epilepsy dies for no obvious
reason. That is, there may be evidence of a typical seizure, a
seizure like they have had a hundred or a thousand times
before, for instance, but there is no evidence of choking;
there is no evidence of trauma or prolonged seizure.
In my last testimony to this committee, I related a story
of Matthew, a delightful, young engineering college student,
who was very much like my own son, who is a college student.
Matthew died from SUDEP during the time that Fycompa was
waiting to be scheduled by the DEA. It had been approved by the
FDA, had already been suggested, had been scheduled, and DEA
was waiting its approval. 2,800 Americans die from SUDEP each
year. For people like Matthew, waiting a year to get an
effective drug to treat their seizures, is not acceptable since
the drug could be lifesaving.
It is troubling, as a patient advocacy organization as
well, that we can't offer a clear explanation of why the delay
occurs at the DEA, since the DEA review has never made a change
to the drug schedule recommended by the FDA. They have always
followed FDA recommendations. Nor can we offer an explanation
of why there is no timeline for DEA approval. After all, the
FDA drug review process is largely transparent with predictable
timelines. And our committee wonders why the DEA approval
process doesn't have a similar timeline or transparency
requirement.
The current delays discouraging innovation in epilepsy
therapy development, the unpredictable delay at the DEA means
companies cannot accurately predict the amount of time they
will have left on their drug patent or exclusivity. This bill
proposes a simple solution to the problem and will ensure that
drugs will not sit idly waiting to be scheduled while patients
wait for potentially lifesaving drugs.
We urge all members to consider full support of this
legislation. Predictable and timely access to new therapies
would be a phenomenal accomplishment for epilepsy patients and
all Americans suffering from conditions like epilepsy. I thank
the committee for its time and attention today.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Fountain follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Now recognizes Mr. Barber, 5 minutes for an
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF D. LINDEN BARBER

Mr. Barber. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Green, members of the subcommittee.
For the last 3 and a half years as the director of the DEA
compliance and litigation practice at Quarles & Brady, I have
dealt with registrants on a daily basis. But, prior to that, I
was the associate chief counsel at DEA. I worked at the agency
for 12 years. And there I was the associate chief counsel in
charge of the litigation section that took administrative
actions against registrants.
Over these last 15 years, we have seen a chain of well-
intentioned actions and reactions by DEA and by the industry
that have unintentional consequences, consequences that
undermine the ability of DEA and industry to address the issue
of prescription drug abuse while ensuring that there is
adequate supply of controlled substances to meet the legitimate
medical needs of the United States.
These unintended consequences are produced, in large part,
by a lack of clarity in the law and the uncertainty produced in
the regulatory environment. Ensuring Patient Access and
Effective Drug Enforcement Act of 2015 provides much needed
clarity in the Controlled Substances Act. Consider the
unintended consequences that have occurred as a result of the
lack of clarity. Communication between DEA and members of
industry is thwarted. And communication is the cornerstone of a
regulatory environment that promotes compliance and
collaboration, particularly in an area like prescription drug
abuse, an area that changes frequently and is difficult for DEA
and industry to detect those who are attempting to obtain
controlled substances for an illicit purpose.
This breakdown has led to a lack of access to controlled
substances for certain patients. It has altered the ordering
patterns of pharmacies, making it more difficult for DEA and
members of the supply chain to detect suspicious orders. And
there is growing evidence to suggest that these actions and
reactions are contributing to the rise in heroin use.
When patients with chronic pain are forced to go from
pharmacy to pharmacy in search of a pharmacist who will
dispense a controlled substance that the patient has taken for
years to control legitimate pain, we have a problem. When a
pharmacist fears that filling such a prescription will result
in being second-guessed by DEA and having their DEA
registration suspended, we have a problem. When wholesale
distributors decide to limit the supply of narcotics to
pharmacies simply to avoid the risk of regulatory action, we
have a problem. And certainly, if the lack of supply of
controlled substances leads some people to use heroin, as some
of the recent evidence suggests, we have a problem. That is why
clarity in the law is so important.
H.R. 471 provides clarity in a way that will allow DEA and
industry to address these unintended consequences. While
addressing these unintended consequences is essential, it is
also important to preserve DEA's ability to issue immediate
suspensions to address imminent danger to public health and
safety. The lack of clarity and an inconsistent approach to
immediate suspensions over the last 40 years has led to
judicial challenges of DEA's authority.
In 2006, when I was the associate chief counsel at DEA, the
agency stopped issuing immediate suspensions because of a
Federal court ruling that found that the DEA had--its process
for immediate suspensions was unconstitutional. During an 8-
month period while the Internet pharmacies were out of control,
fueling prescription drug abuse, the agency issued no immediate
suspensions. That is Exhibit A for why clarity in the law and
protecting DEA's authority is so important.
Clarity also promotes access to controlled medications for
patients. Without clarity, registrants often act to reduce
perceived regulatory risk. A pharmacist refuses to fill
legitimate prescriptions for narcotics simply because
dispensing a high volume of narcotics brings scrutiny from DEA
and from the wholesale distributor. No one wants cancer
patients, wounded veterans, those in chronic pain to go without
medication, but restricting access is an unintended consequence
of a regulatory environment that lacks clarity.
The Ensuring Patient Access and Effective Drug Enforcement
Act of 2015 holds the promise of fulfilling its name. By
defining key terms in the CSA, the regulatory and enforcement
environment will be clarified. Communication between DEA and
registrants will be enhanced. Registrants will be less likely
to restrict access to legitimate patients out of a fear that
they may be second-guessed by DEA. Registrants will also be
encouraged to assist DEA in detecting controlled substance
diversion. And DEA's authority to issue immediate suspensions
will be protected from judicial curtailment because there will
be a clear, legal standard.
I thank the chairman and the committee.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Barber follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. I will begin questioning and recognize myself 5
minutes for that purpose.
Dr. Fountain, in your testimony, you mention that the DEA
has no set timeline or transparency requirements when making
scheduling determinations. How does this impact patients,
particularly those who have not benefited from currently
available therapies?
Dr. Fountain. About one-third of people with epilepsy will
continue to have seizures, despite available treatments. For
those third of patients, every new therapy is vitally
important. Because the incidence of SUDEP, sudden unexplained
death in epilepsy, seems to be related to the number of
seizures, logically. So for those patients who are most
severely affected, they are in most need of new therapies. And
those new--the sooner those new therapies are available, the
sooner that their seizures can be reduced in frequency; the
less likely they are going to die as well as suffer those other
consequences.
So, of course, the epilepsy community, the Epilepsy
Foundation wants to have safe and effective drugs. That is
paramount. But if the FDA has already determined them to be
safe and effective, then, for our community, it is difficult to
understand why it would be delayed at the FDA--I mean, at the
DEA while waiting to be scheduled. So it can impact patients
very directly.
Mr. Pitts. Now, give me the length of time, the longest
time patients have had to wait on DEA after FDA has conducted
its own detailed abuse liability analysis and approved a new
therapy.
Dr. Fountain. I think, based on the analysis that has been
done in the published literature, the drug I mentioned before,
Fycompa, I think, is the longest time. And it was 400 days. So
400 days after FDA approval was when the drug was finally made
available, scheduled, and finally scheduled by the DEA. So
approximately 400 days, more than a year.
Mr. Pitts. Do you know of any widespread abuse or criminal
diversion of epilepsy treatments?
Dr. Fountain. I am not aware of a single case report. So I
have done my own literature search of the medical literature.
And I am not aware of even a single case report of abuse of
what we would consider standard epilepsy drugs. It is true in
epilepsy, we sometimes, in special circumstances, use other
drugs that might be subject to control, the so-called
benzodiazepines, that have a different role. But for normal
epilepsy drugs, the ones that have been approved in the recent
many decades, I am not aware of any actual abuse.
Mr. Pitts. Mr. Chlapek, both the GAO and the IOM have
addressed the need of the EMS system in the U.S. Two of the
areas of need, personnel and training, were highlighted. Since
those reports were issued, there have been several events that
have reinforced the need for a highly trained effective
responsive EMS system--terrorist attacks, natural disasters,
pandemics. Do you see this bill as another way of improving
preparedness?
Mr. Chlapek. Chairman Pitts, absolutely.
This bill will help take a trained and--a trained group of
medics and transition them so they take care of the shortfall.
They are more able to help in disasters. They are more able to
help with protection of a license or certification in incidents
like Boston or Katrina and can go from State to State.
Mr. Pitts. Now, if you were making recommendations to the
States to streamline the process for veterans to become EMTs,
what would you focus on?
Mr. Chlapek. Approving education programs, the training
centers and education facilities to offer something similar to
Lansing Community College in Michigan, that sits down with the
veteran and looks at their electronic military training record
and gives them credit--transcripts credit--for that at no cost
and then fills the gap and gets them out within a few weeks or
a weekend.
Mr. Pitts. OK.
Mr. Eadie, you have mentioned that there is a white paper
that describes best practices PDMPs need to adopt.
Mr. Eadie. Yes, sir. It is available on our--the Web site
of the--at PDMPexcellence.org. And it is the--that is the Web
site for the PDMP Center of Excellence at Brandeis University.
Yes.
Mr. Pitts. Could you highlight a few of the practices you
think are important to improve PDMPs.
Mr. Eadie. Absolutely. I would first comment that there are
35 best practices listed, so it comes--deals with everything
from the way data is collected from pharmacies right through
how the data is used.
In terms of the data use, the recent advent of the mandated
use of the systems by prescribers has certainly proven to be
very effective in the States that have already initiated that,
and I mentioned the examples of that in my earlier comments.
The major one that has yet to be fully implemented is the
use of unsolicited reporting or proactive reporting called
both--proactively States analyze the data that is in their
system and then share it with those people who need to see it
based upon what the analysis shows. To date, only about a third
of States are covering that--doing that adequately. And so
there is a great deal of room there.
There are other things, like, the--the excellent effort
that is underway to allow data to be shared through electronic
health records and health information exchanges that is a
technological fix, so to speak, that will allow the prescribers
and pharmacists to get data faster and right within their
normal workflow so they can review it more readily.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you. My time has expired.
The Chair recognizes the ranking member, Mr. Green, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I am going to focus my questions on the two trauma-
related bills that Dr. Burgess and I have introduced. And Dr.
Burgess is actually chairing another subcommittee of our full
Energy and Commerce Committee downstairs.
Both bills will reauthorize a number of important programs
aimed at strengthening trauma systems, developing regionalized
systems of care, and improving availability of high-level
trauma services.
Dr. Enderson, it is a disappointing fact that 44 million
Americans currently lack access to the major trauma centers
within the golden hour of the injury, the time period when the
chances of survival are greatest. Can you elaborate on the
issue of access and why timely and appropriate care within the
first hour of injury is so critical?
Dr. Enderson. Traumatic injury is a surgical disease.
Basically the injuries that kill patients when they are injured
are--frequently, they are bleeding to death and they need
access to surgical care within that time to stop the dying
process while they are bleeding.
The access problems occur commonly in the United States in
rural areas, but we also have access problems in some of our
major cities where there is a maldistribution of level 1 trauma
centers. So someone who is injured on one side of the city has
problems getting transported to that trauma center in the
length of time before they bleed to death. And if they are
taken to a hospital that is not part of the system, that delays
the care until they reach that definitive surgical care.
Mr. Green. Thank you.
I represent Houston, Texas. And I first became involved in
this issue when hurricane Allison--or Tropical Storm Allison
flooded our two level 1 trauma centers in our Medical Center
and the area was under water. While tropical storms and
hurricanes are not typically the greatest threat to trauma
centers' operations, cost pressures, providers shortages have
caused many trauma centers to close and many more are
struggling to maintain operations.
As you mentioned in your testimony, from 1990 to 2005, 30
percent of our trauma centers closed their doors. Can you
discuss why access to trauma care is threatened by losses
associated with the high cost of treating severely injured
patients, a problem compounded by uncompensated care and the
growing shortage of trauma-related physicians?
Dr. Enderson. The cost does keep going up. The demands on
providers are increasing. And if we close down trauma centers,
that just puts a further strain on the system. In many areas,
such as our area, we are the only trauma center in our area.
And we don't have any backup. And the fewer trauma centers you
have, they are more likely to get overloaded with all of the
patients so that, when they are needed for critical events,
they can't provide care for their patients.
So it is nice to have some redundancy in that system, but
that redundancy has to make sense. It has to be in places where
they can work with the higher level trauma centers where they
can take care of their patients and provide the care that is
needed in that region and for those injured patients.
Mr. Green. And I want to point out that some of these
programs have not received funding for several years.
Dr. Enderson. They have not. They have been authorized, but
they have not had appropriations.
Mr. Green. Dr. Enderson, what can you talk about the value
of investing in trauma centers and trauma care programs like
these?
Dr. Enderson. We have heard that trauma is the leading
cause of death in patients under the age of 44. If you have
young patients who are injured and you treat them and get them
back to normal life, they can return to a long working life for
society.
As an example, we recently had a young man. He was at work.
He got ill. He was driving home, and he had a bad wreck. He had
terrible injuries. He had a ruptured thoracic aorta. He had
extremity fractures. He had a head injury. And yet, by getting
brought quickly to our trauma center, we were able to treat
those injuries over a period of time, and in 6 months, he was
back working and back with his family.
Mr. Green. Well--and, Mr. Chairman, I realize a lot of us
have been to both Iraq and Afghanistan. And that was the same
goal that we had for our military, to make sure that there was
a--within that hour period, they could reach a trauma center,
whether it be in Kabul, Kandahar in Afghanistan, or in Baghdad,
or Balad in Iraq.
Mr. Enderson, can you talk about the value of investing in
trauma systems and trauma care programs like these?
Dr. Enderson. I think the value is simply what you pointed
out. So, in the military, they have a great regionalized system
where they provide lifesaving care at the screen. They quickly
transport to a place for more definitive care. And then they
transfer them back to the United States for rehabilitation.
What we need is a system that involves all levels of trauma
care so that we can take our young people and return them to a
normal life.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, again.
I will yield back my time, except I want to thank Dr.
Burgess for his partnership and leadership.
And I also thank the Trauma Coalition, who has worked hard
on the of reauthorization of these programs.
And I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie [presiding]. Thank you.
The gentleman yields back, and I will recognize myself for
5 minutes for questioning
Mr. Eadie, I am from Kentucky, and we have been very active
in this area. According to the Department of Health and Human
Services, as of July 2013, 47 States had operational
prescription drug monitoring plans or PDMPs. However, they are
significantly underutilized by providers. A number of factors
contribute to this underutilization, including the cumbersome
nature of accessing current systems and privacy concerns. Would
you elaborate on some of the factors that may lead to
underutilization of PDMPs?
Mr. Eadie. Certainly, I am happy to do that, and I want to
acknowledge Kentucky's leadership for the country on many
issues, including this one.
In many cases, the cumbersome nature of this process as you
describe it is correct. Doctors have to take the time to do it.
Recent developments in Kentucky and other States has been
actually to allow the physicians to delegate the responsibility
to a subordinate person in the practice, with the prescriber
keeping responsibility. That is also a practical thing that can
be done, and we encourage every State to look at that. And in
fact, those States that have mandated use have found it
essential because of the increased workload of having to pull
up the data.
Mr. Guthrie. I want to ask you, on the mandate, do you
think that is the right approach, to mandate the use? Kentucky
and I think New York--I know my State has and also the State of
New York.
Mr. Eadie. Yes.
Mr. Guthrie. Will you elaborate on mandating?
Mr. Eadie. Yes. What those mandates--there are multiple
types of mandates out there, some, like the State of Nevada,
which mandates the prescribers use the system but only when
they have a reason to believe that the patient in front of them
is not there for legitimate medical purposes. Such States have
not significantly increased their use of the data by
prescribers with that kind of a mandate. But Kentucky, New
York, and Tennessee have pioneered a new one in which basically
every patient is required, with a few logical exceptions,
before the first prescription is issued and then periodically
thereafter. And, in the case of Kentucky, it is at least every
3 months, they have to check before issuing an additional
prescription beyond 3 months. What that does is it allows a
prescriber in each case to check.
We know from work that we did with the State of
Massachusetts that in that State, when these unsolicited
reports I talked about were sent out and they sent to
prescribers and then we, with them, did a survey, found that
only 8 percent of the prescribers acknowledged after receiving
those reports that they had known about the multiple doctor
episodes or doctor shopping that was going on by their
patients. Putting it the other way, more than 90 percent of the
prescribers did not know what was going on and, therefore,
would not have asked for the data had it not been sent to them.
Or, in the case of a mandate, they have to look, which is why
they are effective.
And we have seen in Kentucky and, frankly, in all three of
those States, that medical opposition at first to being
required to use the system has modified itself after
implementation.
Mr. Guthrie. I am going to try to get another question in
from another panelist.
Mr. Eadie. Please.
Mr. Guthrie. That was very helpful. I appreciate what you
were saying.
Mr. Chlapek, when you were talking about the situation, you
said there were a lot of people helping and involved and
working in this, and so I have two questions really I will ask
you because we have a minute and a half. Who were the
stakeholders that should be addressing this and giving us
information for policy questions? And you also said H.R. 235
will address issues, but there is still a lot of other issues
to be addressed. You talk about State licensing, and I
understand how that, you know, with each State having its own
and us reluctant to get into that because that is a States
issue would be a problem. What other issues besides the State
licensing do you think maybe other legislation would help? So
who are the stakeholders, and what other issues need to be
addressed?
Mr. Chlapek. Vice Chairman Guthrie, other issues are
standardization of training at the Joint Services Medical
Training Facility in San Antonio. If we could get all of those
folks with a National Registry EMT card, that would really help
as they try to transition out.
Other issues, H.R. 235 mainly helps with providing some
funds for educational facilities to develop their transition
program, especially in the rural or shortage areas. Other
issues are standardization of State licenses. If there was a
National Registry, that would really help us. Many States
accept the registry now, but all don't.
Mr. Guthrie. I used to be a State legislator. It probably
would be easy for States to adopt rules if it came out with a
standard uniform service. As you said, if the uniform services
would have a standard training program with a standard card or
standard criteria, then it would be easy for States to--so
maybe that is where to start.
But my time is actually expired. I appreciate you doing so.
I would like to recognize Mr. Schrader from Oregon for 5
minutes of questioning.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate the opportunity. First question for Mr. Eadie.
I am curious, as you have heard testified by Mr. Whitfield that
we currently have a program, a registry, if you will, that is
operated out of the DOJ unit and wondered what the advantages
of or need for the unit out of HHS would be and why that is
critical for making this program work effectively?
Mr. Eadie. I appreciate your question. It is my experience
that both law enforcement and the public health professions
have to be involved in addressing these issues. Neither one can
address it. I mean, a fundamental thing is that prescriptions
are issued by healthcare professionals. And the entire system
of delivery of opioids, for example, are through the health
care system. So a public health involvement and regulatory
involvement involving health care is essential. At the same
time, as long as we have had these types of drugs available for
medical use, which is so important, they have also had the risk
of making people addicted. And when that happens, people move
into all sorts of illegal and criminal behavior patterns,
including forgeries, counterfeitings, organized rings of drug
shoppers, et cetera, and pill mills. Those are outside the
realm that can be dealt with and addressed effectively by
traditional public health entities.
And I give you simply the examples. Public health, if you
look at seatbelts, that is a triumph basically of both public
health and law enforcement working together. The simple thing
of people being quarantined in a public health emergency and an
epidemic, public health orders it; law enforcement enforces it.
And I could go on.
But my point is that both aspects are essential, and we
cannot hope to solve this epidemic if we don't keep both parts
working together.
Mr. Schrader. Very good. Thank you.
Mr. Barber, I was wondering if you could elaborate a little
bit on the lack of clarity in the DEA guidelines, particularly
as it affects distributors, and talk about why the definition
of ``imminent danger'' is so important, and modifying the
corrective action is important also?
Mr. Barber. Yes, sir. The statute currently does not have a
definition for ``imminent danger,'' unlike other Federal
statutes designed to protect public health and safety, such as
the Mines Safety Act. When an attorney, when an agent for DEA
is faced with making a decision about whether or not, prior to
a hearing, to issue an immediate suspension, which brings due
process rights to bear, the question is, what constitutes an
imminent danger? In my written testimony, I cite an example
where DEA has issued a suspension for conduct that they knew
had ceased for months. So it is those types of scenarios that
create a lack of clarity about what the standard is that will
lead to an immediate suspension, and that is why courts have at
times intervened.
And going back to the year after DEA was created in 1974,
all the way to as recently as 2013, courts have questioned and
in many cases overturned suspensions issued by the agency
because of that lack of clarity. As far as the corrective
action plan, that is an important piece of the legislation in
that it provides an assurance to a registrant who has taken
corrective action that that will be taken into account, thereby
enhancing collaboration and communication with the agency.
There are times where registrants get it wrong, and the agency
needs to take action. But if the registrant has taken
corrective action, it is appropriate for the agency to consider
that.
Mr. Schrader. Very good. Thank you.
Mr. Enderson, could you talk very briefly about what the
benefits are with regard to regionalization. What does that
translate into? What does that really mean?
Dr. Enderson. What regionalization really means is that all
of the parts of a system work together, and it may be under one
head. So you have a Level 1 trauma center. You may have other
trauma centers. You have other hospitals, but there is a system
set up to ensure that the right patient gets to the right place
at the right time, and they all work together. In the past, we
have talked about exclusive trauma systems where you just have
one center. Now we talk about inclusive trauma centers. You
want everyone involved so that they know what their role is in
making sure that the patient gets to the right pace.
Mr. Schrader. So they can get the immediate care they need
no matter what.
Dr. Enderson. The immediate care. So there is not delays.
If they are closer to another hospital, there is not a delay
there. There are ways set up to automatically get the patient
to where they need to be.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back.
Recognizes Mr. Griffith of Virginia for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Fountain, if you could talk a little bit about where
you think we ought to go in regard to the DEA and how we can
better improve that process. I know the bills that we have here
today, but are there other things that we can be doing as a
committee to assist in making sure that we get some action on
those things that have already been approved by the DEA or
maybe even some research into things that we know might help
epileptic patients that we are not able to do studies on yet?
Dr. Fountain. I guess there are two other DEA-related
issues that are important to the epilepsy community and to
Americans in general. One of them peculiar to epilepsy drugs is
that although they are scheduled by the FDA, they are scheduled
at a low level. And for administrative reasons, they have been
scheduled because the FDA, when it makes a recommendation to
the DEA, follows eight specific criteria, and if these eight
specific criteria boxes are checked off, then it requires DEA
to schedule it. But those boxes--while they are perfectly
reasonable, for instance, if the drug is approved in a class in
which that class of drugs is already regulated, then the DEA is
forced to schedule it. Well, for epilepsy drugs, because of
historical reasons, they are in those classes, so they end up
getting scheduled by the DEA. But from a medical perspective,
it sort of somewhere between unbelievable and comical because
they aren't the kind of drugs that you would typically regulate
like that. So the physicians who are not epilepsy physicians
always ask the question, Well, why is that a regulated drug?
So specifically for our community and maybe for other drugs
regulated by the DEA, especially given the burden that the DEA
has of dealing with these specific and important issues that we
have been addressing, it might be reasonable to revisit for
epilepsy drugs but perhaps other drugs, speaking for myself,
that don't necessarily need to be regulated by the DEA.
Mr. Griffith. And there may be some drugs that do need to
be regulated by the DEA, but maybe we need to take a look at
how they are regulated. Currently I am working on some language
with the epilepsy folks in regard to figuring out a way that we
can use the cannabinoid oil from the marijuana plant. Of
course, it is hard to figure out how much cannabinoid oil and
how much THC you need to make it work for the children who
apparently--at least anecdotally, it appears that is a
treatment plan for some patients. But we haven't had a lot of
studies done over the years by the DEA. Would you agree?
Dr. Fountain. That is right. So the other issue relevant to
the epilepsy community and to those with severe medical
conditions is regulation of cannabis derivatives and
cannabidiol, which is one derivative of marijuana that doesn't
cause a high, doesn't cause euphoria or anything like that,
seems to have some effectiveness in treating seizures and a few
other medical conditions and is not the part of the plant or
the compound that typically is associated with drug abuse. THC
is, and so, consequently, for the epilepsy community, we would
like to find a way to have cannabidiol oil available, first of
all, to be studied and have research to know it is safe and
effective; but then, beyond that, to make it available to
people with the most severe epilepsies in certain
circumstances.
Mr. Griffith. And we definitely want to go in that
direction but also make sure--because clearly that is a drug
that can be abused--and we want to make sure that we don't
overlook that when we go down that path.
Mr. Barber, I know you sometimes get on the hot seat in
here because we are trying to get things accomplished and get
new treatments out there at the same time you are trying to
make sure we don't have a lot of abuse of drugs. When last we
were here and discussing these items, I had a situation where a
small town pharmacy couldn't do what they can do. You mentioned
that in your opening statement, and I appreciate that. You felt
like we needed to try to make a better system so that we didn't
have those problems where small town pharmacies with one
supplier might have these issues. Do you have any suggestions
that you can think of that we can do to be of assistance in
that? Is there legislation that we need to pass that we haven't
thought of yet or aren't moving on?
Mr. Barber. I believe the Ensuring Patient Access and
Effective Drug Enforcement Act of 2015 is a great step in the
right direction. I do think that there are certainly oversight
roles that committees such as this can play. For example, DEA's
regulation calls on distributors to detect and report
suspicious orders to DEA. Those are, according to the
regulations, orders of unusual size, unusual frequency, or
those that deviate substantially from a normal ordering
pattern. What is unusual depends on the context of the ordering
pharmacy. What deviates substantially is somewhat amorphous,
and so if there is greater clarity around regulatory
obligations like that, it will help pharmacies who now find
themselves oftentimes not having sufficient drug supply to meet
the needs of their patients.
Mr. Griffith. If I can take just a minute, Mr. Chairman,
and just say I understand what he is saying. If I am
translating it correctly, what that means is if you have a
pharmacy that serves a lot of older people who are more likely
to have pain needs, a senior population, than a pharmacy that
serves a younger, you can't have a one-size-fits-all for the
pharmacy that is in a community that is younger and a pharmacy
that is in a community that is substantially older and is going
to have more pain issues. Is that a fair translation?
Mr. Barber. That is a fair translation. Context always
matters, both in the law enforcement and healthcare arena.
Mr. Griffith. I appreciate it, and I appreciate the panel
being here today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman's time is expired.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Sarbanes from Maryland for 5
minutes for questioning.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I won't take 5
minutes.
Most of you have come from great distances to share your
expertise with us, and it is deeply appreciated by the
committee.
Mr. Chlapek, is that how I pronounce it?
Mr. Chlapek. It is Chlapek, sir.
Mr. Sarbanes. Chlapek, sorry. I gather you were here to
testify primarily with respect to the helping veterans with
emergency medical training proposal----
Mr. Chlapek. Yes, sir.
Mr. Sarbanes. Which I think is a terrific opportunity to
showcase how we can streamline bringing providers of all kinds,
frankly, more quickly into the healthcare workforce. I have
been working for many years on this idea of looking in
nontraditional places for people that can help meet some of the
shortages we have, whether that is physicians or nurses or, in
this case, EMTs. In looking at military medics, who obviously
come with a vast amount of experience, for that resource makes
a tremendous amount of sense, and seeing if there is ways that
we can streamline the process for actually getting them
deployed here in the homeland to help respond to these
emergencies makes a lot of sense.
So this demonstration project that Adam Kinzinger and
Congresswoman Capps have proposed I think could make a
tremendous amount of difference.
I was just curious whether you have had the opportunity--I
imagine you have--to work with some EMT professionals who are
former military medics and what your observation has been as to
the kind of expertise and experience that they bring to the
job?
Mr. Chlapek. It depends, sir. You have the Special Forces
or SEAL or PJ medic that is deployed forward that does a whole
lot of different things--puts chest tubes in, uses conscious
sedation, and some other adjuncts. These folks can come out and
go--they should be able to challenge the paramedic test right
away. And I will get phone calls that ask, What can I do, from
these medics, and so I try to link them up with an educational
institution that will let them do a weekend refresher and then
challenge the test through their institution.
Mr. Sarbanes. Excellent. Excellent. Well, that is a good
perspective, and I think what they can bring to a team, to an
EMT team on the ground, given their experience and perspective,
is incredibly valuable. In other words, it is not just another
source of finding people for this job. It is finding people
that are particularly qualified in certain respects for the
job, and that is why I support this bill in particular. Thank
you very much for your testimony. Appreciate it.
And all of you.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back.
The next recognized is Mr. Long from Missouri for 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chlapek, number one, it is nice to have a fellow
Missourian here, so welcome. Can you kind of walk us through
the traditional State credentialing or licensing process for
EMTs?
Mr. Chlapek. Yes, sir. The military EMTs or the civilian
EMTs, Mr. Long?
Mr. Long. Well, the traditional--just the civilian is what
I am getting at.
Mr. Chlapek. Civilian EMTs, normally for the basic course,
go through a one-semester or roughly 6-month time period with
two clinical shifts and then take the test. The State of
Missouri, for example, as well as about 40 other States, have
adopted the National Registry exam because it takes a lot of
pressure off of them. It is standardized. It is vetted, and
they will take that exam and then receive a license. For
paramedics, they go anywhere from two to three semesters and do
an excess of 600 to 700 clinical hours, both in a hospital and
in an ambulance. And then, once they do a certain number of
skills, they are allowed to move on.
Mr. Long. OK. Can you kind of juxtapose that with the
military training? For someone with previous training, such as
a military medic in Missouri, would they be qualified as EMT
basic or EMT intermediate or EMT paramedic?
Mr. Chlapek. The military medics, for the most part, that
go through the program at San Antonio at the Joint Training
Facility qualify; if they are in the Army or the Air Force,
they will have a National Registry card. They present that to
most States, and they are handed a State license to work within
that State.
The Special Forces medics come in, and they are expected--
they have done everything to qualify to test for a paramedic
level card. Sometimes they do, and sometimes they don't. It
depends. A Navy SEAL medic retired after 22 years and went to
LA County Fire, and he wound up going through their whole
paramedic course again. But it was one of the few things he
could do that really satisfied him after the job he had been
doing.
Mr. Long. I know there are EMT shortages, and would you
characterize that problem--is it a problem of recruitment or a
problem of retention or both?
Mr. Chlapek. Both, along with pay. EMS is severely
underfunded, especially in rural areas, and some of these folks
either volunteer or work for about $15,000 a year. If they are
paramedic level, they can make 50 to 60 or a little more. There
is a huge difference, and it is underfunded.
Mr. Long. I was going to ask how you think that State
healthcare systems could keep qualified EMTs working in the
field, but I think you kind of answered that.
Mr. Chlapek. Yes, sir.
Mr. Long. With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Chlapek. Thank you.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back.
The next recognized is Mr. Bucshon of Indiana for 5 minutes
of questions.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Prior to coming to Congress, I was a cardiovascular and
thoracic surgeon for 15 years, so I am pretty familiar with the
subject matter, especially as it relates to trauma and really
all the medical issues, including EMT and how you deal with
pharmacies and what the process is. And I just would like to
say at the top that this is a huge problem. My law enforcement
in my community, in Evansville, Indiana, recently told me that
prescription drug issues have overtaken methamphetamine as a
community health problem in our county. And that I think is
probably widespread across the country.
Mr. Eadie, your comments about combining law enforcement
and medical are very critical. I can tell you, as a practicing
physician, one of the issues is time and the information in an
expedient manner. Most physicians, as you know, 99.9 percent
don't want to prescribe narcotics to people that are doctor
shopping, but available information quickly is so critical if
we can provide that.
As a surgeon, of course, I provided acute medical care and
acute pain management, which is a completely different area
than our primary care physicians or neurologists and others
have to deal with, so maybe you can expand further on how you
think--I mean, getting the information from medical records,
for example, the two major hospital systems in Evansville have
two EMR systems that don't communicate with each other. And
some of the medical practices have EMR systems that don't
communicate with either hospital. How do we make progress in
that area, because I know that there is a lot of smart IT
professionals that can probably fix this problem overnight.
Right? But it is about proprietary information. It is about
economics. It is about profit for different systems, and I
totally understand that. But how do we get past that and get
the physicians the information immediately so that they, on the
prescribing side, we don't overprescribe?
Mr. Eadie. I thank you for your question, and I want to
also acknowledge that I would be happy to put you in contact
with the people in Indiana who are experimenting with this.
There is a trial underway in Indiana. You are one of the 16
States where there is an effort being made to translate PDMP
data directly into the existing systems of electronic health
records and health information exchanges. The details of that,
they would have to provide to you, but it is important work.
And that is why we support the NASPER. It is one of the major
reasons we support NASPER, is that--and feel it is so
important--is that we have seen the value and importance of
doing exactly what you are talking about. And these 16 States
have started, but that is not nearly enough, and they have got
a long way to go. They are just experimenting. NASPER funding
has, in its refocused form, in the redrafted legislation would
really encourage this. It would provide funding to support
States to do the necessary work. And it is going to take time.
The complications of proprietary systems, multiple systems in
each State, it is going to take a while to overcome those
barriers and hurdles that have been put in place by multiple
systems, but it is doable.
And there is a real national effort underway, and in fact,
the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services, or SAMHSA, is
the one that is spearheading this effort with the office from
the White House on technological developments for health care.
There is a lot of work that has been done, and I would be very
happy to put you in touch with them to learn about that.
Mr. Bucshon. That would be great.
And, of course, the medical systems need to be able to
communicate with pharmacies and, honestly, with law enforcement
also in some way. So it is a complicated problem. But my wife
is a anesthesiologist--still practicing--so she tells me every
day the number of patients that come to the hospital for other
procedures that are on, have been taking narcotics or,
honestly, benzodiazepines for many, many years. This is really
an epidemic problem. It is across socioeconomic class. It is
something I have been working on since I have been in Congress
in the State, on the methamphetamine issue, trying to solve
that. But now the prescription drug issue is, it has been and
is surpassing that.
So I can tell you firsthand, you know, the significance.
And I appreciate all your testimony and everyone working
towards solutions to solve the problem.
And on the EMT side, quickly, Mr. Chairman, the last
Congress, we were able to get legislation passed on commercial
driver's license for veterans who had driving experience in the
military, making that a streamlined process so that they could
get a commercial driver's license to drive a semi, for example,
across the country because of their military experience. So I
do think there is a good chance that this legislation will move
forward and become law, and I hope it does.
So I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back.
And I ask unanimous consent to enter into the record a
report, ``The Prescription Opioid and Heroin Crisis: A Public
Health Approach to an Epidemic of Addiction.''
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Guthrie. The Chair now recognized Mr. Collins of New
York for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This has been a great
hearing.
I think, first of all, Mr. Chlapek, we all agree: Anything
we can do help our vets coming back, we want to do. And while
this may not be a lot of money per year--a couple hundred
thousand per year I understand is what has been requested--do
you know how many States have this issue? I mean, one of the
requirements is the State claim a shortage of EMTs, and there
is a need. Do you happen to know, is this 2 or 3 States or 10
or 15? How great is the need for what we are proposing here?
Mr. Chlapek. Nearly every State that has a rural area has a
shortage in those areas. They are currently served by
volunteers, but as more and more folks go back into the city
for work and both members of the household work and
requirements keep increasing for the mobile healthcare
providers, the folks on the street, EMS professionals, they
can't keep people at all. And veterans are coming out. They
know how to be on time for work. They know how to follow
orders, and they just need help with the license.
Illinois is a prime example. And Carle out in Champaign-
Urbana, has a conference every year on rural health care. EMS
is the big thing.
Mr. Collins. I know this has bipartisan support, and we
won't know until we get this approved and appropriated just how
many folks are going to apply for it, but certainly a worthy
objective. And thank you for bringing that up.
My other question really is for Dr. Enderson on the trauma
piece. First of all, I am just curious, do we know, since this
one is a reauthorization, in the last couple of years, how many
hospitals have applied? And what is the average amount of money
they are getting? And have we seen a report that tracks how
this money has allowed us to either get new trauma centers or
keep trauma centers open? In other words, what are the metrics
coming back at us?
Dr. Enderson. Well, sir, unfortunately, these have been
authorized over the past several years, but there have been no
appropriations for that.
Mr. Collins. I am glad you brought that up as well. As an
authorizing committee but not the appropriators, that is
information I didn't know as a new Member, and I am glad to
know that so we can move forward. Certainly the access to
trauma, as we talked about, that golden hour is critical. I
represent the western New York area, and Erie County Medical
Center has one of the best Level 1 trauma centers in the
country. And it is quite expensive to set that up, and I know
it is always the issue with the county government and others,
tight budget times deciding where this money goes; but it is a
lifesaver quite literally, whether it is the ski resorts that
are 60 miles away and the incidents there, which tend to be
head trauma and the like, that access has saved many lives in
western New York, and I know we are blessed to have that. I
know it is very much of a cost burden, but we have decided as a
community it is worth that money.
Would you see that in something like I am explaining--they
are existing, they are there, the community is behind them--
would they qualify for one of these grants, or is this really
more focused on, assuming it is appropriated, those areas that
don't have one now?
Dr. Enderson. Both. So part of it applies to trauma centers
that exist, especially trauma centers that are having
significant difficulties and are in danger of closing, we are
trying to prevent that, but we are also trying to help States
look at the models of trauma care that they have and make sure
that they are allocating the resources the way that make sense.
So, in a regionalized system, these, as you pointed out, are
very expensive resources. You don't want every hospital
duplicating those resources. You have to understand how it
works best in a system, know how it works, and how that system
can work together to take care of their patients.
Mr. Collins. Yes. I mean, the good news for our area is we
did designate the Erie County Medical Center as the Level 1
trauma center. The other hospitals recognize that. It is also
the regional arm, and in many cases, that 1 hour works with our
mercy flight, the helicopters coming in. I suspect we are
probably an example of best practices, both in the type of
facility and also the way the other hospitals recognize that
that is our designated trauma center.
Dr. Enderson. Absolutely.
Mr. Collins. So, again, very important issue. Thank you for
your testimony.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back my remaining 5 seconds.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back.
The gentlelady from Tennessee is recognized for 5 minutes
for questions.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank you all for being here, especially Dr.
Enderson, my fellow Tennessean, and we are delighted to have
him here and with us today.
Mr. Chairman, I have got some things to submit for the
record. First of all, the statement of the National Association
of Chain Drug Stores on today's hearing.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mrs. Blackburn. And, secondly, letters of support for the
Ensuring Patient Access and Effective Drug Enforcement Act of
2015, which is the work product of Ms. Chu, Mr. Welch, Mr.
Marino, and I. These are from the American Pharmacists
Association, the Healthcare Distribution Management
Association, the National Association of Chain Drug Stores, and
the National Community Pharmacists Association.
Mr. Guthrie. Seeing no objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Very quickly as we wrap up, I did have a couple of
questions on H.R. 471, which is the Ensuring Patient Access and
Effective Drug Enforcement Act.
Mr. Barber, you mentioned in your remarks to one of the
questions that context matters, and I appreciate hearing that.
So I wanted to go back to your testimony. You said that little
has changed in the past year in regard to the issue of dealing
with DEA and guidance. And I want to know, has there been any
improvement in the guidance the DEA is giving to distributors
and pharmacists on this issue?
Mr. Barber. It hasn't changed, so I would say there has
been no improvement or any decrement. It is unchanged.
Mrs. Blackburn. Well, I was hoping there was a sliver of a
right step in the right direction, but I guess not, and it
shows why we need to go ahead and get this bill passed.
I wanted to also ask you, we hear some discussion about
whether or not to define ``imminent danger,'' and I would like
for you briefly to touch on why giving definition to ``imminent
danger'' would benefit the DEA?
Mr. Barber. Well, as a former counsel who appeared in
Federal courts, assisted U.S. Attorney's Office in defending
the suspension power of the agency, having a clear legal
standard is always best. There are Federal statutes that were
passed around the same time as the CSA that contain a
definition of ``imminent danger,'' and rather than having it
undefined and having courts second-guess the agency's important
power, to me it seems like if Congress gave a clear standard in
the law, then the agency could enforce it and courts would not
be left to second-guess DEA.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. So you would say the harm comes in
having no definition of ``imminent danger''?
Mr. Barber. I believe that is the harm. It is a harm both
to the agency and to the regulated community, who doesn't know
where the lines are, and we have those unintended consequences
I mentioned in my testimony.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you.
And, Mr. Chairman, just for the record, we are speaking in
reference to the Controlled Substance Act.
Well, I know you all are ready to step away from the desk.
And we are appreciative that you are here.
And, Mr. Chairman, in the interest of time and ending the
hearing, I will yield back my time.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back her
time.
All Members have been recognized. I remind Members that
they have 10 business days to submit questions for the record,
and I ask that the witnesses respond to the questions promptly.
Members should submit their questions by the close of business
on Tuesday, February 10.
Without objection, we have one more. We have a unanimous
consent request for ``Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs: An
Assessment of the Evidence for Best Practices'' for the record.
Without objection, so ordered. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at http://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF14/20150127/102844/
HMTG-114-IF14-20150127-SD054.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Without objection, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:52 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
