- H.R., THE IMPROVING COAL COMBUSTION RESIDUALS REGULATION ACT OF 2015, DAY 1

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. ___, THE IMPROVING COAL
COMBUSTION RESIDUALS REGULATION ACT OF 2015

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND THE ECONOMY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 18 & 24, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-22

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
95-633                        WASHINGTON : 2016

_________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                     Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

Subcommittee on Environment and the Economy

JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
Chairman

GREGG HARPER, Vice Chairman          PAUL TONKO, New York
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                LOIS CAPPS, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JERRY McNERNEY, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TONY CARDENAS, California
BILL FLORES, Texas                   FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina           officio)
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------

MARCH 18, 2015

Page
Hon. John Shimkus, a Representative in Congress from the state of
Illinois, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Paul Tonko, a Representative in Congress from the State of
New York, opening statement....................................     4
Hon. David B. McKinley, a Representative in Congress from the
State of West Virginia, opening statement......................     5
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     6
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................    73

Witnesses

David Paylor, Director, Virginia Department of Environmental
Quality........................................................     7
Prepared statement...........................................    10
Michael Forbeck, Environmental Program Manager, Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental, Bureau of Waste Management........    18
Prepared statement...........................................    20
James Roewer, Executive Director, Utilities Solid Waste
Activities Group...............................................    25
Prepared statement...........................................    27
Lisa Evans, Senior Administrative Counsel, Earthjustice..........    34
Prepared statement...........................................    36

MARCH 24, 2015
Witnesses

Mathy Stanislaus, Assistant Administrator, Office of Solid Waste
and Emergency Response, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency...    75
Prepared statement...........................................    78

Submitted Material

Statement of the Chamber of Commerce, submitted by Mr. Shimkus...    98
Statement of Portland Cement Association, submitted by Mr.
Shimkus........................................................   100
Letter of March 6, 2015, from various organizations to Messrs.
Shimkus and Tonko, submitted by Mr. Tonko......................   101
Letter of March 17, 2015, from various organizations from all
over the U.S. to Messrs. Shimkus and Tonko, submitted by Mr.
Tonko..........................................................   108

H.R. ----------, THE IMPROVING COAL
COMBUSTION RESIDUALS REGULATION ACT OF 2015, DAY 1

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 18, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment and the Economy,
Committee on Energy and Commerce
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:17 a.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John
Shimkus (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Shimkus, Harper, Murphy,
Latta, McKinley, Johnson, Bucshon, Flores, Hudson, Cramer,
Tonko, Schrader, Green, McNerney, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Nick Abraham, Legislative Clerk; Charlotte
Baker, Deputy Communications Director; Leighton Brown, Press
Assistant; David McCarthy, Chief Counsel, Environment and the
Economy; Tina Richards, Counsel, Environment; Chris Sarley,
Policy Coordinator, Environment and the Economy; Jean Woodrow,
Director, Information Technology; Jacqueline Cohen, Democratic
Senior Counsel; Caitlin Haberman, Democratic Professional Staff
Member; Rick Kessler, Democratic Senior Advisor and Staff
Director, Energy and Environment; and Ryan Schmit, Democratic
EPA Detailee.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN SHIMKUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Shimkus. Oh, my gosh. We are out of control already.
Welcome, everybody. I am going to call the hearing to order.
The subcommittee will come to order, and the Chair recognizes
himself for 5 minutes.
Welcome, everyone, back as we continue the discussion
regarding coal ash. Today we are hearing from our stakeholder
panel, and because of some scheduling conflicts, we will
convene and hear from the EPA next week.
A couple months ago we heard from EPA and stakeholders
about the final coal ash rule. We discussed the problems
associated with the implementation, in particular, the fact
that the final rule is self-implementing, meaning there will be
no regulatory oversight and no enforceable permits, the fact
that if states implement permit programs, they will not operate
in lieu of the Federal rule so regulated entities must comply
with two sets of requirements, and the fact that the only
mechanism for enforcement of the final rule is through citizen
suits which would result in an unpredictable array of
regulatory interpretations, as Judges throughout the country
are forced to make technical compliance decisions that are
better left to a regulatory agency. As a result we heard from
almost all of the stakeholders at our January hearing that a
legislative solution is still needed to best regulate coal ash.
Since our last hearing, we have been working to develop a
legislative solution that does two things; one, takes into
account all of the hard work EPA put into developing sound
technical standards protective of human health and the
environment and second, utilize the framework developed in
previous legislation requiring states to develop enforceable
permit programs that will contain minimum Federal standards.
This brings us here today to discuss the draft legislation
we think accomplishes both of those goals. We are keeping the
bill as a discussion draft because this is an open process
during which we will continue efforts to collaborate with our
colleagues in the House and our friends in the Senate, work
with EPA on technical assistance, and of course, welcome
suggestions from all of you to improve the bill.
The basics of the discussion draft are simple. The bill
requires that every state have a permit program, and every
permit program will contain minimum requirements based on EPA's
final rule. Every permit program will address inactive surface
impoundments or legacy sites in the same manner as EPA dealt
with them in the final rule. They will have to decide within 2
months from the date of enactment whether they will be closed
within 3 years from the date of enactment or whether they will
be regulated like any other active disposal unit. Compliance
timeframes are comparable to the final rule and for any lag we
will gain the benefit of having an enforceable permit program.
Furthermore, the discussion draft does not in any way impact
the ability to bring citizen suits. The draft legislation does
not require owners and operators to post their operating
records on the internet because this is a remnant of a self-
implementing program, but the draft requires states to make
information regarding groundwater monitoring data, structural
stability, emergency action plans, fugitive dust control plans,
certifications regarding closure, and information regarding
corrective action remedies available to the public.
We heard from a number of witnesses at our last hearing
that a key problem with the self-implementing final rule was
that EPA was forced to eliminate certain flexibility, in
particular with respect to groundwater monitoring and
corrective action, due to the lack of state oversight. Because
the requirements will be implemented through state permit
programs, the draft legislation allows the implementing agency
on a site-specific basis to provide flexibility for groundwater
monitoring or corrective action taking into account risk-based
factors.
At our last hearing we also heard about a few other
provisions in the final rule that were problematic including:
the retroactive application of the location of siting
restrictions, the requirement that unlined impoundments that
exceed a groundwater protection standard close with no
opportunity to remedy the problem through corrective action,
and that surface impoundments that miss a deadline to access
structural stability must stop operating and close. Forced
closure of impoundments with no analysis of whether the
impoundment is, or can be, operated safely may be appropriate
under a self-implementing rule with no regulatory involvement,
but the goal of the draft legislation and the state permit
programs is to ensure that surface impoundments are operated
safely and if they are not, then they will be corrected or
closed.
As we work on this draft legislation we acknowledge the
amount of time and effort that EPA put into drafting a final
rule that is fully protective of human health and the
environment and because actions speak louder than words, we did
this by directly incorporating the exact provisions and the
policy of the final rule into the discussion draft. That being
said, we still believe that a legislative solution is the best
approach to dealing with the regulation of coal ash because of
the significant limitations of the rule.
We look forward to hearing from all our witnesses and hope
Mr. Stanislaus will be able to provide some helpful comments on
the discussion draft next week. In particular, ECOS and ASTSWMO
since they will be tasked with creating permit programs that
meet the minimum standards criteria set out in the legislation.
I would like again to thank the Administration for all of
the cooperation we have received on this issue. EPA has been
extremely constructive and helpful during the last Congress and
recently working through the issues with the final rule and the
discussion draft. I would also like to specifically thank ECOS
and ASTSWMO for their continued participation and invaluable
input on the mechanics of implementation. Last, I would like to
express my appreciation to Mr. McKinley for his longstanding
leadership on this issue as we continue the process of trying
to figure out how to effectively regulate coal ash. As always,
we appreciate all of our witnesses for being here and look
forward to your testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shimkus follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. John Shimkus

We welcome everyone back as we continue the discussion
regarding coal ash. Today we are hearing from our stakeholder
panel and because of some scheduling conflicts we will
reconvene and hear from EPA next week.
A couple months ago we heard from EPA and stakeholders
about the final coal ash rule. We discussed the problems
associated with implementation--in particular, the fact that
the final rule is self-implementing meaning there will be no
regulatory oversight and no enforceable permits, the fact that
if states implement permit programs they will not operate in
lieu of the federal rule so regulated entities must comply with
two sets of requirements, and the fact that the only mechanism
for enforcement of the final rule is through citizen suits
which would result in an unpredictable array of regulatory
interpretations, as judges throughout the country are forced to
make technical compliance decisions that are better left to a
regulatory agency. As a result we heard from almost all of the
stakeholders at our January hearing that a legislative solution
is still needed to best regulate coal ash.
Since our last hearing, we have been working to develop a
legislative solution that does two things--takes into account
all of the hard work EPA put into developing sound technical
standards protective of human health and the environment and
second, utilize the framework developed in previous legislation
requiring states to develop enforceable permit programs that
will contain minimum federal standards.
This brings us here today to discuss the draft legislation
we think accomplishes both of those goals. We are keeping the
bill as a discussion draft because this is an open process
during which we will continue efforts to collaborate with our
colleagues in the House and our friends in the Senate, work
with EPA on technical assistance, and of course welcome
suggestions from all of you to improve the bill.
The basics of the discussion draft are simple. The bill
requires that every state have a permit program and every
permit program will contain minimum requirements based on EPA's
final rule. Every permit program will address inactive surface
impoundments or ``legacy sites'' in the same manner as EPA
dealt with them in the final rule--they will have to decide
within 2 months from the date of enactment whether they will be
closed within 3 years from the date or enactment or whether
they will be regulated like any other active disposal unit.
Compliance timeframes are comparable to the final rule and for
any lag we will gain the benefit of having an enforceable
permit program. Furthermore, the discussion draft does not in
any way impact the ability to bring citizen suits. The draft
legislation does not require owners and operators to post their
operating records on the internet because that is a remnant of
a self-implementing program, but the draft requires states to
make information regarding groundwater monitoring data,
structural stability, emergency action plans, fugitive dust
control plans, certifications regarding closure, and
information regarding corrective action remedies available to
the public.
We heard from a number of witnesses at our last hearing
that a key problem with the self-implementing final rule was
that EPA was forced to eliminate certain flexibility--in
particular with respect to groundwater monitoring and
corrective action--due to the lack of state oversight. Because
the requirements will be implemented through state permit
programs, the draft legislation allows the implementing agency
on a site-specific basis to provide flexibility for groundwater
monitoring or corrective action taking into account risk-based
factors.
At our last hearing we also heard about a few other
provisions in the final rule that were problematic including:
the retroactive application of the location or siting
restrictions; the requirement that unlined impoundments that
exceed a groundwater protection standard close with no
opportunity to remedy the problem through corrective action;
and that surface impoundments that miss a deadline to assess
structural stability must stop operating and close. Forced
closure of impoundments with no analysis of whether the
impoundment is, or can be, operated safely may be appropriate
under a self-implementing rule with no regulatory involvement--
but the goal of the draft legislation and state permit programs
is to ensure that surface impoundments are operated safely and
if they are not--then they will be corrected or closed.
As we work on this draft legislation we acknowledge the
amount of time and effort that EPA put into drafting a final
rule that is fully protective of human health and the
environment and because actions speak louder than words, we did
this by directly incorporating the exact provisions and the
policy of the final rule into the discussion draft. That being
said, we still believe that a legislative solution is the best
approach to dealing with the regulation of coal ash because of
the significant limitations of the rule.
We look forward to hearing from all of our witnesses and
hope Mr. Stanislaus will be able to provide some helpful
comments on the discussion draft next week. In particular, ECOS
and ASTSWMO since they will be tasked with creating permit
programs that meet the minimum federal criteria set out in the
legislation.
I would like to again thank the Administration for all of
the cooperation we have received on this issue. EPA has been
extremely constructive and helpful during the last Congress and
recently working through the issues with the final rule and the
discussion draft. I would also like to specifically thank ECOS
and ASTSWMO for their continued participation and invaluable
input on the mechanics of implementation. Last, I would like to
express my appreciation to Mr. McKinley for his longstanding
leadership on this issue as we continue the process of trying
to figure out how to effectively regulate coal ash.

Mr. Shimkus. With that I yield 5 minutes to the gentleman
from New York, Mr. Tonko.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TONKO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good morning. I thank
the members of our witness panel for participating in today's
hearing and for offering their thoughts on the discussion
draft, the Improving Coal Combustion Residuals Regulation Act.
In the 35 years since Congress passed the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act, or RCRA, the Environmental
Protection Agency has been studying this issue, and it has been
the subject of intense debate. During this same time
communities and many states have experienced problems from
inadequate handling and disposal of coal ash. It is long past
time to resolve these issues and indeed move forward.
Earlier this year we heard from the agency and from other
stakeholders about EPA's final rule on the disposal of coal
ash. This rule has taken many years and is the result of an
extensive public process. The rule represents a compromise
amongst the stakeholders in this issue, and so it is not
surprising that some groups are unhappy with certain provisions
of the rule. But I continue to believe the rule should move
forward. I realize that some of our witnesses today prefer the
approach taken by this draft legislation. At this point,
however, I do not see the need for legislation. There is a need
for consistent, fair, and rigorous oversight of the rule's
implementation. If the rule does not result in appropriate coal
ash disposal or if it results in conflicts between state and
Federal authorities or it leads to an excess of litigation, it
can be revised or Congress can pass legislation to correct any
problems that are identified.
At this point any problems with the rule are speculative,
but the problems of coal ash disposal across the country are
not. Spills, windborne ash, and groundwater contamination have
caused serious health and environmental problems and continue
to require expensive clean-up efforts. Properties and
businesses have been severely damaged. This situation should
not be allowed to continue.
The EPA finally has taken appropriate action under the law.
We should now monitor the rule's implementation and do that
very carefully.
Again, I thank the witnesses for taking time to appear
before the subcommittee this morning, and with that, Mr. Chair,
I thank you and yield back the remainder of my time. Is there
anyone from the panel that would like to use about 2 minutes I
think we have left? Anyone? If not, I yield back my time.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from West Virginia,
Mr. McKinley, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DAVID B. MCKINLEY, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WEST VIRGINIA

Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As you have heard
for 35 years, Congress has been wrestling with how to handle
fly ash. For 35 years. After countless hearings, meetings,
amendments, and legislation in the past, we come here with a
draft piece of legislation, crafted with the help of the state
Environmental and Solid Waste officials, committee staff, and
with the input of the EPA.
The regulation may have been finalized in December, but it
provided no certainty to those 316,000 hardworking Americans
who recycle fly ash. This rule did not provide closure on a
number of issues. It is simply not acceptable to the status
quo.
However, what is accepted or what is acceptable is the
legislation before us, this draft piece, ensures that the
states have the flexibility they need to make the program work
and are able to complete it within a reasonable timeframe. This
draft legislation guarantees that every state must, not may,
must have a Coal Ash Permit Program, and it must contain the
minimum Federal standards set out under the finalized rule.
Bottom line, this legislation provides certainty while the
December ruling left the industry still scratching their heads.
It would be responsible for this committee to continue to
promote and push this draft legislation and work with all the
stakeholders and the interest groups around this country to
bring closure to this issue and end 35 years of unknown.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman would yield back, but before he
does, I would look to the Republican side to see if anybody
would like to use the remaining time. Seeing none, even on my
colleagues on the Democrat side, seeing none, the gentleman
yields back his time.
I want to make sure that you all can hear out there, not
just folks on the panel but the folks who are sitting in the
back because usually there are some speakers. The feed is
working, but the--I don't think the speakers are working. They
are working on it. OK.
So for the panel if you can use your military voice down
from the diaphragm, use your military voice down from the
diaphragm. Before we go to the panel I have neglected to
recognize the ranking member of the full committee. That is a
major faux pas. Congressman Pallone from New Jersey is
recognized for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Shimkus.
This is the second hearing this Congress on the important
topic of coal ash. In January this subcommittee heard from EPA
and stakeholders about the agency's new final rule. After years
of debate at the agency and in Congress over the proper
regulation of coal ash, the agency had reached a verdict. EPA's
final rule reflects a tremendous effort, and it will for the
first time provide the framework for addressing this serious
environmental problem. This rule is the product of a robust
public process, including field hearings and several rounds of
public comment, and it reflects the input of over 450,000
consumers, including states, industry groups, environmental
groups, and individual concerned citizens.
In the end EPA finalized a rule that addressed almost all
the concerns this subcommittee has heard about for years. Those
in the coal ash recycling industry who make things like
concrete and wallboard submitting, substituting coal ash for
virgin material, had sought a non-hazardous rule under Subtitle
D of RCRA, and that is what they got. Those in the electric
utility industry wanted a Subtitle D rule that would not
require them to retrofit their existing impoundments with
liners, and that is what they got. And states wanted a
mechanism to set up their own programs to implement Federal
standards and to have EPA approve them, and that is what they
got. The only stakeholders who really did not get what they
sought in this rule were the environmental and public health
advocates who wanted a stronger Subtitle C rule with the
requirement that the giant unlined pits currently receiving
this dangerous waste to be retrofitted to protect groundwater.
Other than those calls to strengthen the rule, the reaction
to EPA's rule has been positive. The agency testified that they
have every confidence in the rule and do not see a need for
legislation, and members on both sides of the aisle expressed
their support.
So I am surprised that we find ourselves here today
considering legislation that would replace that rule before it
has taken affect and undermine the robust public process that
went into it. I am even more surprised that the stakeholders
who are here today expressing support for legislation are the
same ones whose concerns have been addressed in the rule. I
don't see a need for legislation at this time. Instead I think
EPA and the states should be allowed to move forward and
implement the final rule subject to this Committee's oversight.
I do want to say a few words about the specific legislation
that is the subject of today's hearing. This new proposal
retains the problems of past proposals which have been
discussed extensively in this subcommittee. It would create a
new model of delegation to states with a sharply-curtailed role
for EPA. It does not include a legal standard of protection, a
substantive EPA role in reviewing state programs, or EPA
backstop enforcement authority. The new proposal presents
additional concerns as well because necessary health
protections included in EPA's final rule are left to state
discretion or left out entirely. Groundwater monitoring
protection, closure requirements, clean-up requirements all
could be weaker under this bill than under the final rule. If
anything, we should be strengthening the protections of the
final rule and not weakening them.
So I think this legislation is unnecessary and dangerous
for public health and the environment. I applaud EPA for their
hard work on the coal ash final rule, and I hope the
subcommittee can move forward in an oversight role as
implementation begins.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. Now the
Chair will recognize our panelists one at a time with an
introduction and your opening statement. Your full statement is
submitted for the record.
So first I would like to welcome and recognize David
Paylor, Director of the Virginia Department of Environmental
Quality, on behalf of the Environmental Council of the States.
Sir, welcome, and you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF DAVID PAYLOR, DIRECTOR, VIRGINIA DEPARTMENT OF
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY; MICHAEL FORBECK, ENVIRONMENTAL PROGRAM
MANAGER, PENNSYLVANIA DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL, BUREAU OF
WASTE MANAGEMENT; JAMES ROEWER, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, UTILITIES
SOLID WASTE ACTIVITIES GROUP; AND LISA EVANS, SENIOR
ADMINISTRATIVE COUNSEL, EARTHJUSTICE

STATEMENT OF DAVID PAYLOR

Mr. Paylor. Thank you, Chairman Shimkus, Ranking Member
Tonko, and members of the subcommittee. Good morning. My name
is David Paylor. I am the Director of the Virginia Department
of Environmental Quality, and I appreciate the opportunity to
share with you Virginia's views on the draft bill. I am also
representing the Environmental Council of the States, ECOS,
whose members are leaders of the state and territorial
environmental protection agencies.
Many state regulators have first-hand experience with the
devastating results of CCR impoundment failures. Breaches and
releases destroy property and contaminate natural resources.
ECOS has worked on the CCR rule issue for many years. ECOS'
resolution on CCR regulation was first passed in 2008, and ECOS
testified in April, 2013, in support of legislation to amend
RCRA to create a defensible and strong CCR program that could
be run by the states. After EPA signed a final CCR rule in
December, ECOS testified before this subcommittee supporting
the final rule's technical requirements but stating that
legislation to amend RCRA was still needed for several reasons.
The final rule creates a dual Federal and state regulatory
system that will be confusing and resource intensive, the final
rule's schedules would require states to achieve final Solid
Waste Management Plan amendments on an aggressive schedule
which could not be met by many states. the final rule's self-
implementing approach would make RCRA citizen suits the primary
enforcement vehicle for CCRs under The final rule's self-
implementing approach would make citizen suits the primary
enforcement vehicle, marginalizing the role of state
regulation, oversight, and enforcement and thus creating
uncertainty for the regulated community.
ECOS has reviewed the draft bill and find that it
positively addresses the concerns. The draft bill leverages and
codifies the extensive technical work in EPA's final rule. It
provides that states may adopt, implement, and enforce CCR
programs. The draft bill would give state environmental
agencies 24 months to certify their programs, with a potential
for an additional 12 months. This would provide most states
with existing CCR programs ample time to pursue the necessary
state legislative and rulemaking processes. For example, in
Virginia, our regulatory process can take 2 to 3 years.
The draft bill provides that the requests for certification
to EPA be fully described, that the states fully describe their
programs and how they meet Federal requirements. The draft bill
importantly provides that state programs can be more stringent
or broader in scope. For example, Virginia already has
authority under the Waste Management Act to require solid waste
permits for the operation of a coal ash management facility,
including activities related to post closure and corrective
action.
The draft bill contains an important provision that allows
states that already have existing programs to begin using it
right away. A recent survey of states indicated that 36 states,
including Virginia, have permitting programs for disposal
activities with 94 percent of those requiring groundwater
monitoring.
The draft bill contains an important requirement for states
to submit as part of their certifications a plan for
coordination among states in the event of a release that
crosses state lines. This type of upfront planning is relevant,
especially in Virginia, where we recently had a Dan River spill
that originated in North Carolina but impacted nearly 50 miles
of Virginia waterways.
The Federal bill provides that EPA will operate the CCR
Program for a state that cannot demonstrate a sufficient
program or declines to do so.
The draft bill includes robust requirements for industry
permit applications, provides for public information
availability, and state access to facilities. The bill
incorporates the new robust technical, siting, financial
assurance, run-on and run-off controls and recordkeeping and
structural integrity requirements. We value the flexibility the
draft bill adds that will allow states to identify alternative
points of compliance for monitoring, alternative groundwater
protection standards, remediation flexibility, and to allow
unlined impoundments to operate for a period of time providing
there are no groundwater threats and the structural integrity
of the berms is maintained.
The draft bill sets out a 3- to 4-year process for
compliance. It recognizes implementation realities and still
allows action in emergency situations. The legislation supports
beneficial uses of coal ash, such as in concrete, road bed
fill, wallboard, and other uses. Beneficial reuse of coal ash
is consistent with ECOS' longstanding resolution, which is
appended to my testimony.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member, and members of the
subcommittee, I thank you for the opportunity to present my
views and those of ECOS to you today, and I am happy to answer
any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Paylor follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FOMRAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much, sir.
Now I would like to introduce Mr. Michael Forbeck,
Environmental Program Manager for the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Bureau of Waste Management, on behalf of the
Association of state and Territorial Solid Waste Management
Officials, which is the hard to say, ASTSWMO.
Sir, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL FORBECK

Mr. Forbeck. I am President of the Association of state and
Territorial Solid Waste Management Officials, ASTSWMO, and I am
here today to testify on behalf of ASTSWMO.
ASTSWMO is an association representing the waste management
and remediation programs of the 50 states, five Territories and
the District of Columbia. Our membership includes state program
experts with individual responsibility for the regulation and
management of solid and hazardous wastes.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on the
discussion draft, ``Improving Coal Combustion Residuals
Regulation Act of 2015''. Overall, ASTSWMO believes the
discussion draft has successfully captured the essential parts
of the EPA rule on coal combustion residuals management that
are germane to the protection of the environment and public
health and has modified or added those areas that improve the
rule.
We also believe that this discussion draft has addressed
the main concerns that ASTSWMO expressed regarding EPA's final
rule on CCR in our testimony before this subcommittee on
January 22, 2015. While being in full agreement with issuance
of the final rule under Subtitle D of the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act, ASTSWMO's prior testimony noted state
implementation issues raised by the self-implementing construct
of RCRA Subtitle D, Part 257. The concerns we voiced are summed
up as follows. The rule's self-implementing requirements will
set up the situation of dual state and Federal regulatory
regime, even if the state requirements meet or exceed national
minimums. The use of EPA-approved state Solid Waste Management
Plans as a mechanism to deal with the issue of dual regulatory
authority will not fully alleviate dual implementation of state
and Federal standards, since the approved Solid Waste
Management Plan would not operate in lieu of the Federal
standards. The ability of states to establish regionally
appropriate standards, as allowed under RCRA Subtitle D, Part
258 for municipal solid waste landfills, is constrained by the
rule's self-implementing requirements.
ASTSWMO believes this discussion draft has addressed our
main concerns regarding EPA's final rule in the following three
ways.
First, it eliminates dual state and Federal regulatory
authority resulting from the self-implementing construct of
EPA's rule by giving states the authority to adopt and
implement a CCR permit program. Many states already have a very
successful permit program. For states that choose to adopt and
implement the permit program, it assures state primacy through
a single permit program provision that is enforceable by the
state. This results in a clear and consistent understanding of
the permitting and enforcement roles of the states. We also
agree with the additional level of review by EPA to determine
whether state permit programs are adequate to ensure compliance
with the criteria as described in the discussion draft.
Second, by directly giving states the authority to
implement a CCR role or program, the discussion draft
eliminates the uncertainty of state-only implementation the
Solid Waste Management Plan as the mechanism. The certification
process under the draft legislation could allow for expedited
implementation of the technical requirements.
Third, we appreciate that the draft legislation allows the
flexibility for states to have regionally appropriate state
standards for groundwater monitoring and corrective action.
In addition to the draft legislation addressing the
concerns expressed in our previous testimony, ASTSWMO is
pleased that the legislation requires financial assurance for
post-closure care of inactive surface impoundments to ensure
long-term compliance with environmental and public health
requirements. Financial assurance is an important component in
state waste programs, and ASTSWMO has supported the inclusion
of financial assurance as a key program element in a final EPA
CCR rule under Subtitle D.
We would like to offer to the subcommittee's consideration
one modification to the draft legislation at this time. Under
the Agency Authority for inspections we ask that the
subcommittee consider not limiting an implementing agency's
authority to enter a site for purposes of inspection to only
``at reasonable times.'' This could be construed to mean during
normal working hours. The timing of inspections should be at
the discretion of the state to allow for after-hour
inspections.
Thank you again for providing me the opportunity to testify
on this draft legislation, and I would be happy to answer any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Forbeck follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
The Chair now recognizes Jim Roewer, the Executive Director
of the Utilities Solid Waste Activities Group on behalf of
USWAG Edison Electric Institute, National Rural Electric
Cooperative Association, and the American Public Power
Association.
Thank you and recognize you for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JAMES ROEWER

Mr. Roewer. Chairman Shimkus, Ranking Member Tonko--excuse
me, he left--members of the subcommittee, good morning. I am
pleased to present the views of the utility industry; USWAG,
APPA, EEI, and NRECA on the ``Improving Coal Combustion
Residuals Regulation Act of 2015.''
When I testified at the Oversight Hearing before the
committee on EPA's CCR, I made clear that while we supported
EPA's decision to regulate coal ash as a non-hazardous waste,
there were significant flaws in the rule because the rule can't
be delegated to the states, it is self-implementing, and
regulated facilities must comply with the rules requirements
irrespective of whether it is adopted by the states.
Since state coal ash regulations cannot operate in lieu of
Federal regulations, we must comply with dual and potentially-
inconsistent Federal and state regs. This is unlike other
Federal environmental regulatory regimes, including EPA's
Subtitle C Hazardous Waste Program where Congress views the
states as key partners in implementing and enforcing Federal
regulation and expressly authorizes the states to adopt and
implement the Federal regime in lieu of EPA.
The rule's only compliance mechanism is for a state or
citizen group to bring suit in a Federal District Court, so an
excess of litigation is guaranteed. Legal disputes regarding
compliance can only be determined on a case-by-case basis by
different Federal District Courts across the country. Federal
Judges will be forced to make complex technical decisions
regarding compliance instead of regulatory agencies that have
the technical expertise and experience to better address those
issues.
Because of these fundamental flaws in the statutory
structure under which the rule was issued, legislation amending
RCRA is necessary for EPA's rule to be implemented in an
effective and practical manner. The discussion draft would do
this.
The bill would establish a permit program for
implementation of the regulations issued by EPA, eliminate the
problems associated with the self-implementing nature of the
rule. Under the bill, virtually all aspects of the rule would
be implemented solely through state CCR permit programs or by
EPA if the states do not adequately adopt and implement the
rule. This structure is similar to the manner in which Congress
previously amended RCRA to allow EPA's Subtitle D municipal
solid waste landfill rules to be implemented through state
permit programs.
The bill would also require coal ash permits to include
conditions not included in EPA's final rule, including
financial assurance requirements and would preserve the ability
of the states to regulate more stringently than the Federal
rule.
Authorizing the states to implement the rule through permit
programs would eliminate the problem of dual and inconsistent
Federal and state regulation. Equally important, having EPA's
rule implemented by a state Regulatory Agency eliminates the
compliance dilemma where our members and the public at large
are left to own their devices to determine what is required to
come into compliance. The utility industry will be investing
huge capital resources to comply with the rule. The bill will
provide the regulatory certainty for those investment decisions
since compliance will be specified by a regulatory agency and
spelled out in a permit.
The bill would establish a rational and efficient
enforcement scheme by enabling state Regulatory Agencies to
enforce the rules as opposed to having enforcement borne solely
on the back of citizen suits as it is under EPA's rule. EPA
currently has no role in administering or enforcing its rule.
The bill would increase EPA's authority by directing it to
review the adequacy of state permit programs, where to
implement those programs where the states choose not to, or the
state's program is inadequate.
In addition, and importantly, the bill does not limit in
any way the ability of a citizen group to bring enforcement
actions under RCRA's citizen suit provision. The bill
eliminates reliance on Federal District Courts for interpreting
and enforcing the rule, avoiding the specter of differing and
potentially inconsistent application of the rule between or
even within states.
EPA dropped from the final rule certain site-specific,
risk-based options for applying elements of the regulations
that were in its proposal, reasoning that those risk-based
decisions require regulatory oversight. Thus, state programs
that enable regulators to issue tailored, site-specific, risk-
based options for coal ask management are superseded by the
one-size-fits-all approach in EPA's rule.
The bill establishes regulatory agency oversight in
implementing the rule, and therefore, appropriately restores
the ability of the implementing agency to tailor aspects of the
rule to accommodate site-specific factors, consistent with the
approach of EPA's proposed rule as well as the Federal
Municipal Solid Waste Program.
For example, the proposed rule would have allowed a
facility to establish an alternative risk-based groundwater
protection standard. EPA removed that option precisely because
there was no regulatory oversight or approval regarding the
establishment by an owner and operator of that alternative
standard. The bill allows the permitting agency to establish,
where appropriate, an alternative risk-based groundwater
protection standard, the same option provided to permit writers
under EPA's municipal solid waste landfill rule.
I thank the subcommittee for the opportunity to present the
views of the utility industry on the discussion draft which we
believe will allow EPA's new coal ash rule to be implemented in
an effective and practical manner. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Roewer follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes Lisa Evans, Senior Administrative
Counsel, from EarthJustice.
You are recognized for 5 minutes. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF LISA EVANS

Ms. Evans. Thank you very much. Chairman Shimkus, Ranking
Member Tonko, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for
the opportunity today to discuss the bill offered by
Representative McKinley. I am Lisa Evans, Senior Administrative
Counsel for EarthJustice. I have had the privilege of
testifying previously before this subcommittee concerning the
serious harm caused by coal ash to our health, economy, and
environment. I have spoken about the hundreds of sites where
coal ash has harmed Americans nationwide by poisoning water,
air, and threatening the very existence of communities near
large coal ash dams. Today we stand at a crossroads.
In December, EPA's first-ever coal ash rule finally put the
Nation on the road to safer toxic waste disposal which will
help prevent water pollution, avoid catastrophic spills,
promote cleaner air, and encourage robust public engagement by
communities living near coal ash dumps. Yet the bill proposed
by Representative McKinley would run us off this road and drag
us into a dark and dangerous detour where almost none of the
protections of the new EPA rule would survive intact.
Worst of all, it is a one-way trip that permanently
deprives citizens of consistent nation-wide protection from the
second largest industrial waste strain in the country. Make no
mistake, this bill is an unwarranted and dangerous detour that
guts the new EPA rule and permanently removes critical public
health safeguards.
Let me be very specific. The requirements in Representative
McKinley's bill are not the same, not nearly the same, as the
requirements in the EPA rule. Today's bill eliminates many
requirements entirely, weakens others, and delays all.
The following are some examples. First, the bill will
eliminate the guarantee of public access to information
concerning contaminated sites and dangerous dams. Communities
will likely be unable to find out if there are toxic chemicals
in their water, spills in their neighborhood, or unstable dams
above their homes. Second, the bill will eliminate the rules
ban on storing and dumping coal ash directly in drinking water.
Unlike the EPA rule, there is no ban on operating a coal ash
pond directly in an aquifer. Ponds that are located there now,
and there are many, can continue to dump toxic waste and new
dumps can be built on top of drinking water sources.
Third, the bill will eliminate the rule's national standard
for drinking water protection and clean-ups. According to this
bill, a state can choose to allow more arsenic, more lead, more
mercury, more thallium in the groundwater and not be bound by
Federal health standards. Fourth, the bill will eliminate the
requirement to quickly close legacy ponds. The bill will likely
delay cleanup of legacy sites for years and allow contaminated
and abandoned ponds, like the Dan River Dam that burst last
February, to escape all safety requirements, including
inspections, for up to 7 years.
The bill also contains a loophole that could allow inactive
ponds to escape all closure requirements entirely. Fifth, the
bill will eliminate the polluter's responsibility to respond
and notify the public of toxic spills. Sixth, the bill will
eliminate the state's duty to require cleanup of such toxic
spills. According to the bill, the utility industry need not
cleanup spills if states don't want to require it.
Lastly, the bill will permanently establish an inconsistent
patchwork of state programs which need not meet any standard of
protection for health and the environment and which will cause
uncertainty nationwide.
Undoubtedly this bill will harm the health, economy, and
environment of communities near more than 1,000 coal ash
dumpsites. Yet last December the EPA bent over backwards to
satisfy the concerns of industry, recyclers, and states. It
delivered a rule that characterized coal ash as non-hazardous,
fails to banned continued use of unlined ponds, exempts
beneficial use, establishes extended and flexible timeframes
for compliance and closure, and regulates coal ash under the
weakest of the three options proposed in 2010.
In closing, I want to reiterate that I appreciate the
opportunity to address the subcommittee. However, there are
other voices that must be heard. Last week 143 individuals and
groups personally impacted by coal ash dumping sent a letter to
this subcommittee requesting the opportunity to speak. The
words of those actually harmed by toxic dumping are sorely
missing today. If impacted community members were here today,
citizens from Illinois, West Virginia, Pennsylvania, and
Missouri who live near leaking coal ash ponds, citizens from
North Carolina and Virginia who live along the Moapa
Reservation in Nevada and the Nevada, the Navajo Reservation in
New Mexico whose air is thick with ash, these citizens and many
others would ask this committee not to throw away this limited
coal ash rule for essentially no rule at all. They would ask
the committee not to delay and not to remove critical health
protections for their families and communities. Today I
respectfully echo their plea.
Thank you for your time, and I would be happy to answer any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Evans follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
I now recognize myself for the first round of questioning,
and I would just like to start, the intent was to take the rule
and codify it, and I think that is what we have been able to
do. It makes it easier to comply with and understandable when
it does create consistency across the country, and that was the
intent. We specifically took EPA language in the rule on, the
exact language on design requirements, post-closure, air
criteria, record keeping, run-off, run-on and run-off controls,
hydrologic and hydrologic capacity requirements, and
inspections. Those are aspects that we took the exact language
in the rule.
So, I just appreciate the work that we have done to try to
move in a direction where we are working with the EPA, take
their rule, and make it stronger, and that is really the
position of the majority of the subcommittee.
Mr. Paylor, does ECOS support the approach taken in this
draft legislation?
Mr. Paylor. Yes, I believe that ECOS does support it, and
it is for the reasons that you mentioned, that it takes the EPA
Federal rule, which we believe was a positive step forward, and
addresses some of those additional concerns like dual oversight
and financial assurance.
Mr. Shimkus. In your opinion does the draft legislation
address the implementation issues associated with the final
rule, including, as you just mentioned, dual regulation systems
and the enforcement only through citizen suits?
Mr. Paylor. Yes, I believe it does address those.
Mr. Shimkus. And that is part of the debate on this
legislation. The way the rule comes out is the only way you
really can get enforcement is through the Courts, and every
Federal District Court around this country, which are in the
hundreds, could then enforce a different standard than what a
national standard or a standard working through the states. Is
that your understanding, Mr. Paylor?
Mr. Paylor. I believe that this would create a uniform
standard across the country, and that is one of the strengths
that it provides. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. Forbeck, do you agree with that?
Mr. Forbeck. Yes, I do. I believe it eliminates the
confusion that the Solid Waste Management Plan had provided and
would provide a single point of determining----
Mr. Shimkus. So ASTSWMO supports this legislation?
Mr. Forbeck. We do support. We are very pleased that it
incorporates the EPA rule and also added the financial
assurances that we requested and has a single permit.
Mr. Shimkus. Let me just follow up. Do you read the
legislation as allowing states the ability to pick and choose
which requirements to include in the state Permit Program?
Mr. Forbeck. No, I do not. There are minimum standards or
permit requirements that the states would----
Mr. Shimkus. And the minimum of standards as you evaluate
this draft legislation comes from where?
Mr. Forbeck. From the EPA rule. From the legislation.
Mr. Shimkus. So just for the record, the minimum standards
you interpret as coming from where?
Mr. Forbeck. Well, it comes from the, originally from the
EPA rule as it was incorporated.
Mr. Shimkus. Great. Thank you. Mr. Roewer, the legislation
incorporates requirements of the final rule as minimum
requirements for state Permit Programs. Many of the
requirements are incorporated directly with no revisions as I
read earlier. There are, however, a few places where the
legislation allows the implementing agency to tailor the
requirements based on onsite specific risk-based decisions, in
particular with respect to groundwater monitoring and
corrective action. Can you explain why this is important?
Mr. Roewer. Yes. Thank you. EPA recognizes the legitimacy
of tailoring those regulations. There is extensive discussion
of that fact in the preamble but then backed away from that
recognizing there was no Federal or no regulatory agency
oversight of that process. The legislation would allow the
state Regulatory Agencies to tailor the regulations to address
site-specific concerns associated with coal ash management.
Mr. Shimkus. What could be different?
Mr. Roewer. Well, one of the things would be a groundwater
protection standard for instance. EPA would default to the
background of the groundwater protection standard under their
self-implementing rule. Where there is another state or Federal
health-based standard, the state Regulatory Agency can apply
that in lieu, if there is no MCL, to establish an alternative
groundwater protection standard. Not leaving, EPA couldn't
leave that to the owner and operator. That does need regulatory
agency oversight, and the bill appropriately sets up a
mechanism for the states to take that approach.
Mr. Shimkus. Great. My time is close to expiring. Thank you
very much, and I recognize Mr. Tonko for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
For far too long communities have been subject to the
serious risks associated with inadequate coal ash disposal.
Coal ash releases have polluted our air and water supplies, and
structural failures have devastated communities and resulted in
very expensive and very complicated clean-up efforts.
EPA's final rule will go a long way, I believe, to address
these concerns. This bill up here is to reverse this course,
eliminating some of EPA's minimum requirements and weakening or
delaying others.
Ms. Evans, how did the bill's location requirements measure
up to those in the final rule, and if they are not the same,
why is that difference important?
Ms. Evans. Thank you, Representative Tonko. The location
standards differ radically from the location standards in the
EPA rule. One of the most important restrictions is the
placement, the prohibition against the placement of ash within
5 feet of the groundwater table. In other words, you can't
place ash any longer within 5 feet of a potential drinking
water source. The proposed legislation does not incorporate
that location standard. So what you have is--you do not have
the prohibition of ponds that are currently located in a
drinking water aquifer. They will not have to close. That is a
radical change in the requirements because we know for sure
that there are many ponds that are currently in contact with a
groundwater.
The bill also does not incorporate restrictions for
wetlands, for seismic areas, and for fault areas.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, and the bill differs from the EPA
rule's closure requirements for disposal units that don't meet
important criteria like liner designs, structural integrity, or
location restrictions. The bill keeps these facilities open,
allowing deficient structures to continue to receive waste for
years.
Ms. Evans, how do the closure requirements of the bill
compare to those in the EPA rule?
Ms. Evans. The closure requirements in the bill are much
more lenient and will allow ponds that are contaminating
groundwater to continue to operate and continue to accept waste
for 8.5 years in the case of an unlined surface impoundment.
And this, of course, endangers those communities near those
impoundments that are reliant on drinking groundwater. EPA has
identified unlined ponds as being the most dangerous way to
dispose of waste, and when you allow unlined ponds that are
leaking above a health standard into groundwater to continue to
operate for 8.5 years, that certainly is not the same
requirements as you had in the EPA rule. The EPA rule would
require the ponds to cease accepting waste within 6 months and
close.
Mr. Tonko. And so the requirements under EPA's rule as
indicated will take effect much more quickly than those under
the bill?
Ms. Evans. Absolutely. Communities are looking forward to
the application of the requirements as early as September. Many
requirements are in effect 6 months from the date of
publication. If that is at the end of this month, we are going
to see relief for contaminated air quality from dust, we are
going to see public information posted on utility Web sites, we
will see the initiation of inspection at high and significant
hazard ponds on a weekly basis and a monthly basis. So
communities will get immediate relief from the EPA rule, and
under the bill this relief is going to be delayed at least 2 to
3 years and probably in most cases much longer.
Mr. Tonko. And the requirement that, as you indicate,
facilities can post operational and compliance data on a
publicly-available internet site without exception, this both
incentivizes industry compliance up front and empowers local
citizens with information they need to keep an eye on what is
happening in their communities. How important are these public
disclosure provisions in EPA's rule?
Ms. Evans. The public disclosure provisions are critical to
EPA's rule, and EPA rule is explicit as to what has to be
posted. The difference in the bill is that there are general
public participation or public notice provisions, but it gives
states discretion on how they require that information to be
made public. Currently information in many states is made
public, but it is at state agencies where citizens at great
difficulty and great expense must request a file review, often
wait a substantial amount of time, and spend a significant
amount of money obtaining that data. So often this data is in
the real world not available to citizens, but actual
groundwater monitoring data, dust control plans, inspections,
assessments of structural stability, all those would be posted
according to the EPA rule in a publicly-accessible Web site
free of charge to all communities impacted by the dumpsites in
their communities.
Mr. Tonko. I have exhausted my time, so I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back time.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Mississippi,
Mr. Harper, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to each of you
for being here.
Mr. Paylor, the draft legislation directly incorporates the
technical requirements in EPA's final coal ash rule and
establishes a baseline for coal ash management across the
country. Do you believe that the minimum requirements set forth
in the legislation will ensure that states develop effective
and environmentally-protected permit programs for coal ash
management, and if so, why?
Mr. Paylor. We do believe that it would provide a Federal
baseline and then states would also be able to go beyond that
with their own site-specific needs as well.
Mr. Harper. The bill contains a provision requiring states
to develop plans for coordination among states in the event of
a release that goes across state lines. Why is that important?
Mr. Paylor. Well, it is important to Virginians because we
recently this year had an experience where there was a release
in North Carolina. The majority of the stream impact was in
Virginia, and so the ability for states to have some upfront
planning and coordination would just streamline the process
should we have another unfortunate incident like that.
Mr. Shimkus. Would the gentleman yield on that?
Mr. Harper. Yes, I will yield.
Mr. Shimkus. Is that in the current EPA rule?
Mr. Paylor. Not to my knowledge.
Mr. Shimkus. Does anyone know? I don't think it is. Thank
you. I yield back.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Paylor, your written testimony notes that the draft
bill includes the new robust technical siting, financial
assurance, run-on and run-off controls, record keeping, and
structural integrity requirements published by EPA in the final
CCR rule and that EPA did a very good job developing the
technical requirements of the final CCR rule. Your written
testimony also states that you value the flexibility the draft
bill adds. Can you explain why the added flexibility is a good
thing?
Mr. Paylor. The added flexibility is important primarily
because of being able to deal with site-specific issues,
especially when you are looking at groundwater contamination,
issues of groundwater flow, and nearby receptors and everything
are very important, allows you to tailor your response to the
site rather than a one-size-fits-all approach.
Mr. Harper. OK, and your written testimony also states that
the draft legislation provides a Federal backstop. Would you
please explain to us what that means?
Mr. Paylor. Well, the Federal backstop means that there is
enforcement authority at the Federal level should the state not
meet those standards, and so, therefore, you have got the state
authority but if that fails, the Federal Government can come in
and take action.
Mr. Harper. Why is it important that the draft legislation
allows for the pre-approval of a state Permitting Program?
Mr. Paylor. Well, a state Permitting Program provides
certainty, it provides the ability to have site-specific
requirements on that particular facility, and it provides more
clear enforceability.
Mr. Harper. OK. Thank you very much. Mr. Forbeck, states
have previously demonstrated the ability to implement permit
programs very similar to coal ash. So is EPA approval necessary
before states begin implementing Coal Ash Permit Programs, and
wouldn't EPA program approval unnecessarily delay
implementation of Coal Ash Permit Programs?
Mr. Forbeck. I think the certification program that is
within this draft would actually expedite implementation of
these requirements of the rule. In states that have proven
programs, proven permit programs can continue them with CCRs.
In Pennsylvania we have a very successful program which we have
done for many, many years.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, and I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
McNerney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank my
colleague for his efforts on this issue.
I believe I heard two concerns consistently from the first
three witnesses. One of them was that the main enforcement
mechanism of citizen lawsuits and that that would bring
uncertainty and so on, and the other one, and I am a little
confused about this one, is that it would establish
inconsistent standards across states while at the same time
giving states flexibility, which seemed to be something that,
like you are shaking your head there, Mr. Roewer. Did you
disagree?
Mr. Roewer. The inconsistent application of the rule,
Congressman, is due to the interpretation of the rule by the
Federal District Court Judges, not inconsistent as per
application and enforcement by the state Regulatory Agencies.
At least in my testimony the concern for a potential patchwork
of interpretation stems from the self-implementing citizen suit
enforcement structure of EPA's rule, not of the legislation.
The legislation solves that problem.
Mr. McNerney. How does it solve it?
Mr. Roewer. By having the Federal standards prescribed in
the rule, that are EPA's rule, implemented by the state
Regulatory Agencies. There is a Federal floor under which the
states cannot drop.
Mr. McNerney. Well, my understanding is that there is a
lack of a standard of protection in the proposed legislation.
Would you address that, Ms. Evans?
Ms. Evans. Yes. This bill, like the other bills proposed by
Representative McKinley, lacks a protective standard of
protection, and this is pointed out numerous times by CRS. What
that means is that there really is no Federal floor that Mr.
Roewer is describing. States are free to interpret the terms
that are not defined. They can define their own terms, and they
can run their programs without oversight that has a standard of
protection of human health and the environment. The standard
protection of human health and the environment is a watch word
of RCRA. It applies in all of RCRA's programs except if this
bill passes it won't be applied to coal ash, and this is a very
dangerous omission because EPA essentially will have very
narrow oversight as to be completely ineffective because if an
agency can't look at a state program and say these programs
don't protect human health and the environment, therefore, this
is a deficient program, their oversight will be minimized and
essentially this is exactly what the bill says.
If I could talk to the dual enforcement because that
argument is really nonsense. Under RCRA, the RCRA Citizen Suit
Provision, either states or citizens, when, following a citizen
suit are in Federal Court, they are in Federal Court if it is a
hazardous waste violation, they are in Federal Court if it is a
municipal solid waste violation. So RCRA has always operated
like this, that you have Federal Courts interpreting state law.
So the problem that is raised by USWAG and the states is really
a problem, that it is really something that hasn't been a
problem for all the decades that RCRA has been, RCRA programs
have been in effect for decades.
Mr. McNerney. So are you concerned about the citizens
lawsuits being the main enforcement mechanism?
Ms. Evans. I am not. Citizen lawsuits include the state
lawsuits. So it is not, when one says citizen lawsuits, what
that means is citizens or the states are free to enforce, under
the EPA rule, are free to enforce the EPA rule. States can go
in and enforce those provisions as well. So any citizen suit
that is filed, it is required that there be 60 days' notice to
the state. If the state wants to be the main implementing
agency and wants to interpret its own regulation and enforce
its own regulation, it is 100 percent free to do that. A
citizen can't slip in with a lawsuit. They have to give 60
days, and if the state wants to maintain, be the primary
enforcing agency and maintain 100 percent control over the
program, a state can bring that enforcement action, can enter a
consent decree, and there will not be a citizen lawsuit by a
citizen group.
Mr. McNerney. OK. I don't know if you will have enough time
to answer this, but one of the things that you said concerned
me was that citizens wouldn't have the ability to determine the
quality of the water that might have been contaminated, and
that, how could the bill prevent that from happening?
Ms. Evans. Well, the bill doesn't make mandatory
groundwater monitoring data. So what that means is a community
that is on wells next to a coal ash pond or landfill would not
necessarily under the bill have access to the groundwater
monitoring data. So they couldn't go on a Web site and find out
what are the levels of arsenic, chromium, lead.
Mr. McNerney. But they could do it themselves? They could
do the testing themselves or have a laboratory do it if it is
in the paperwork?
Ms. Evans. Well, that is, well, they wouldn't have access
to the industry wells. They could test their own well, but
some, the purpose of RCRA is to prevent harm to health and the
environment. So you want to find out what is in those industry
wells, which might be ``a mile from your drinking water well''
before it gets to your well and your family.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired.
Before I move to Mr. Murphy, Ms. Evans, you mentioned the
CRS report. If you have one on this bill, we would like to see
it. I think you are referring to previous bills of past
Congresses. There is no CRS report on this bill right now, and
there would be public disclosure through the state, and with
that I yield 5 minutes to Mr. Murphy.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the panel
being here. It is a long-term issue we have to deal with
directly.
I do want to deal with some comments that, Ms. Evans, you
made and with regard to the bill fails to establish a
protective standard. I didn't hear from other panelists if they
agree with that. Mr. Roewer, do you agree with that?
Mr. Roewer. The bill takes EPA's 257 regulations, their
coal ash rule, and builds a CCR Permit Program based on those
regulations. Those regulations, the 257 regulations, are
developed by EPA with that, to meet that standard of care, so
we believe that the bill does provide that Federal standard of
care in a Federal floor.
Mr. Murphy. Mr. Forbeck, do you agree that the bill fails
to establish a protective standard, or do you disagree?
Mr. Forbeck. I disagree. I believe it does establish a
protective standard.
Mr. Murphy. Mr. Paylor?
Mr. Paylor. I would agree with those responses as well.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. I mean, along those lines I look
upon it that state legislators and regulators have the
authority to do some things. Ms. Evans, one of the things you
are raising question with is it may get in the way of people
being able to bring up Court cases, interfere with that. Am I
understanding you correctly there?
Ms. Evans. If I understand your question, the state and
citizens stand in the same legal place in that if an industry
under the CCR rule is violating any of those requirements, it
can bring a suit to enforce the EPA rule. There is nothing in
the EPA rule that would stop states from fully adopting, fully
enforcing that rule, and as one of, I think it was the
gentleman from ECOS, has said that states are ready to do this
within 2 or 3 years.
Mr. Murphy. OK. Mr. Forbeck, so based on your experience
will this draft legislation being discussed today result in a
more effective implementation of requirements of the final rule
than the self-implementing program, and why or why not?
Mr. Forbeck. I believe as I said in the testimony, it would
be more effective, one, as a single permit program we have the
state that will have the jurisdiction and the enforcement
capabilities of enforcing this rule. In addition, the
uncertainty of the Solid Waste Management Plan as a mechanism
for implementation is no longer there. We have this permit
program that would be in effect and----
Mr. Murphy. Pennsylvania has a very robust coal ash
program. Am I correct?
Mr. Forbeck. That is correct.
Mr. Murphy. And would you have to develop any new
requirements or make changes to existing requirements based
upon this draft legislation?
Mr. Forbeck. We believe it would be very minimum
requirements that we would have to change. We have been
regulating coal ash for a number of years. We had liners
requirements since the early '90s and groundwater requirements
since the '90s. So I think for Pennsylvania it would not be
very long.
Mr. Murphy. So let me talk about that issue with the liner
requirements. I want to make sure we have enough flexibility
that as new science is developing, new liners, et cetera, that
we don't limit anything here. So, and I think that is where
this bill tries to reflect, but would you support the inclusion
of a provision to allow more latitude in liner design to
capture the flexibility of science develops, as technology
develops than is already provided by state law, so long as it
is protective of the EPA devised standard?
Mr. Forbeck. If it is as protective, and right, as
technology improves----
Mr. Murphy. Yes.
Mr. Forbeck [continuing]. There could be even better
methods that could be more protective than the liner systems
that we have now. So we would support that.
Mr. Murphy. Ms. Evans, you said something that called my
attention to. You talked about issues with regard to dams. I
guess coal ash dams or piles or whatever, and what do you
consider the risk that this bill does not address with regard
to dams?
Ms. Evans. Well, with regard to dams there are a few. One
of them is the location restrictions which don't apply to dams
in wetlands, in fault areas, in seismic areas, and the dams
that are sitting in the aquifer. Further, it is the delay. This
rule wouldn't--the requirements would be at the earliest in
effect 2 to 3 years, and so the inspections of high-hazard dams
would not occur until 2 or 3 years where it would immediately
be applicable. And the other thing is, we keep talking about
whether this bill is the same as the EPA rule, and I would urge
the committee members to look at my testimony and the long list
of definitions that can be defined by a state without a
protective standard and which could differ from EPA's
definitions, and definitions define the applicability, the
scope, the stringency of a rule. So let us take dams. The----
Mr. Murphy. I am out of time here.
Ms. Evans. Oh. Can I just say that the states can define
hazard potential dams differently, well, as they wish because
that is not a definition in the bill, so they could exempt some
highly-significant hazard dams from those categories, and
thereby, those more stringent requirements for those more
dangerous dams would not be applicable.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Murphy. Could I just ask that we could ask for the
record the other panelists be able to respond to that question,
too?
Mr. Shimkus. Without objection----
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. So ordered.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Latta, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks very much
for our panel for being here. It is very informative as always.
If I could go back, Mr. Roewer, if I could ask you because
the question that Mr. Murphy had just brought up pretty much,
the basic principle in this bill is that we are taking EPA's
rule and giving more flexibility to states, providing the same
protections to the environment and particularly the drinking
water resources in ways other than those narrowly approved by
the EPA. And, again, following up, Mr. Forbeck just answered
Mr. Murphy. Would you support the minor changes to the bill
that would meet the basic principle giving that flexibility to
provide the same environmental protection if states have
regulations to provide equivalent protection in different ways?
Mr. Roewer. USWAG has always supported regulation by the
states of coal ash as a non-hazardous waste with a performance-
based approach, protecting the environment, protecting the
groundwater resource. So that would be consistent with that
view as long as it is protective of the groundwater resource.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much.
Mr. Paylor, if I could ask, I saw in your testimony that 36
states have permitting for the disposal activities with 94
percent of those requiring groundwater monitoring. Do you
believe that most states want to implement their own permit
program rather than have the EPA do it for them?
Mr. Paylor. In general, states do prefer to have oversight.
It gives more a more direct connection to the facility itself
that is being regulated. We support the Federal floor that
gives consistency across states, and I think most states would
very much prefer to implement their own permitting program.
Mr. Latta. Thank you, and Mr. Forbeck, what do you see as
the role of states in protecting the environment, and how does
the draft legislation accomplish that goal?
Mr. Forbeck. I think the states are the first line of
defense and the ones that are closer to the issues, and they
are the ones that should be enforcing the rule, and I think the
capability of the proposed legislation will allow states to do
that.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. Mr. Paylor, in your opinion will the
draft legislation require every state to have a permit program
that contains the minimum Federal requirements?
Mr. Paylor. It does not require every state to do that,
however, if the state does not have rules that meet the Federal
standard or opts out on their own, then the Federal Government
would step in and enforce those rules.
Mr. Latta. If I could just follow up, again, Mr. Paylor, in
your written testimony you note that the draft legislation lays
out a 3- to 4-year process for compliance by regulated
facilities, but you note that the bill recognizes
implementation realities and still allows for action in
emergency situations. Could you explain that?
Mr. Paylor. Each impoundment is going to have its own site-
specific concerns and just the logistics of identifying what it
takes to comply, and implementing that is going to take some
time, plus it is going to take a couple of years for the states
to get their rules in place. And so that just recognizes the
realities of the logistics to need to do that and also allows
for, if, in fact, you do have an emergency situation, you move
immediately.
Mr. Latta. OK. Thank you, and Mr. Roewer, I know my time is
running short here, but the rule requires retroactive
application of the location restrictions to existing surface
impoundments. Can you walk me through why this is important?
Mr. Roewer. We believe it is unfair to apply retroactively
location restrictions. We can't move these impoundments. They
are where they are. There are other provisions in the
legislation that would address the concerns that are at the
core of those location restrictions. We heard there is no
prohibition of putting ash directly into an aquifer. The bill
contains groundwater protection standards, groundwater
monitoring requirements. So the goal of the location
restrictions to keep contaminants out of the aquifer are met
through other aspects of the legislation, and indeed, the
inspections, the safety assessments will all address those same
concerns that are being addressed through the location
restrictions. Other elements in the bill do that.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, my time has expired,
and I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from West Virginia,
Mr. McKinley, the author of the legislation, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is a draft
legislation, draft piece. We are going to be working with this,
and we are going to make some other modifications, I am sure,
to it. It is going to continue to evolve in this process. It
has to.
But I am just curious, a lot of the comments--well, the
majority of the comments that have been made to date have all
been about location, drinking water, and the like. But we
haven't talked about the recycling, and so let us put this all
in context again.
For the crowd that may or may not understand a lot of this
issue, we generate about 150 million tons of fly ash annually,
but we recycle 40 percent of that. So all of this last hour-
and-a-half or 2 hours we have been talking about is the water.
What about the recycling provision? What are we going to do,
because the preamble to the rule is troubling to me, and it
should be troubling to everyone because the preamble says this
rule defers a final determination until additional information
is available. That means that it could rule back to a C. They
are D now. It could be a C in the future. It could be 2 weeks
from now, it could be a year from now or 2 years from now. What
we are trying to do is codify that provision so that we remove
the uncertainty for the recyclers. Three-hundred and 16
thousand jobs are at risk. If they make that flip that they
have just--in the rule and because it is an executive rule they
can do another executive rule or through the EPA rule to say
that it is a hazardous material, what happens to the recyclable
material? 316,000 jobs could be at risk. Who is going to put in
their house if--and remember, the science has already been
determined it is not a hazardous material. This was done in
1993, and the year 2000. It said it is not a hazardous
material. It wasn't until this Administration said I don't care
what the science says, I want to treat it as a hazardous
material, and as a result we got uncertainty. I don't think any
of us would put drywall in our house or concrete in our floors
or in our concrete block or in our bricks if we thought it was
a hazardous material. So, therefore, the EPA did their study
and came back two times and said it is unhazardous. I am
concerned about this portion, the 40 percent. Certainly we are
concerned about the other 60 percent when it goes to a
landfill, and we will address that, and there is a lot of
provisions that have been in there, but let us make sure we
have some debate here today about the 40 percent that we are
trying to recycle.
So go back if we could get our panel, is that a concern,
that they could switch back because they say in the preamble
they defer a final determination until further information is
available? Is that a reasonable determination? Does that cause
certainty?
Mr. Paylor?
Mr. Paylor. Thank you. We support beneficial reuse, which
by definition tells you we think it is a Subtitle D material.
Whether that creates uncertainty is a great question, but the
ECOS states have uniformly supported beneficial reuse of this
material.
Mr. McKinley. Mr. Forbeck, do you think it should be
recycled?
Mr. Forbeck. Absolutely and----
Mr. McKinley. Would you recycle it if it were hazardous
material?
Mr. Forbeck. It would be a concern if it was a hazardous
material.
Mr. McKinley. Concern.
Mr. Forbeck. ASTSWMO has supported the beneficial use, and
that has been a concern in our past documentation of this being
labeled as a hazardous waste.
Mr. McKinley. OK. Mr. Roewer? Again, my question is is this
issue of uncertainty by virtue of them being able to switch
back to a C from a D?
Mr. Roewer. Congressman, the language in the preamble is
very troubling.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you.
Mr. Roewer. The legislation would bring regulatory
certainty in this manner. Congress would be amending the
statute to establish a permit program to regulate, under which
the states would be regulating CCRs under Subtitle D, the non-
hazardous waste title of RCRA. That would provide the
certainty. EPA certainly could revise those 257 criteria in the
future, but the regulatory program is within Subtitle D non-
hazardous waste program. It does bring the certainty that the
recycling market needs.
Mr. McKinley. OK. Ms. Evans, would you support recycling of
the fly ash?
Ms. Evans. Absolutely. Safe recycling of fly ash----
Mr. McKinley. I am sorry. I have had a hard time hearing
you all day today.
Ms. Evans. Oh, I am sorry.
Mr. McKinley. Much better.
Ms. Evans. I am sorry about that.
Mr. McKinley. Keep it in front of you.
Ms. Evans. We do support safe recycling of coal ash, and I
would say that----
Mr. McKinley. Do you think this preamble should be
tightened up a little bit, to codify, so that it is not set up
by the Administration or the EPA can just change that at their
whim?
Ms. Evans. Well, I have two responses to that. One is that
it is impossible to ``flip''. The EPA, if they were going to
make a change, it is a long process full of public
participation, proposed rules. You can't see EPA making a
unilateral decision without your involvement, the involvement
of industry and public interest groups. So it is impossible to
flip. Whether EPA could change its mind, which I don't think it
will in the future, you know, is certainly inherent in
environmental regulation.
But if we are talking about certainty, what I would point
to is the gross uncertainty that is created by the bill----
Mr. McKinley. I am sorry.
Ms. Evans [continuing]. To communities because there is no
Federal floor under the bill for safeguards.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you very much.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Indiana, Mr.
Bucshon, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Evans, do you believe we should burn coal to generate
electrical power?
Ms. Evans. I believe that there are safer sources of
energy.
Mr. Bucshon. That is a yes or no. Yes, you do believe we
should continue to use coal, or no, you think we should just
eliminate coal as a source of energy generation.
Ms. Evans. Well, I think it is a more nuance question. I
support the transition to safer and more environmentally-
friendly sources of energy.
Mr. Bucshon. OK. Fair enough. And do you believe, Ms.
Evans, that state regulatory agencies, because just through the
tone of this, it is a Federal versus state issue here, that do
you believe that state regulatory agencies and the citizens in
individual states care about the health and wellbeing of their
citizens at the state level?
Ms. Evans. I do. I believe state agencies care on the
whole.
Mr. Bucshon. Yes.
Ms. Evans. I think they do, but I think the record of state
agencies has not been good and----
Mr. Bucshon. And the record, in fairness, the record of the
Federal Government has been better?
Ms. Evans. The record of both agencies on coal ash has been
bad, but what we have seen in terms of----
Mr. Bucshon. Not specifically the coal ash, just this is a
generalized question about state, I mean, it is a Federalism
issue. Basically the question that I have is a state--because
the implication that states and their agencies and citizens in
their states have to have the Federal Government tell them
specifically what to do or they will violate, they will damage
the environment, and they won't properly regulate things at the
state level I think is something that has been implied, which I
disagree with.
So the question is, as you know, at the state level there
is legislative pressure, there is citizen pressure on the
governors, the state legislators, the regulators just as there
is at the Federal level. So the question I have basically is
why do you feel that, you know, that the Federal regulators
would necessarily do a better job than people are doing already
at the states like Pennsylvania has described, for example?
Ms. Evans. All right. Well, what we see, and I think the
proof is in the evidence on the ground, EPA identified 157
cases of contamination from coal ash sites, sites which are
wholly under the authority of state agencies. We have had three
major spills since 2008, two of which were horrendous in terms
of their damage and their cost, and it is lucky that no lives
were taken. That record indicates that state agencies are not
doing their job as far as coal ash is concerned.
Mr. Bucshon. Why would this be because----
Ms. Evans. And then----
Mr. Bucshon. Wait. I am reclaiming my time because I was a
healthcare provider before, you probably don't know that, and
there is no system in healthcare that we, when we provide
healthcare to patients that is perfect and every once in a
while if you understand statistics, things do occur. So I think
the overall implication that because there have been some
disastrous spills, in total agreement with you on that, that
that means that state regulators are not doing their job I
think is an unfair assessment and that--so the question is,
again, compared to this draft legislation, and what the EPA has
done, do you think that the Federal Government will be able to
eliminate all the spills and other problems that you have?
Because statistically, right, no matter what industry you are
in, there is nothing that is 100 percent.
Ms. Evans. Right, but the damage does indicate that on
their watch the state agencies have failed. If you compare the
municipal solid waste arena where the state agencies have an
authorized program that has a Federal floor and has a Federal
standard of protection, you are not seeing the same kind of
contaminated groundwater near municipal solid waste landfills
as you are near coal ash sites.
So, yes, when there is a Federally-approved program, when
it has got specific standards, and when states have to be
authorized to have standards as stringent as the Federal
standards----
Mr. Bucshon. OK.
Ms. Evans [continuing]. That can----
Mr. Bucshon. Reclaiming my time, Mr. Roewer, can you
respond to what she just said?
Mr. Roewer. Congressman, I think comparing a situation
prior to a Federal standard that would be implemented through
this legislation is inherently unfair. If you are comparing
previous performance by the state regulatory agencies when
there isn't a Federal regulation, which is what this bill would
do, just is not appropriate.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you. I yield back my time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Flores, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the panel for
joining us today.
Mr. Roewer, the draft legislation treats legacy sites in
the same way that the EPA did under the final rule, and that is
that inactive impoundments must either close within 3 years or
become subject to all of the requirements to an active disposal
unit. In your opinion is 3 years already enough time to close a
surfaced impoundment?
Mr. Roewer. Not in all cases. It is a rather complicated
process of dewatering the facility to ensure the structural
integrity of the unit to minimize impacts of contaminants to
groundwater, to ensure that you can place and then place a cap
on top of that unit. There may be climate and permitting
complications that would cause that period to be longer. EPA
recognized this in their rule when they established a 5-year
timeframe for closure of impoundments with the possibility of
extending that.
Mr. Flores. Yes. That building on that then the legislation
that Mr. McKinley drafted give the implementing agency the
authority to grant a 2-year extension. Why is that extension
there, sir? I think you already answered that. Sometimes you
can't----
Mr. Roewer. Absolutely, and, again, I will point to the
fact that the agency for active impoundments provided for a 5-
year timeframe with the ability to extend that closure time
period by up to 10 additional years. The closure process for
inactive units and active units can be quite similar. So we do
need additional time.
Mr. Flores. Let us go ahead and drill into that. I think
you had, you said something to the extent that you would have
to demonstrate, your agency would have to demonstrate why that
was needed. Give me an example of the demonstration.
Mr. Roewer. Again, it is not a guarantee that we get that
extension. It is something that the owner and operator would
have to petition the implementing agency to get. You would have
to demonstrate that the factors are beyond control, the
extension would be the same factors in EPA's rule to extend the
time period: climate, weather, permitting conditions,
permitting situations that require additional time.
Mr. Flores. OK.
Mr. Roewer. And you also have to demonstrate that the
facility you are closing isn't a threat for release or a spill.
Mr. Flores. Yes. In some cases, I mean, going to an
inactive facility and starting the process to seal it could be
more disruptive to the environment than to take your time and
do it the right way.
Mr. Roewer. We certainly need to make sure that all
facilities, whether they are active facilities we are capping
or active facilities are closed in a safe and environmentally-
sound manner.
Mr. Flores. OK, and Mr. Forbeck, to follow up on that, in
your opinion does the draft legislation deal with inactive
impoundments in the same manner as the final rule?
Mr. Forbeck. It does deal with it very similar, but it does
allow some extensions based on the conditions that Mr. Roewer
expressed.
Mr. Flores. And those are important conditions. I mean----
Mr. Forbeck. Yes, they are.
Mr. Flores [continuing]. Disrupting an inactive facility
prematurely without adequate planning could be more harmful for
the environment. Mr. Forbeck, did the final rule require
regulated entities to provide financial assurance for
corrective action, closure, and post-closure of coal ash
disposal units?
Mr. Forbeck. The EPA rule did not.
Mr. Flores. OK, and so doesn't this legislation actually go
further than the final rule by requiring financial assurance
not just for active disposal units but also for inactive
surface impoundments?
Mr. Forbeck. Yes, it does, and we feel that is a very
important component of this----
Mr. Flores. OK.
Mr. Forbeck [continuing]. Legislation.
Mr. Flores. Thank you for joining us today. I yield to any
other Republican member the balance of my time, or I will yield
back. OK. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Member of the full
committee, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to first ask Mr. Paylor, you mentioned earlier, I
wasn't here, I was at the other hearing, but you mentioned
earlier that citizen suits would be the sole method of
enforcement under the EPA rule, but EPA strongly encouraged
states to incorporate the new Federal criteria into their own
state Solid Waste Management Plans. So do you expect at least
some states will incorporate the new Federal standards into
state programs, and if states adopt these requirements, do you
expect them to enforce the requirements?
Mr. Paylor. It is certainly possible that some states would
adopt those. There would not be a permitting mechanism,
however, and it would be subject to a one-size-fits-all
situation. So there might be some spotty enforcement by states,
but as a whole the one-size-fits-all approach to Federal
regulation would, in fact, leave citizen suits as the primary
mechanism.
Mr. Pallone. Did you want to comment on that, Ms. Evans?
Ms. Evans. Well, I have read testimony from ASTSWMO that
indicates that states following the EPA rule signing, that
states were ready and willing to implement those programs
within the states, and states certainly can implement permit
programs. The requirements have to be consistent with the EPA
rule, but they certainly can tailor permits and use their
authority to run coal ash permit programs subsequent to the EPA
rule.
Mr. Pallone. All right, and then I want to continue with
you, Ms. Evans. EPA's final rule published online in December
set Federal floor standards for the safe disposal of coal ash
for the first time, and the rule has been decades in the
making. The final product was a result of a transparent public
process and input from stakeholders including significant input
from the groups represented on today's panel. The rule advances
public health protection and protects beneficiary use.
But this bill before us would undermine that Federal floor
in alarming ways in my opinion by leaving out important
requirements and allowing states to enforce alternative
requirements that might be less productive.
So do you agree that this bill would undermine the Federal
floor established by the final rule?
Ms. Evans. This bill absolutely undermines the Federal
floor and does not, and I have to repeat, does not incorporate
the standards in EPA's rule. It incorporates some of the
standards but, again, leaves definitions up to the states,
which can radically alter the implementation and the scope and
the stringency of the program.
Mr. Pallone. And what are the most important requirements
that would be left to state discretion?
Ms. Evans. Well, you have eliminated, as I have said
before, you have eliminated the requirement to make data
publicly accessible in a way that is meaningful for the public.
This includes data about the quality of their drinking water,
the assessment of wells, and you also have eliminated the
requirement for keeping coal ash away from aquifers. You have
taken away the responsibility, the requirement for states to
address spills, you have taken away the requirement for
industry to address releases of hazardous substances. The
important considerations are almost too numerous to name.
I do want to flag one, though, because it is so important
after the collapse of the Dan River pond. These inactive sites
which have not been attended to sometimes for over a decade,
that are sitting often close to rivers or to sources of
drinking water, the requirements that pertaining to the closure
of inactive sites are not equivalent. I am hearing again and
again that people think that they are, but there are important
differences in the closure of legacy sites, not only the
extension of time in which to close them but what regulations
apply after 3 years. None according to the bill. Everything
according to EPA.
And furthermore, utilities can very easily get out of all
the closure requirements simply by using that old abandoned
pond for disposal of anything. If you dispose of any non-coal
ash waste in a legacy pond, it is not subject to the closure
requirements, and that could be a really important and
dangerous loophole for the inactive sites.
Mr. Pallone. Let me just ask one last question, whether in
your experience state regulation of coal ash has been effective
or protective of public health.
Ms. Evans. Absolutely not and CRS came to that same
conclusion when they looked at this. It was EPA's conclusion
the holes were immense in terms of failure to require
inspections of high-hazard dams, failure to require even
monitoring of landfills and ponds, failure to require liners
for these ponds, and the failure to require these basic, basic
safeguard for waste disposal is what has resulted in the spills
and the releases and all the damage cases throughout the United
states.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time----
Mr. Pallone. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. And I would, again, make the point that there
is no CRS report on this bill. You are talking about previous
CRS reports and previous Congresses with a different
implication. So to compare those is not proper.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr.
Hudson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hudson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
panelists for being here today. This is an issue the people of
North Carolina are following very closely. There has been a lot
of news reports out of North Carolina dealing with coal ash,
and it is important that we get this right.
First of all, first and foremost, we've got to protect our
environment, but secondly we have got to get the balance right
when it comes to certainty of the regulations, and so I would
like to go back and revisit that issue with Mr. Roewer.
Does the draft legislation provide regulatory certainty for
your member companies regarding whether EPA can revisit the
determination in the future and regulate coal ash under
Subtitle C?
Mr. Roewer. The legislation provides certainly by
establishing that permit program under Subtitle D.
Mr. Hudson. OK, and if an owner, operator misses the
deadline to complete a safety factor assessment or fails to
meet the initial safety factor assessment criteria, the final
rule requires that the impoundment cease receipt of coal ash
within 6 months and close within 5 years. Can you please
explain why that is a problem, and does the draft legislation
address this issue?
Mr. Roewer. In some cases the design and implementation of
an engineering solution to allow a facility to meet that safety
factor assessment may take longer than the 18 months EPA has
provided in this rule. We support the application of structural
integrity criteria to these units. We need in some cases
additional time. We want to make sure these units can continue
to operate. We are not asking that unsafe units be allowed to
continue to operate but that we be given time to ensure that
these units meet the safety factors.
Mr. Hudson. I think you have addressed that maybe with one
of my other colleagues, but what are some of the factors that
make one situation take longer than another, for example?
Mr. Roewer. One of the complicating factors is these
facilities are subject to permits by state regulatory agencies,
and you got to get the approval from the state regulatory
agency before you can do any work on that facility, and that
can be a lengthy process.
Mr. Hudson. So in your testimony you need that flexibility?
Mr. Roewer. Absolutely. The legislation provides additional
time for us to come into compliance with the safety factors,
and it is very important the legislation does that.
Mr. Hudson. All right. Thank you for that.
Mr. Chairman, I would be happy to yield to you if you would
like to use the rest of this time.
Mr. Shimkus. No. I want you to yield back, and we will go
to Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Hudson. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Johnson,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the panel
for being here today, too. I associate myself with the comments
of my colleague from North Carolina. This is an issue that the
people of the great state of Ohio are monitoring very, very
closely. We have a tremendous number of families that work in
the coal industry that are dependent upon the coal industry for
their livelihoods to support their families, and Ohio still
gets in excess of 60 percent of its energy from coal. So it is
a very, very important issue for people in my district.
Mr. Forbeck, the draft legislation incorporates the
definitions from the final rule but allows the states to make
changes that may be necessary to tailor the requirements to the
needs of the states but only if the state demonstrates that it
has a reasonable basis for making the change. In your opinion
will the states be able to arbitrarily change the definitions,
and does this minimize the protectiveness of a state Permit
Program?
Mr. Forbeck. No. I do not think the states can arbitrarily
change the definitions. It says it has to have a reasonable
basis for those changes. An example under Pennsylvania, for
example, where coal ash is defined differently than what is
under the proposed legislation, doesn't include flue gas
desulphurization sludge, however, that FGD and the coal ash is
included under our term, residual waste. That residual waste is
governed in the same manner as the coal ash is with the
protective standards.
Mr. Johnson. So is it important then in your opinion that
states be able to adjust the definitions if necessary?
Mr. Forbeck. In my opinion, yes.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Mr. Forbeck, also, will the draft that you
have read, the draft legislation, would that require states to
make information like groundwater monitoring data, emergency
action plans, fugitive dust control plans, and the results of
structural stability assessments available to the public?
Mr. Forbeck. Yes, it will.
Mr. Johnson. OK. We had heard some concerns about that. I
wanted to clarify that. So all this data is going to be made
available to the public?
Mr. Forbeck. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Johnson. Right. In your opinion as an experienced state
regulator, do you think location restrictions should be imposed
retroactively?
Mr. Forbeck. I think it is important that the location
restrictions are looked at at all facilities, however, there
should be availability for corrective action and for enclosure
if issues do occur. It is not possible, as I said, I think,
earlier to simply move a facility out from a location standard.
If there is reason to or there are issues that has been, that
has come up from these, then maybe that is corrective action.
If there isn't, which we have seen in sites in our region, we
have had groundwater monitoring, et cetera, around a lot of
these impoundments, that they are operating safely, even though
they might not meet the location standards and have been
grandfathered.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Roewer, the draft legislation also treats legacy sites
in the same way EPA did under the final rule. Inactive
impoundments must either close within 3 years or become subject
to all of the requirements applicable to an active disposal
unit.
In your opinion is 3 years always enough time to safely
close a surface impoundment?
Mr. Roewer. No, it is not. It is a very complicated
process, and we need to make sure that that closure is
environmentally sound and safe. It can take longer than 3 years
given the size of the unit, the requirements of dewatering it,
and then constructing the cap in place.
Mr. Johnson. OK. The draft legislation gives the
implementing agency the authority to grant an extension of up
to 2 more years to complete closure. Why is the extension
necessary? You just----
Mr. Roewer. That extension is necessary because we can't
always get it done within that 3-year time period. We want to
close these facilities safely, and that extension would allow
us the time necessary to do that.
Mr. Johnson. OK, but certainly we are not going to do these
extensions willy-nilly. What would your members have to
demonstrate in order to request an extension from the
implementing agency, and specifically, if you could focus on
the requirement that your members demonstrate that there is no
immediate threat of release?
Mr. Roewer. The EPA in their rule has established the
ability to extend the closure process for active units, and we
would have to show the same reasons because of climate, size,
et cetera, that we are required under the provisions to allow
an extension of the closure timeframe for active units for
inactive units.
In addition, we would have to show that the facility is not
a threat of immediate release. So we are not talking about
allowing unsafe facilities to continue to stay there. We are
asking additional time to safely close these facilities.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired.
Just a reminder, this is a legislative hearing on draft
legislation, and so as Mr. McKinley said, people who have
comments or concerns can still address myself, Mr. McKinley,
and members of this committee as we move forward.
The hearing is recessed until Tuesday, March 24, at 2:00
p.m. in Room 2123. The witness will be EPA Assistant
Administrator, Matthew Stanislaus, a good friend of the
committee who has been here numerous times.
With that I recess this hearing.
[Whereupon, at 11:55 a.m., the subcommittee recessed, to
reconvene at 2:00 p.m., March 24, 2015.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Today's hearing continues our multi-year and multi-Congress
effort to finalize a thoughtful, bipartisan solution for coal
ash. This has been a collaborative effort every step of the
way, and I commend Mr. Shimkus and Mr. McKinley for their
leadership. With this discussion draft I am confident that we
have the right policy in place that will get us across the
finish line.
The draft is designed much like the legislation we nearly
enacted in the last Congress:

It appropriately treats coal ash as though it's a
non-hazardous waste.

It includes minimum federal standards for managing
the post-combustion materials.

And it allows states to develop permit programs
that will implement the minimum standards.
What's different this time around? Instead of keying the
minimum national standards off the old EPA regulations issued
for Municipal Solid Waste--with a few tweaks for coal ash--we
set the national standard by incorporating EPA's new coal ash
rule that came out last December.
We acknowledge all of EPA's work to develop sound technical
requirements for regulating coal ash in a way that protects
human health and the environment and we put the agency's
efforts to good use. We allow the states--the natural choice to
carry out permit programs--to implement the standards from the
final rule through enforceable permits. This commonsense
approach alleviates the implementation issues with the final
rule and means state environmental protection authorities, some
of whom are here for this hearing, will work on a daily basis
with the regulated community to make sure the permit programs
are on track. This kind of discipline should avoid unnecessary
litigation and protect our environment at the same time.
I appreciate the testimony of our witnesses, especially
those who will be on the front line when this bill becomes law:
the state officials and the regulated community. This bill is
good for states like Michigan that rely on coal for
electricity. This bill is good for jobs. Let's continue the
momentum and get this bill moving through committee and the
House, and through the Senate, so that the president can sign
it into law and the issue will be settled once and for all.
----------

H.R. ----------, THE IMPROVING COAL COMBUSTION RESIDUALS REGULATION ACT
OF 2015, DAY 2

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 24, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment and the Economy,
Committee on Energy and Commerce
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:34 p.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John
Shimkus (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Shimkus, Harper, Murphy,
Latta, McKinley, Johnson, Bucshon, Flores, Hudson, Cramer, and
Tonko.
Staff present: Nick Abraham, Legislative Clerk; Charlotte
Baker, Deputy Communications Director; David McCarthy, Chief
Counsel, Environment and the Economy; Tina Richards, Counsel,
Environment and the Economy; Chris Sarley, Policy Coordinator,
Environment and the Economy; Jacqueline Cohen, Democratic
Senior Counsel; Michael Goo, Democratic Senior Counsel, Energy
and Environment; Caitlin Haberman, Democratic Professional
Staff Member; Rick Kessler, Democratic Senior Advisor and Staff
Director, Energy and Environment; and Ryan Schmit, Democratic
EPA Detailee.
Mr. Shimkus. We want to call the hearing back to order and
welcome the Undersecretary Mathy Stanislaus from the EPA to
testify on the coal ash bill. And my colleagues are here, and
some will come back. We just came from votes.
Just for information, Mathy has to leave at 3:30, so we
will try to expedite this as much as possible. And with that,
your full statement is submitted for the record. You have 5
minutes, and welcome.

STATEMENT OF MATHY STANISLAUS, ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR, OFFICE
OF SOLID WASTE AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE, U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION AGENCY

Mr. Stanislaus. OK. Thank you. Good afternoon Chairman
Shimkus, Ranking Member Tonko, and members of the subcommittee.
I am Mathy Stanislaus, Assistant Administrator for the Office
of Solid Waste and Emergency Response. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify on EPA's efforts on coal ash residuals
as well as the subcommittee's discussion draft. I was also
looking for a frequent witness card after I am done here today.
Mr. Shimkus. We will see how your testimony goes.
Mr. Stanislaus. So as you all know, on December 19, the EPA
Administrator signed the coal ash rule. The rule establishes
the first-ever nationally applicable minimum criteria for the
safe disposal of coal combustion residuals in landfills and
surface impoundments. The agency is pleased that there
continues to be wide agreement on the importance of ensuring
the safe disposal of coal ash residuals. As noted in my
testimony before the subcommittee on January 22 of this year,
EPA believes that the agency's rulemaking appropriately
addresses the risks posed by the mismanagement of coal ash
residual disposal. The EPA believes that the coal ash rule is a
strong, effective, approach that provides critical protection
to communities across the Nation by helping to protect our
water, land, and air. The rule provides states and local
communities the information they need to fully engage in the
rule's implementation, thereby helping to ensure that
facilities safely manage and dispose of coal ash residuals. To
address the risk posed by mismanagement of coal ash residuals,
the rule requires utilities to conduct groundwater monitoring,
installing liners for new surface impoundments and landfills,
control fugitive dust, and properly close surface impoundments
and landfills no longer receiving coal ash.
The CCR rule is designed to provide electric utilities and
independent power producers generating coal ash with a
practical approach for addressing the issue of coal ash
disposal and has established varying implementation timelines
for the technical requirements that take into account, among
other things, upcoming regulatory actions affecting electric
utilities and site-specific practical realities. This rule also
sets out recordkeeping and reporting requirements, including
requirements to post information on a publicly available Web
site to ensure transparency. We are committed to working
closely with our state partners on rule implementation, and as
a major component of this, we are encouraging states to revise
their Solid Waste Management Plans and submit the revisions to
the EPA for approval.
Just last week I briefed state commissioners on the rule's
implementation process, and we agreed to continue to work
together on expediting a streamlined process for developing and
improving states' solid waste management plans. EPA has been
working extensively with stakeholders before the rule and
subsequently, and just recently we had a webinar in which 800
participants participated in discussing the rule.
EPA expects that the states will use the solid waste
management planning process to help align state programs with
the EPA rule and revise the state Solid Waste Management Plans
to demonstrate how the state intends to regulate coal ash
landfills and surface impoundments. We believe states will have
sufficient time to prepare the solid waste management plans for
approval. We believe we built in adequate time, up to 18
months, to revise the Solid Waste Management Plans before key
provisions of the rule take effect. The agency expects that the
solid waste management plan process can accommodate state
program variability as states demonstrate regulatory
requirements that are equivalent or more stringent than the
requirements in the EPA rule. Most importantly, states'
concerns of having state oversight and permit program that is
aligned with the coal ash rule will be achieved with an
approved solid waste management plan, and utilities will have a
single point of compliance.
EPA is currently reviewing the subcommittee's draft, and we
remain open to providing technical comments to the committee.
We believe that legislation should provide for a national
uniform minimum standard that is protective of public health
and the environment as we have set forth in the rule, and we
appreciate the provisions of the discussion draft that
incorporates components of the EPA's CCR rule.
However, the coal ash rule contains very specific detail
regarding elements of transparency, prevention, and response,
these elements were developed by reviewing extensive
information from utilities, states, and citizens, augmented by
in-the-field inspections of coal ash impoundments. The rule
provides specific timelines that reflect the balance of
immediately addressing risk to communities as soon as possible
such as structural integrity to prevent catastrophic failure
and ongoing risk to drinking water, while providing a
reasonable amount of time for utilities to take actions given
the variability of circumstance of CCR units. These components
include a requirement that facility compliance data and
information be posted on the internet for public access,
criteria for addressing coal ash unit closure, comprehensive
structural stability requirements, and requirements for all
releases. Now we believe these are critically important
components for a protective national program for coal ash
disposal.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stanislaus follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much. I would like to recognize
myself for the first 5 minutes, and Mr. Stanislaus, I would
like to walk you through some of the specific provisions in the
legislation and compare them to the final rule. We are going to
try the yes or no because of our time comparing the rule to the
language of the bill. So if we can get to a yes and no on some
of these first ones, we would appreciate it.
Do you agree the bill requires states to use the exact
design requirements as in 257.70 and 257.72?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, I know you want yes and no answers,
but I think the best way to kind of address those specific
detailed questions is to----
Mr. Shimkus. But the real question is----
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. Did we take the language from the
reg----
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. And place that in the language of
the bill?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, I guess I will have to get back to
you on that.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, I think you know the answer. It does.
Mr. Stanislaus. OK.
Mr. Shimkus. Do you agree that the bill requires the states
to incorporate the groundwater monitoring and corrective action
provisions in 257.90 to 257.98?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes, I believe the draft does contain those
kind of requirements as I said in my testimony. Some of the
details having set forth in the rule is where we would like to
work with you.
Mr. Shimkus. Do you agree that the bill has a deadline of
no more than 36 months for the installation of groundwater
monitoring?
Mr. Stanislaus. Again----
Mr. Shimkus. It does.
Mr. Stanislaus. OK.
Mr. Shimkus. Does the final rule require installation of
groundwater monitoring within 30 months of the effective date?
Mr. Stanislaus. Are you talking about the draft or the
rule?
Mr. Shimkus. You are testifying on the bill.
Mr. Stanislaus. OK.
Mr. Shimkus. We are comparing the bill's language to the
rule.
Mr. Stanislaus. OK.
Mr. Shimkus. Which we looked at very closely.
Mr. Stanislaus. OK. Well, again, in terms of a direct
comparison, we can get back to you on that, so----
Mr. Shimkus. OK. We believe it does.
Mr. Stanislaus. OK.
Mr. Shimkus. Do you agree the bill includes all the same
constituents identified by EPA as being of concern for coal
ash?
Mr. Stanislaus. Again, I believe it does, but we will have
to do a direct comparison.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes.
Mr. Stanislaus. OK.
Mr. Shimkus. Do you agree the bill requires states to
include the post-closure requirements in 257.104? I am just
going to keep reading these.
Mr. Stanislaus. OK.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. So the answer that we are trying to get to
is, and there may be when we go through the markup, there may
be some issues of debate, but our intent was as much as we
could grabbing the regulation language and putting it in the
bill.
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. And this line of questioning is to confirm
that.
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. Do you agree that the bill requires the states
to include the exact air criteria in 257.80? You probably don't
know. We think it does. Does the final rule require financial
assurance? Does our draft bill include financial--does the
final rule, excuse me, your rule, does it include financial
assurance?
Mr. Stanislaus. The coal ash rule does not include
financial assurance, but it does not foreclose existing states
who have financial assurance for adding that to their
administration of coal ash disposal.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. But so you are testifying that the final
rule doesn't but they could, based upon state action?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes, states can, in fact----
Mr. Shimkus. Right. OK.
Mr. Stanislaus [continuing]. Add that, yes.
Mr. Shimkus. Do you agree that the bill requires states to
include surface water requirements as part of a permit program?
Mr. Stanislaus. You are talking about the draft?
Mr. Shimkus. I am on the same line of questioning----
Mr. Stanislaus. OK.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. Is the regulation comparing it to
the draft. So the question is do you agree that the bill, the
draft bill, requires states to include surface water
requirements as part of a permit program?
Mr. Stanislaus. Again, we would be more than willing to
compare it back to----
Mr. Shimkus. I think what we will do, we will just submit--
--
Mr. Stanislaus. Sure.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. These questions for the record,
although we are going to be--as we mentioned before the
hearing, a bill moves through the process. We will have a
subcommittee mark. Through that process, if you can confirm or
deny these questions, then we go to Full Committee mark, then
we go to the floor. So there are other times for this process
to move forward. But we think we have drafted the bill to, for
the most part, address the regulatory issues that you have. Our
intent was to, as I said in the earlier part of the hearing 2
days ago, is to be helpful, codifying versus what we are
concerned about is litigation, citizen suits and different
rules throughout the Federal District Court jurisdictions and
then giving states the permitting authority with federal
standards and to comply. So I will submit these questions, and
if you can as quickly as possible, respond to those. I didn't
get to the other ones, but my time is expired. And I will yield
to Mr. Tonko for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Chair Shimkus, and welcome to
Administrator Stanislaus. We can all agree that coal ash can
pose serious risks when not disposed of properly. Now for the
first time we have minimum federal requirements that set a
floor of public health and environmental protections. But we
are still hearing from our majority that a bill is needed, that
this rule somehow falls short.
Mr. Stanislaus, do you believe there are gaps in EPA's
final rule?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, we believe that the rule
comprehensively addressed the risk that we have identified from
a technical perspective, and we also believe that the alignment
of the federal rule with state requirements can occur through
the state solid waste management planning process.
Mr. Tonko. And does the rule address the major risks of
improper coal ash disposal?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes.
Mr. Tonko. And do you think there are problems in the rule
that need to be addressed?
Mr. Stanislaus. We believe that we have addressed all the
rest identified by EPA and by all the stakeholders, and in
fact, in last week's testimony, I think the state witnesses had
noted that the rule reflects the best practices of the states.
Mr. Tonko. And you know, we have heard from some
stakeholders last week, even after all of this, that the rule
does not include enough discretion for states to tailor
requirements to specific sites. In response, this bill gives
states significant leeway to apply alternative groundwater
protection standards, clean-up requirements, and more. But this
leeway undermines the federal floor or the national minimal
criteria that EPA sets in the final rule.
So my question to you, do you think it is important to have
a federal floor of protections for coal ash disposal?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well absolutely. What we have done is
establish a clear federal floor around the major risks but also
provided some tailored requirements to accommodate site-
specific flexibility as well as timelines to accommodate the
variants of the size of facilities.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And we have also heard some concerns
about enforcement, that it might rely exclusively on citizen
suits or that we may see issues of dual enforcement. So do you
have confidence that enforcement of the final rule through
citizen suits or states that have adopted requirements into
their existing plans will be effective?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, we have confidence that the states
going through the state solid waste management planning process
would align the state requirements with the federal
requirements and not result in dual requirements. And
therefore, in any citizen suit as courts have done in looking
at other kind of citizen suits under RCRA would provide
substantial weight to EPA's approval of the state's solid waste
management plan.
Mr. Tonko. And lastly, we have heard from some that the
final rule does not provide enough certainty to the recycling
industry because EPA could, at some time in the future, go
through another lengthy public process to regulate coal ash as
hazardous. By that measure, nothing that we do is certain
because regulations and statutes can always be revised. Mr.
Stanislaus, does EPA's final rule label coal ash as hazardous?
Mr. Stanislaus. No.
Mr. Tonko. Does the final rule prevent beneficial reuse?
Mr. Stanislaus. No.
Mr. Tonko. Does EPA have any plans at this time to label
coal ash as hazardous or restrict beneficial reuse?
Mr. Stanislaus. No.
Mr. Tonko. I thank the chair for calling this hearing and
the witness for his testimony. Based on this testimony, I do
not see a need for legislation at this time, and I see serious
risks in this particular proposal at a point I believe the
public interest would be best served by allowing the EPA rule
to move forward. The state-based approach on coal ash disposal
has been in effect for over 30 years and has resulted in too
many failures.
So EPA's proposal deserves I believe a fair test to see if
it results in better protection for the American people from
the risks of coal ash. And with that, I will yield back to the
chair.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. Just a
note that I appreciate your yes and no answer to my colleague
but no ability to do yes or no to me.
So I will now recognize my colleague, Mr. Murphy, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. I am over here. Good to see you.
Now, does this legislation create enforceable permit programs
for coal ash?
Mr. Stanislaus. In my understanding, there is a permit
program in there.
Mr. Murphy. OK. You have read the bill?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes.
Mr. Murphy. OK. So you are aware on pages 10 through 18 the
bill text sets out the minimum requirements for states' coal
ash permit programs. Are those direct references to the
requirements in Part 257 of the EPA's final rule?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes, I do believe there are references to
EPA's final rule, and as I noted in my opening statement, I
think that there has been a lot of incorporation of the
elements of the EPA's final rule. I do think the specificity
that we laid out in the coal ash rule regarding the major risks
are critical enhancements that are necessary to provide the
kind of protections against catastrophic failure among other
kinds of risk.
Mr. Murphy. And doesn't the bill then also require state
permit programs to use the requirements in the final rule as
the minimum requirements of coal ash permit programs?
Mr. Stanislaus. I am sorry. Could you say that again?
Mr. Murphy. The bill requires the state permit programs to
use the requirements in the final rule as the minimum
requirements of coal ash permits?
Mr. Stanislaus. Minimum requirements? Yes, I don't really
have that in front of me.
Mr. Murphy. OK. We will get back to that.
Mr. Stanislaus. OK.
Mr. Murphy. I believe it directly incorporates the minimum
requirements set forth in your December final rule, but let us
know. In the fact sheet that accompanied the December 20, 2014,
final rule, your agency says, ``EPA has no formal role in
implementation of the rule. EPA does not issue permits nor can
EPA enforce the requirements of the rule.'' In order to ensure
that the EPA's coal combustion residual standards are met,
doesn't it make more sense to enact a statutory guarantee that
these standards would be adhered to rather than placing
reliance on this rule's self-implementing mechanism?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well yes, we have been really clear that
the rule is self-implementing, but we believe, you know, based
on all the comments we have heard from the states that the
states want to enforce it through their programs. The states
have that ability right now and that the alignment between
state programs and the coal ash rule can occur through EPA's
approval of the state's solid waste management plan.
Mr. Murphy. When you refer to that states can enforce that,
isn't that also referring though to lawsuits states and
individuals can bring up as far as a means of enforcing the
federal standards?
Mr. Stanislaus. No. I want to separate the two. So with
respect to aligning with state permit programs and enforcing it
through the state authority, they can do that by integrating
the coal ash rule into their program and then by submitting a
solid waste management plan for EPA's approval separately, the
states or citizens can enforce the self-implementing
requirements through a suit.
Mr. Murphy. Right, but won't enforcement through citizens'
suits as called for in the final rule result in this extreme
variety of interpretations and a patchwork of compliance and
enforcement decisions as made by federal courts and not the
EPA, not elected Members of Congress, not EPA and Congress
working together? I am very concerned about that. Are you
concerned as well that that basically means we are going to
punt our authority here by relying on the courts for
enforcement which includes interpretation? It is not just
making someone do that which they are supposed to be doing, but
whenever you go to the courts, you are also dealing with
interpretation issues. Does that concern you?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, precisely because of that concern we
have heard from utilities, we have heard from the states that
very issue. That is the reason why we identified this
opportunity to align state programs using the state's solid
waste management planning process. And we have heard from
utilities and states, and we agree that there should be a
single point of compliance and that----
Mr. Murphy. And what is that point of compliance? Would
that point of compliance be the permit process itself or
letting the states go through the enforcement and challenging
in courts and individuals challenging courts? Wouldn't the
permit process be the best place so you have interpretation and
enforcement by the very agency that is working with Congress on
this?
Mr. Stanislaus. Oh, yes, and we would agree and we think
that states utilizing the solid waste management planning
process would enable that to occur.
Mr. Murphy. So we want to make sure that the legislation
really enables that to occur. I appreciate that. That is very
important. And I yield back the balance of my time. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Latta, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
thanks so much for being here again with us. I really
appreciate it. Let me ask if I could, what do you see as the
role of states in protecting the environment? Kind of a general
question, but do you see as the overall role of states out
there in protecting the environment?
Mr. Stanislaus. What do I see the states----
Mr. Latta. Yes. Right.
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, the states are very much a co-
regulator, in fact they have led responsibility for overseeing
and enforcing environmental requirements. That is found within
the Resource Conservation Recovery Act and probably many of our
other environmental statutes. So we very much believe the
states are on the front lines and should have primacy over
that.
Mr. Latta. Because, as you just said, the states are on the
front line that especially when the states, they know their own
backyards much better. And so you think that the states should
be out there on the front and should be maybe the first line of
defense out there instead of the Federal Government?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes, I mean, I don't disagree with that
statement, and we spent a lot of time in the rule recognizing
that fact and to accommodate the states to the greatest extent
that we can. And even during the development of the rule, we
have spent extensive time analyzing the states' rules and
figuring out how we can best align the federal rule with state
requirements and with the states taking the lead.
Mr. Latta. Let me follow up on that then. Do you believe
that most states want to implement their own regulatory or
permit program rather than have the U.S. EPA do it? Do you
think----
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, yes. I think the states in fact want
to move forward on either enhancing their permit program, a new
permit program for the coal ash rules, and in my conversations
with the states is that we want to move forward taking
advantage of the requirements in the rule to do that.
Mr. Latta. Well, when we are looking at that, then would
more states be inclined to want to do it themselves or have the
U.S. EPA do it, to have their own permitting process?
Mr. Stanislaus. I am not sure I have that information in
front of me. I would say that states generally want to
administer a permit program for coal ash disposal management.
Mr. Latta. OK. Let me just follow up again. Given all the
uncertainty that the EPA's rule has given states in the
industry, the fact that many states already have permit
programs and the fact that the EPA has previously determined
that coal ash is not a hazardous waste, wouldn't it be more
prudent now to provide that full authority to the states to be
able to do that on their permitting?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, I actually believe that we have done
that in the rule that we finalized. We finalized as minimum
technical requirements and the ability of states with the
existing authority to incorporate that within their existing
permitting program and for EPA to approve that, to align those
requirements with the state requirements which would, we
believe, substantially help states and utilities in any
challenges, any court challenges.
Mr. Latta. OK. Let me ask this then. Also, looking at your
testimony, you say that we have talked about this in the past
in the committee, approximately 40 percent of all the CCR
generated in 2012 was beneficially used. Do you believe that
this bill that we are talking about today would ensure that
continued beneficial use of that CCR?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes. I am not sure that I have analyzed it
from a beneficial-use perspective. I mean, I think both, I
think the rule and the legislation, is focused on the disposal,
so I believe both will accommodate beneficial reuse of coal
ash.
Mr. Latta. OK. Well, thank you very much, and Mr. Chairman,
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back the balance of his
time. The chair now recognizes the gentleman from West
Virginia, Mr. McKinley, who is the author of much of this bill,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome again to
our committee and your help on this. If I can get to three
questions, I would like to handle it that way. I am still
somewhat troubled by the preamble, about the possibility of a
slip, that there could be some consideration as a result of
that. I am still getting phone calls about this and primarily
from state highway commissions around the country that they are
concerned that their use of cinders for providing traction on
our highways that they have used historically may be not
permitted.
Do you have a sense of where the EPA would come down on
whether cinders, the bottom ash, could be used on highways for
safety?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes. So with respect to any issue with
respect to regulation, I think we are very clear in the rule
that all beneficial use would not be subject to the rules on
disposal. Separate from that, we have established a methodology
for safe use of encapsulated use and we are now working on a
methodology for the safe use of unencapsulated use. That deals
with the risk----
Mr. McKinley. So where----
Mr. Stanislaus [continuing]. Side of disposal.
Mr. McKinley [continuing]. Do you think the EPA may come
down on that issue? Because some of the states, during this
past winter because of this controversy that has been stirred
up by certain people, they are afraid to use cinders. As a
result, we have had increased accident rate in some areas.
So can you share? Do you think that they would rule that as
being a beneficial use or are they going to--how would you
finish that sentence?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, we are in the midst of evaluating the
unencapsulated use. All I can say is that the encapsulated
use----
Mr. McKinley. This wouldn't be encapsulated, obviously, not
the cinders spread on the highway.
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes. Yes. So to draw the analogy to the
methodology, unencapsulated use, what it would do is to lay out
the kind of techniques and applications so that it can be
safely recycled. It would not be getting involved in whether
that is subject to regulation at all.
Mr. McKinley. OK. I think we are going to have to have more
conversation about that.
Mr. Stanislaus. OK.
Mr. McKinley. I am still not clear on that. So again, your
testimony said that--in critiquing the legislation, the
criteria to address when a CCR unit would need to close should
be included. Can you explain what you mean by that?
Mr. Stanislaus. Sure. So we spent a lot of time in the
particular circumstance and timeline for closure of
impoundment. So there can be times where a unit has to close
for structural stability purposes, and so we lay out a series
of requirements for structural stability, for inspection,
looking at safety factors, if they don't pass safety factors,
the ability to engineer around and fix those safety factors.
Another circumstance where there could be impact of
groundwater, where it is an unlined impoundment. So we spent a
lot of time both in the rule text and in the preamble
articulating how to do the analysis, under what circumstance it
would have to close and the particular methods of closure and
timeline of closure.
Mr. McKinley. Very good. I would really like to spend more
time back in that first because that issue of spreading salt we
know is doing damage. Any of us that know from engineering that
we are going to destroy our roads and bridges by use of salt.
So I hope that your ultimate decision will be that we can
continue using cinders on our highways.
Mr. Stanislaus. And as a follow----
Mr. McKinley. Especially given the vegetation, the flora
and fauna that we are killing along the highways because of the
salt runoff. So there are some issues with that, and we can
have more conversation. But in the timeframe, one last
question. You talked about you wanted comprehensive structural
integrity requirements you thought were--maybe we need to
amplify that a little bit more in the bill. But the language in
the bill is from the rule over the structural integrity
requirements. The only thing was just a slight modification for
utilities. What is not included? What is causing you
consternation over this?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes, I think let us have our staff get
together on that. I mean, one of the issues I think we flagged
was the timing addressing the structural integrity problems. We
didn't think that was identical to what we have laid out in the
rule. All right. So what our rule says is do these inspections,
do these assessments. Have a professional evaluate it. If there
are problems with it, fix it, but if you can't fix it, then
you're going to have to close because of the real consequence
of a catastrophic failure.
Mr. McKinley. I would agree. I yield back the balance of my
time. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Johnson, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that.
Mr. Stanislaus, there are a number of places in the preamble
where the EPA indicated that certain provisions of the rule
would have been written differently if the final rule was not
self-implementing and if there was state oversight. So let us
look at some specific issues.
If the requirements were implemented with state regulatory
oversight through permits, would the EPA have allowed
alternative groundwater protection standards to be established?
Mr. Stanislaus. I guess I am not sure. What we included in
the rule was the various technical considerations for
evaluating----
Mr. Johnson. Well, it says right in the preamble yes. I
mean, you do know your rule, right?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes.
Mr. Johnson. OK. So it says that it----
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes.
Mr. Johnson [continuing]. Would. So would it also allow for
alternative points of compliance to be established?
Mr. Stanislaus. If there was a permit program?
Mr. Johnson. Yes.
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes, let me get back to you. I don't know
at this moment.
Mr. Johnson. Would it allow a determination that compliance
with corrective action requirements cannot be reasonably
achieved with concurrently available methods, with currently
available methods?
Mr. Stanislaus. I believe that is currently in the rule.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Would it allow a determination that
remediation of a release is not necessary?
Mr. Stanislaus. If there was a permit program
Mr. Johnson. Yes. The preamble to the rule says that there
are provisions in the rule that would have been written
differently if the final rule was not self-implementing and if
there was a state oversight. So if the requirements were
implemented with state regulatory oversight through permits,
would the rule have allowed a determination that remediation of
a release is not necessary?
Mr. Stanislaus. I guess I am not sure. If there was a
release resulting in exceedance, be it a state permit program
or minimum federal requirements, I think that would both
require addressing that release.
Mr. Johnson. All right. Well, let us move on. The
groundwater monitoring and corrective action provisions in the
proposed and final rule are based on the municipal solid waste
regulations in part 258. Would you disagree that the
flexibility afforded states in making regulatory decisions
under part 258 would also be appropriate for a state to
incorporate as part of a coal ash permit program?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, I mean----
Mr. Johnson. Why would they be different?
Mr. Stanislaus. I am sorry?
Mr. Johnson. Why would they be different?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, I mean, I think----
Mr. Johnson. If they are both based on part 258?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes.
Mr. Johnson. Why would they be different?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, yes, you know the rule, it does
borrow from the provision that you noted.
Mr. Johnson. Yes. So the question is would it also be
appropriate then under Part 258 for a state to incorporate as
part of a coal ash permit program?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, I guess what I would say is the rule
provides specific requirements regarding groundwater that we
think should be followed, and we believe states should adopt
those groundwater requirements in the state programs to be
protected.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Stanislaus, we would like to compare how
the final rule addresses inactive surface impoundments with how
the legislation addresses them. So doesn't the bill require
that inactive impoundments notify EPA and the state within two
months of enactment regarding whether they intend to close? You
have read the bill, right?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes. Yes. Yes, I am not sure of the time
period in front of me but----
Mr. Johnson. OK. Well, it does. Do you know what the rule
requires?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes. The rule permits subjects' inactive
units that don't close within 3 years of the effective date to
do the requirements of the rule. Within those 3 years, a unit
can dewater and close.
Mr. Johnson. Doesn't the bill require that an inactive
impoundment close within 3 years or 5 years or become subject
to all of the requirements of a permit program?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes. I believe that is the case.
Mr. Johnson. OK. What does the rule require?
Mr. Stanislaus. Again, the rule requires the 3-year
timeframe.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas,
Mr. Flores, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Stanislaus, quick
question for you. Once the file rule is effective, what will
the EPA's role be with respect to enforcing the requirements in
the rule?
Mr. Stanislaus. The rule again is self-implementing so it
would be enforced either by the states or citizens.
Mr. Flores. Means the EPA has no role in enforcement
essentially, right?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, with the exception of an imminent and
substantial endangerment where we reserve that opportunity.
Mr. Flores. In the legislation on the other hand that we
are proposing gives the EPA a continuing oversight rule to
ensure that the state permit programs meet the minimum federal
requirements, and it allows the EPA to implement a permit
program if the states decide not to. And the EPA could take
over a state permit program if the state fails to correct the
deficiencies. Doesn't the EPA have a more substantial role with
respect to the regulation of coal ash and with the legislation
than it does under the rule that you proposed?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes, actually we are not sure because I
think we have questions about----
Mr. Flores. It does. I don't think this has been asked
already. When does the EPA plan to publish the final rule in
the Federal Register?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, it has been sent to the Federal
Register Office, so expect it very shortly.
Mr. Flores. OK. What changes are you proposing from the
initial rule?
Mr. Stanislaus. There are no real changes. It is technical
corrections.
Mr. Flores. OK. So no substantive changes?
Mr. Stanislaus. No substantive.
Mr. Flores. No substantive changes?
Mr. Stanislaus. No.
Mr. Flores. OK. Will there be a document that describes all
the changes between the December 19 publication and--the pre-
publication and the version in the Federal Register?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes, let me get back to you on that.
Mr. Flores. OK. Does the EPA have the legal authority to
publish the rule in the Federal Register that varies from the
December 19 prepublication version?
Mr. Stanislaus. Sure. I mean, the standard process, I mean,
basically is a cleaning up of the rule.
Mr. Flores. And that is based on your representation that
there are no substantive changes?
Mr. Stanislaus. That is right.
Mr. Flores. OK. This is more a rhetorical question. You
don't have to answer, but isn't it preferable that the EPA
issue rules based on statutory guidance from Congress instead
of doing it on its own? I mean, this hearing was about the
legislation we are proposing, and you have said you read it.
But yet, many of the questions that have been asked by members,
it doesn't feel like you have had your arms around it. So I
would say that it makes more sense I think for the EPA to have
statutory authority to do something than do it on its own and
not have it work as well as it could. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The chair
now recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Hudson,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hudson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, sir,
for being here with us today. Mr. Stanislaus, on the first day
of our hearing last week from one of our witnesses, we heard a
lot of distrust of the states and their ability to implement
permit programs that are protective of human health and the
environment. Do you believe the states would develop coal ash
permit programs that did not protect human health and the
environment?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, I have a large degree of confidence
that the states will--and we are working with them--the states
will develop a coal ash disposal program in alignment with the
rule, yes.
Mr. Hudson. So do you agree the states have an established
standard of protection that they are required to meet and
establish environmental statutes and regulations?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, I think that is the goal to have
states incorporate the minimum federal requirements set forth
in the coal ash rule.
Mr. Hudson. OK. The agency in proposing that the location
restrictions apply retroactively to existing service
impoundments acknowledge that this would force a majority of
those impoundments to close. Do you have an estimate of how
many we would be talking about would close and what the
potential impacts would be on grid reliability?
Mr. Stanislaus. I don't have an estimate in front of me. I
can get that to you. But I don't believe that a majority would
close because of location requirements. Now, we built in, per
information that we received from utilities and states, the
ability to examine these particular location requirements and
conduct retrofits to continue operation. But I can provide to
you the estimate that we have.
Mr. Hudson. I would appreciate that because I think it is
important, and we have heard a lot of concern about the fact
that it can be retroactively applied but we are looking at a
significant amount of closure. And again, that has really
raised a lot of concern in my mind about the grid reliability
and what the impact on that will be.
In your written testimony you state that the requirement
that facility compliance data and information be posted on the
internet for public access is critical to establishing a
framework to help ensure proper management of CCR disposal. Why
is it critical that regulated agencies directly post compliance
data instead of the states posting the information or otherwise
making the information publically available as is required by
our legislation?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, I mean, we believe that the public
posting of critical data in terms of, for example, how a
utility is or is not exceeding groundwater protection
standards, how a utility is moving forward on corrective action
helps, the community living next to a facility to understand
how a utility is addressing the coal ash impoundments.
Mr. Hudson. Well, sure, but our legislation expressly
requires that states make information such as groundwater
monitoring data, structural stability assessments, fugitive
dust control plans, emergency action plans, and corrective
action remedies be made available to the public. Why is this
not an acceptable alternative to having the facilities directly
post this information? It is going to be out there for the
public consumption.
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes, I think having--whether this talks
about the utilities or the states, I think they are both
adequate enough so, yes.
Mr. Hudson. Right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Harper, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for being
here, and I wanted to just let you know a few things in case
you didn't get a chance to look at it when we had this
beginning of the hearing last week on the 18th. I just wanted
to point out some testimony from a couple of the witnesses that
were here. David Paylor, who is with the Virginia DEQ and Past-
President of ECOS, he said in his testimony that the draft bill
amended Subtitle D of RCRA by allowing the states to implement
and enforce the EPA's coal ash management rule through a state
permit program instead of having the rule be self-implementing.
He said this recognizes that the states are in the best
position to implement the rule and to regulate CCR units but
also properly empowers the EPA to serve as a backstop and
administrate the new rule and circumstances where a state
decides not to do so or fails to do so properly. Further, he
pointed out that ECOS testified before this subcommittee in
January, supporting the final rules' technical requirements but
stating that legislation to amend RCRA was still needed to
address limitations in weaknesses in the final rule. Further
ECOS has reviewed the draft bill and finds that it positively
addresses the concerns identified by ECOS in our January
testimony. The draft bill leverages and codifies the extensive
technical work in EPA's final rule.
So I could go on with what he said, but I also want to
point out Michael Forbeck who is on behalf of the Association
of state and Territorial Solid Waste Management Officials. And
their testimony was pretty clear that the discussion draft has
addressed the main concerns that they have expressed regarding
EPA's final rule on CCR, and they believe that this discussion
draft addresses the main concerns that they have in that this
is necessary. And they are pleased that the legislation
requires financial assurance for post-closure care of inactive
surface impoundments and I could go on and on.
But this is something we believe is necessary. And I have
got a few questions as I follow up. The legislation allows
states to use their discretion to establish alternative
groundwater protection standards, alternative points of
compliance, and determine that corrective action is not
necessary or technically feasible. But the bill limits the
discretion to what the state could do under the municipal solid
waste regulations in Part 258. Do you feel that this
significantly weakens the protections in the final rule?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, I guess our view is that the level of
detail to ensure equivalency between what we put in the coal
ash rule and what is contained in the bill, we are not sure it
has the same level of equivalency.
Mr. Harper. OK. Did EPA promulgate the final rule to be
protective of human health in the environment?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes.
Mr. Harper. Why is a general standard of protection
necessary in the bill to ensure that states develop permit
programs that are protective of human health and the
environment?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, we established very specific
requirements based on the risk to groundwater, the risk of
catastrophic failure. So we believe that level of specificity
is necessary to ensure an adequate level of protection.
Mr. Harper. Some of the environmental groups are saying
that EPA finalized the weakest regulatory option. Do you agree
that the final rule contains weak regulatory standards?
Mr. Stanislaus. No.
Mr. Harper. The agency in proposing that the location
restrictions apply retroactively to existing surface
impoundments acknowledged that this would force the majority of
these impoundments to close. Do you have an estimate of how
many will close and what the potential impacts will be on grid
reliability?
Mr. Stanislaus. Sure. Yes. I can get back to you with those
numbers.
Mr. Harper. OK. We really would----
Mr. Stanislaus. Sure.
Mr. Harper [continuing]. Like to see that.
Mr. Stanislaus. OK.
Mr. Harper. And do you know if those estimates exist? Are
they already part of your file? Do you already have that and
you just have to get it to us or does it have to be compiled?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes, we have analyzed it. We can get you
information on that. I mean, just to be clear, because of the
concern that you raised, you know, the location requirements
permit one, the analysis of those various requirements but also
the ability to implement engineering solutions to provide the
necessary safety net----
Mr. Harper. Thank you for being willing to provide that.
Mr. Stanislaus. OK.
Mr. Harper. We look forward to seeing that. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. Last but
not least, the gentleman from North Dakota, Mr. Cramer, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Cramer. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you as
well. I am just going to--I want to maybe focus in just a
little more on one topic, and I know Mr. Johnson raised it a
little bit ago. But I felt like we left it a little early. And
just as a background, I am a former state regulator. I was in
the Public Service Commission, and we, in North Dakota, had the
surface mining, the SMCRA rules, and carried them out as a
state on behalf of the Federal Government as well as our own
reclamation rules. And realizing that coal ash is RCRA and
solid waste, and what I am struggling with, and I am hoping you
can help me, is if a state opens up its solid waste regulations
as you suggest and if they adopt, you know, these rules, your
rules, they then become part of their--258 rules, they then
become part of their enforcement regime. But as I understand
it, that is not the end of it. In other words, they still have
the EPA rule over here, and the state doesn't enforce in lieu
of the federal rule. Is that right? And I have to tell you, if
that is right, that is concerning to me because it seems if I
was the state regulator that I used to be, that would be
problematic for me. That would be confusing I think certainly
to the stakeholders, and I think it would be confusing to the
regulators with regard to who has got enforcement over what.
I pose it in that statement in hopes that you can help
clarify it for me.
Mr. Stanislaus. Sure. Because of this concern that the
states can't act in lieu of EPA in the way that other programs
can is the reason why we believe the state's solid waste
management planning process would allow that alignment. So once
a state submits a plan to us that demonstrates that the minimum
federal requirements are contained in a state program, ideally
a permit program, EPA would then approve that and I believe the
major concern that we heard from the states and utilities was a
court could view this as different requirements between the
states and the coal ash rule. And we do believe that should
there be litigation around that, that our experience has been,
it is going to provide substantial weight of EPA's conclusion
that a state program is consistent with the federal rule. Does
that answer your question?
Mr. Cramer. I think it does, but it doesn't alleviate my
concern because with your court example, wouldn't it be easier
if we just had the states permitting as part of the enforcement
mechanism rather than have a court, what I think you are
talking about, a court sort of recognize that the state adopted
this and therefore they will consider that as part of this
citizen suit enforcement mechanism that I think is the
highlight of the rule, which I think is quite problematic.
Obviously, I mean, it is pretty clear by the legislation and
certainly by the majority that that is a fairly major concern
for us.
So yes, I think I understand your answer. I just am not
sure that I can agree with it as a conclusion. With that, I
have nothing further, but I would yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. I have
four letters to ask unanimous consent to submit into the
record. One references the opposition to the draft, and it is
signed by a lot of organizations from all over the country. So
people can check the record for that. Another one, another
letter requests for the subcommittee to convene a hearing to
address this and concerns, and it is signed by a lot of
citizens from across the country. And people can find out who
they are if we accept this into the record.
We also have a letter by the Chamber of Commerce in support
of the legislation and a letter from the Portland Cement in
support of the legislation.
Without objection, I would like to submit these to the
record. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Shimkus. We want to thank you for testifying for us as
part of the process of looking at the bill. We look forward to
some responses to the many questions that members put forth,
and with that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:27 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
