- A LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON EIGHT ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE BILLS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

A LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON EIGHT ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE BILLS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 2, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-111

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov
_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

99-932 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2016
_________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California7
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               JERRY McNERNEY, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        PAUL TONKO, New York
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREGG HARPER, Vice Chairman          GENE GREEN, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     LOIS CAPPS, California
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             KATHY CASTOR, Florida
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   PETER WELCH, Vermont
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILL FLORES, Texas                   FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma               officio)
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     3
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................   147

Witnesses

Ann F. Miles, Director, Office of Energy Projects, Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission..........................................     7
Prepared statement...........................................     9
Answers to submitted questions...............................   175
Max J. Minzner, General Counsel, Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission.....................................................    19
Prepared statement...........................................    21
Tim Powell, Director of Land, GIS and Permits, The Williams
Company, on behalf of the Interstate Natural Gas Association of
America........................................................    50
Prepared statement...........................................    52
Edward Lloyd, Evan M. Frankel Clinical Professor of Environmental
Law, Columbia Law School, on behalf of the New Jersey
Conservation Foundation and the Stony Brook-Millstone Watershed
Association....................................................    59
Prepared statement...........................................    61
Additional information submitted for the record \1\
Bill Bottiggi, General Manager, Braintree Electric Light
Department, on Behalf of the Northeast Public Power Association    79
Prepared statement...........................................    82
Bill Marsan, Executive Vice President and General Counsel,
American Transmission Company..................................    89
Prepared statement...........................................    91
Tyson Slocum, Energy Program Director, Public Citizen, Inc.......   113
Prepared statement...........................................   115
Jeffrey Leahey, Deputy Executive Director, National Hydropower
Association....................................................   122
Prepared statement...........................................   124

Submitted Material

H.R. 3021, the AIR Survey Act of 2015, submitted by Mr. Whitfield   148
H.R. 2984, the Fair RATES Act, submitted by Mr. Whitfield........   151
Discussion Draft, H.R. ___, a Bill to Amend Section 203 of the
Federal Power Act, submitted by Mr. Whitfield..................   153
H.R. 2080, a Bill to Reinstate and Extend the Deadline for
Commencement of Construction of a Hydroelectric Project
Involving Clark Canyon Dam, submitted by Mr. Whitfield.........   154
H.R. 2081, a Bill to Extend the Deadline for Commencement of
Construction of a Hydroelectric Project Involving the Gibson
Dam, submitted by Mr. Whitfield................................   156

----------
\1\ Additional information submitted by Mr. Lloyd has been
retained in committee files and also is available at http://
docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF03/20160202/104387/HHRG-114-IF03-
Wstate-LloydE-20160202-SD088.pdf.
H.R. 3447, a Bill to Extend the Deadline for Commencement of
Construction of a Hydroelectric Project Involving the W. Kerr
Scott Dam, submitted by Mr. Whitfield..........................   158
Discussion Draft, H.R. ___, a Bill to Extend the Deadline for
Commencement of Construction of a Hydroelectric Project
Involving the Jennings Randolph Dam, submitted by Mr. Whitfield   160
Discussion Draft, H.R. ___, a Bill to Extend the Deadline for
Commencement of Construction of a Hydroelectric Project
Involving the Cannonsville Dam, submitted by Mr. Whitfield.....   162
Letter of January 29, 2016, from David C. Sinclair, President,
Advanced Hydro Solutions, LLC, to Mr. Whitfield and Mr. Rush,
submitted by Mr. Whitfield.....................................   164
Statement of Clark Canyon Hydro, LLC, by Alina Osorio, Director,
February 2, 2016, submitted by Mr. Whitfield...................   166
Statement of Hon. Ryan K. Zinke, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Montana, February 2, 2016, submitted by Mr.
Whitfield......................................................   168
Letter of February 3, 2016, from Jim Bradley, Vice President for
Government Relations and Policy, American Rivers, to Mr.
Whitfield and Mr. Rush, submitted by Mr. Whitfield.............   170

A LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON EIGHT ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE BILLS

----------

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 2, 2016

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:02 a.m., in
room 2123 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed Whitfield
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Whitfield, Barton, Olson,
Shimkus, Latta, Harper, McKinley, Pompeo, Kinzinger, Griffith,
Johnson, Long, Ellmers, Flores, Hudson, Upton (ex officio),
Rush, McNerney, Tonko, Green, Capps, Doyle, Castor, Welch, and
Pallone (ex officio).
Also present: Representative Kennedy.
Staff present: Gary Andres, Staff Director; Will Batson,
Legislative Clerk; Allison Busbee, Policy Coordinator, Energy
and Power; Rebecca Card, Assistant Press Secretary; Karen
Christian, General Counsel; Patrick Currier, Senior Counsel,
Energy and Power; Tom Hassenboehler, Chief Counsel, Energy and
Power; A.T. Johnston, Senior Policy Advisor; Brandon Mooney,
Professional Staff Member, Energy and Power; Dan Schneider,
Press Secretary; Jeff Carroll, Democratic Staff Director; Rick
Kessler, Democratic Senior Advisor and Staff Director, Energy
and Environment; John Marshall, Democratic Policy Coordinator;
Alexander Ratner, Democratic Policy Analyst; and Tuley Wright,
Democratic Energy and Environment Policy Advisor.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Mr. Whitfield. I would like to call the hearing to order
this morning.
This is our second hearing in the Second Session of the
114th Congress. I want to take this opportunity to wish
everybody on the committee and those in attendance a very happy
and productive 2016.
This subcommittee has continuously examined legislation
aimed at reducing red tape when it is standing in the way of
economic development and development of energy infrastructure
that would benefit this country. Projects that update and
expand the Nation's energy infrastructure will create jobs and
lead to greater supplies of affordable domestic energy for our
homes and businesses. Affordable energy is very important
because we are in a competitive world today. We are competing
with other countries, and the price of electricity and energy
goes a long way in determining where businesses locate and jobs
are created. So, this is the unifying theme behind the eight
bills that we are going to be discussing today.
H.R. 3021 is the AIR Survey Act of 2015, which was
introduced by Mr. Pompeo. It is an overdue measure to
incorporate data collected through aerial surveys into the
approval process for natural gas infrastructure.
H.R. 2984, the Fair Rates Act, which was introduced by Mr.
Kennedy, sets out a process to deal with those situations under
the Federal Power Act in which FERC neither approves nor denies
an electricity rate change such as when the Commission is
deadlocked.
A draft bill entitled ``A Bill to Amend Section 203 of the
Federal Power Act'' would serve to address an oversight in the
Energy Policy Act of 2005. That law amended Section 203 of the
Federal Power Act which pertains to the sale, disposition,
merger, purchase, and acquisition of certain utility assets and
facilities.
Along with these three bills making procedural changes, we
also have before us five bills dealing with new hydroelectric
projects on existing dams. Given the low cost and low emissions
of hydropower, these projects ought to be among the least
controversial issues of increasing the Nation's electricity
supply.
However, the FERC-issued licenses for these projects have
expired, or soon will expire, largely because of regulatory
delays or unforeseen circumstances that have prevented
construction. These bills extend the life of the license by 6
to 8 years, allowing these job-creating projects to move
forward.
The result of the passage of these eight bills will be more
jobs, more energy for the American people at an affordable
price, and I would urge all my colleagues to support them.
So, that concludes my opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Ed Whitfield

This subcommittee has continuously examined legislation
aimed at cutting red tape where it is standing in the way of
energy infrastructure that would benefit all Americans.
Projects that update and expand the Nation's energy
infrastructure will create jobs and lead to greater supplies of
affordable domestic energy for our homes and businesses. That
is the unifying theme behind the eight bills we will discuss
today.
H.R. 3021, the ``AIR Survey Act of 2015,'' introduced by
Mr. Pompeo, is an overdue measure to incorporate data collected
through aerial surveys into the approval process for natural
gas infrastructure. The bill would enable the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission (FERC) to accept such data in its
application process under the Natural Gas Act, subject to any
verification through ground survey data that FERC deems
appropriate. Given the growing importance of natural gas in our
economy, we will all benefit from a measure such as this that
will help facilitate the construction of new natural gas
pipelines.
H.R. 2984, the ``Fair RATES Act,'' introduced by Mr.
Kennedy, sets out a process to deal with those situations under
the Federal Power Act in which FERC neither approves nor denies
an electricity rate change, such as when the commission is
deadlocked. These rate changes still take effect, but currently
there are limited opportunities for the public to challenge
them because FERC did not officially issue an order. This bill
would create an administrative process for members of the
public who wish to challenge such rate changes.
A draft bill entitled ``A Bill to Amend Section 203 of the
Federal Power Act'' would serve to address an oversight in the
Energy Policy Act of 2005. That law amended section 203 of the
Federal Power Act, which pertains to the sale, disposition,
merger, purchase and acquisition of certain utility assets and
facilities. It raised the minimum monetary thresholds for FERC
jurisdiction from $50,000 to $10 million for three of these
subcategories, but not for acquisitions. This bill would raise
the minimum for acquisitions to $10 million as well, thus
avoiding FERC process for relatively small transactions.
Along with these three bills making procedural changes, we
also have before us five bills dealing with new hydroelectric
projects on existing dams. Given the low cost and low emissions
of hydropower, these projects ought to be among the least
controversial means of increasing the Nation's electricity
supply. However, the FERC- issued licenses for these projects
have expired, or soon will expire, largely because of
regulatory delays or unforeseen circumstances that have
prevented construction. These bills extend the life of the
licenses by 6 to 8 years, allowing these job-creating projects
to move forward.
The result of the passage of these eight bills will be more
jobs and more energy for the American people, and I urge all my
colleagues to support them.

[The proposed legislation appears at the conclusion of the
hearing.]
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I would like to introduce and
recognize the gentleman from Chicago, Mr. Rush, and also wish
you a happy new year, Mr. Rush. He is recognized for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wish you a happy new
year, and I wish all those who are in this committee room a
happy new year also.
I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding today's
hearing on these eight energy infrastructure bills. Mr.
Chairman, while I support the majority of these bills before us
today, I do have some concerns that I would look forward to
addressing as we move forward through the legislative process.
In regards to the five bills extending the time period for
expired hydropower licenses, I support each of these pieces of
legislation. These bills would extend the construction time for
hydropower projects across the country up to 8 years, and I
commend my colleagues for sponsoring these important bills.
Hydropower is a renewable source of energy that has
received widespread, bipartisan support from those on this
subcommittee. Allowing these projects to commence will help
increase the Nation's portfolio of clean, home-grown energy
resources.
Mr. Chairman, I also support very strongly my colleague Mr.
Kennedy's bill, the Fair Rates Act, which would provide the
public with an opportunity to legally challenge rate changes
approved by FERC essentially by new vote.
Mr. Chairman, five times in the past 14 years rate changes
have been approved by default due to the Commission being
deadlocked during a vote. Even when these rate changes
negatively impact consumers, the public currently has no legal
recourse to challenge these cases, as a deadlocked vote is not
legally viewed as in order. The Fair Rates Act would rectify
this inequity by treating new rate changes, including those go
into effect by default, as a FERC order that can be challenged
administratively and, very important, by consumers.
Protecting consumers and average Americans should be a
primary objective of all the bills this committee considers.
While I support most of these legislations that we are
considering today, I am not sure that the remaining two bills
meet that same high threshold.
Mr. Chairman, I look forward to engaging today's witnesses
on both H.R. 3021, the AIR Survey Act of 2016, and the bill
that will amend Section 203 of the Federal Power Act. For both
of these pieces of legislation, I want to make sure that there
aren't any unintended consequences that we are overlooking
before we move forward in making these important policy
changes.
My biggest concern is with H.R. 3021, which will require
FERC to give the same equal weight to aerial survey data that
it does ground survey data in the prefiling process and
avoiding completion of an application for construction of our
natural gas pipeline. Mr. Chairman, I look forward to hearing
from our expert panelists on the practical impact of this
change in policy for both landowners as well as the impact on
the environment.
So, once again, Mr. Chairman, I applaud you for holding
this timely hearing today and I look forward to hearing from
all of our expert witnesses.
With that, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Rush.
At this time I would like to recognize the gentleman from
New Jersey, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and our ranking
member, for this hearing today on a number of bills addressing
programs and projects administered by FERC.
I am particularly pleased that the subcommittee is
considering H.R. 2984, Representative Kennedy's Fair Rates Act,
which would greatly improve the process by which FERC votes are
reconsidered. This small but significant change to the Federal
Power Act would ensure that, if there is a deadlocked vote
amongst Commissioners, there will still be recourse for
eligible parties to seek a review of the rates that result from
a de facto decision of the Commission.
The need for this change became evident in the wake of a
New England forward-capacity market auction in 2014. At that
time, FERC had only four Commissioners and they split over the
question of whether the auction results were just and
reasonable. Since FERC didn't disapprove the auction results,
wholesale electricity prices in New England increased
dramatically. So, while rates went up, none of the affected
parties could challenge the decision or resulting rate increase
and, therefore, no rehearing or judicial review was possible.
There is an old saying, Mr. Chairman, that if you choose
not to decide, you still have made a choice. And we should not
deprive stakeholders of any recourse when a nondecision by FERC
has real consequences for consumers, producers, and others.
Representative Kennedy's bill doesn't favor one side or
another. It merely provides those who want to challenge the
outcome of an action the same rights they would have if FERC
made an affirmative decision. It is thoughtful and meaningful
legislation that deserves to become law as soon as possible.
Unfortunately, I can't say the same about the AIR Survey
Act of 2015. It is a reckless and brazen effort to further
strip landowners and resource agencies of their ability to
participate meaningfully in the gas pipeline siting process.
The bill directs FERC and agencies responsible for implementing
Federal environmental laws not just to allow data collected by
AIR to be used in gas pipeline certification activities, but it
goes so far as to tell scientists and regulators to give it the
same weight in the decision process as data collected on the
ground. We should not categorically make a decision that photos
taken thousand of feet in the air are as accurate in
cataloguing endangered plants and animals as surveys on the
ground, nor should we second-guess scientists and other trained
professionals in State environmental offices or at the Army
Corps as to how best to collect data related to their
implementation of the Clean Water Act.
Furthermore, this legislation is not needed. FERC already
allows aerial data to be used in proceedings under Section 7 of
the Natural Gas Act. The only reason to move the legislation is
to shortcircuit meaningful environmental assessments and to get
around the concerns of private landowners and in some cases
local governments who have legitimately barred pipeline
companies from surveying after those companies were caught
acting illegally without proper authorization. It is a bad
concept and a bad bill, and it should not move any further.
Mr. Pompeo's other legislative proposal is, on the other
hand, something worth exploring. The committee print before us
would add a $10 million threshold to trigger FERC review of a
merger or consolidation, since under current law no such
threshold exists. I am particularly interested in hearing from
Mr. Slocum regarding the concerns he raised with this
legislation because this is not a change that we should
undertake lightly. I look forward to working with my colleagues
to see if there is a way forward on this issue.
Finally, I just want to say that I know of no major
objection with regard to any of the five hydroelectric
construction license extension bills before us. They have all
bipartisan support, and I hope we will move quickly on them.
I appreciate the chair and the ranking member for holding
this hearing, and the witnesses.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

I want to thank Chairman Whitfield and Ranking Member Rush
for holding today's legislative hearing on a number of bills
addressing programs and projects administered by the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC).
I am particularly pleased that the subcommittee is
considering H.R. 2984, Rep. Kennedy's FAIR Rates Act, which
would greatly improve the process by which FERC votes are
reconsidered. This small, but significant change to the Federal
Power Act would ensure that if there is a deadlocked vote among
the Commissioners, there will still be recourse for eligible
parties to seek a review of the rates that result from a de
facto decision of the Commission. The need for this change
became evident in the wake of a New England Forward Capacity
Market Auction in 2014. At that time, FERC had only four
Commissioners and they split over the question of whether the
auction results were just and reasonable. Since FERC didn't
disapprove the auction results, wholesale electricity prices in
New England increased dramatically. So, while rates went up,
none of the affected parties could challenge the decision or
resulting rate increase, and, therefore, no rehearing or
judicial review was possible.
There's an old saying that ``if you choose not to decide,
you still have made a choice.'' We should not deprive
stakeholders of any recourse when a nondecision by FERC has
very real consequences for consumers, producers and many
others. Rep. Kennedy's bill doesn't favor one side or another,
it merely provides those who want to challenge the outcome of
inaction the same rights they would have if FERC made an
affirmative decision. It is thoughtful and meaningful
legislation that deserves to become law as soon as possible.
Unfortunately, I cannot say the same thing about the Air
Survey Act of 2015: it is a reckless and brazen effort to
further strip landowners and resource agencies of their ability
to participate meaningfully in the gas pipeline siting process.
The bill directs FERC and agencies responsible for implementing
Federal environmental laws not just to allow data collected by
air to be used in gas pipeline certificating activities, but it
goes so far as to tell scientists and regulators to give it the
same weight in the decision process as data collected on the
ground! We should not categorically make a decision that photos
taken thousands of feet in the air are as accurate in
cataloging endangered plants and animals as surveys on the
ground. Nor should we second guess scientists and other trained
professionals in State environmental offices or at the Army
Corps as to how best to collect data related to their
implementation of the Clean Water Act.
Furthermore, this legislation is not needed. FERC already
allows aerial data to be used in proceedings under section 7 of
the Natural Gas Act. The only reason to move this legislation
is to short circuit meaningful environmental assessments and to
get around the concerns of private landowners and, in some
cases, local governments who have legitimately barred pipeline
companies from surveying after those companies were caught
acting illegally, without proper authorization. It is a bad
concept, a bad bill and it should not move any farther.
Mr. Pompeo's other legislative proposal is, on the other
hand, something worth exploring. The committee print before us
would add a $10 million threshold to trigger FERC review of a
merger or consolidation, since, under current law, no such
threshold exists. I am particularly interested in hearing from
Mr. Slocum regarding the concerns he raises with this
legislation because this is not a change we should undertake
lightly. I look forward to working with my colleagues to see if
there is a way forward on this issue.
Finally, I just want to say that I know of no major
objection with regard to any of the 5 hydroelectric
construction license extension bills before us. They all have
bipartisan support, and I hope we will move on them quickly.
I appreciate the chair and ranking member for holding this
hearing, and I also thank the witnesses for participating
today.

Mr. Pallone. I would like to yield the remainder of my time
to Mr. Kennedy.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you very much, Mr. Pallone. I am
grateful.
And I want to thank the chairman and the ranking member for
holding this important hearing.
My constituents face the highest energy rates in the
continental United States. So, today's discussion about
skyrocketing energy cost is, unfortunately, nothing new to my
home State.
But what happened to us 2 years ago after rates were filed
with FERC should never happen, no matter how expensive or cheap
your energy bill is. The Commission, which at that time was
down to four Commissioners, deadlocked. The rates become
effective by operation of law, precluding any avenue for
administrative redress.
As a result, any now protest of those rates were dismissed
because, according to FERC and the Federal Power Act, there is
no decision to rehear. That is unacceptable. But there is
nothing my constituents could do to protest because of the flaw
in the Federal Power Act.
My bill, H.R. 2984, the Fair Rates Act, is a simple
technical fix to ensure that scenario doesn't happen again. It
ensures all administrative and judicial avenues for redress are
available whenever new rates take effect, including in the
advent of a deadlocked Commission.
Today FERC once again is down only to four Commissioners,
without a fifth so much as nominated, setting the stage for
that event to play out again in the next weeks or in the month
ahead.
I appreciate FERC's thoughts on the legislation and their
work with both me and my staff over the past several years.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses, and
particularly Bill Bottiggi, who was willing to come down to
Washington to share his expertise with us.
I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back, and that
concludes our opening statements today.
So, we have two panels of witnesses. On our first panel we
have two witnesses. I would like to welcome them first, Ann
Miles, who is the Director of the Office of Energy Projects at
the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, and the other witness
is Max Minzner, who is General Counsel, Office of the General
Counsel, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.
I thank both of you very much for taking time to be with us
today to give your thoughts and ideas about these pieces of
legislation.
Ms. Miles, I will recognize you first for 5 minutes for
your opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF ANN F. MILES, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF ENERGY
PROJECTS, FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY COMMISSION, AND MAX J.
MINZNER, GENERAL COUNSEL, FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY COMMISSION

STATEMENT OF ANN F. MILES

Ms. Miles. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. And be sure to turn the microphone on.
Ms. Miles. Good morning, Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member
Rush, and members of the subcommittee.
My name is Ann Miles, and I am the Director of the Office
of Energy Projects at the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.
The Commission is responsible for siting infrastructure,
including non-Federal hydropower projects, interstate natural
gas pipelines and storage facilities, and liquefied natural gas
terminals.
I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you to
comment on the five hydropower bills to extend commencement of
construction deadlines and on the Aerial Infrastructure Route
Survey Act of 2015.
As a member of the Commission's staff, the views I express
in this testimony are my own and not those of the Chairman,
other than as specifically noted, or of any individual
Commissioner.
I will first comment on the hydropower extension bills,
H.R. 2080, H.R. 2081, H.R. 3447, the bill regarding Jennings
Randolph Project No. 12715, and the bill regarding Cannonsville
bill, Project No. 13287. Each of the bills seeks to extend the
project's commencement of construction deadline to a total of
no more than 10 years from the date the project license was
issued. The last several Commission Chairmen, as well as the
current Chairman, have taken the position of not opposing
legislation that would extend the commencement of construction
deadline no further than 10 years from the date the licensing
decision was issued. Because each of these bills provides for
commencement of construction deadlines that do not exceed 10
years from the dates of the respective licenses being issued, I
do not oppose these bills.
I note that all bills, except for H.R. 2081, contain a
reinstatement provision, should the period required for
commencement of construction expire prior to enactment of the
Act. Congress may want to consider including a reinstatement
provision in H.R. 2081.
Second, I will comment on the Aerial Infrastructure Route
Survey Act, H.R. 3021. The bill would amend Section 7 of the
Natural Gas Act to provide that data collected by aerial survey
will be accepted in lieu of and given equal weight to ground
survey data for the purpose of completing the Commission's
natural gas project prefiling process and for completing
applications associated with Federal authorizations related to
such projects.
The bill provides that an agency may require that aerial
survey data be verified through the use of on-the-ground survey
data before project construction. Aerial surveys can be a
useful tool for developing project routes and making initial
determinations of resources that may be affected by a proposed
project.
Currently, Commission staff accepts aerial survey data,
especially where ground access is not available during the
prefiling or application review process. However, most project
applications include ground survey data for a significant
portion of the right-of-way. I do have some concern that
waiting to verify large amounts of aerial data until late in
the project development process or after issuance of a
certificate could in some cases pose difficulties.
For example, if it was not discovered until the
preconstruction stage that a project might affect historic
properties or endangered species, matters that can be difficult
to determine with certainty in the absence of on-the-ground
surveys, a project proponent might be required at a late stage
to amend its approved route or to conduct additional
mitigation, which could cause delay and additional expense.
This concludes my remarks, and I would be pleased to answer
any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Miles follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Ms. Miles, thanks very much for your opening
statement.
Mr. Minzner, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MAX MINZNER

Mr. Minzner. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Rush, members of
the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to testify here
today.
My name is Max Minzner. I am the General Counsel at the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. Like Ms. Miles, I am also
a staff witness and my remarks today don't necessarily reflect
the views of the Chairman or any specific Commissioner.
I have been asked to testify today on two bills that would
amend the Federal Power Act. One is a bill that would modify
Section 203 of the Federal Power Act to set a minimum threshold
value of $10 million on the merger or consolidation of
facilities belonging to public utilities that would be required
for FERC approval.
And two, H.R. 2984, a bill that would amend Section 205 of
the Federal Power Act, that would permit a party to seek
rehearing and subsequent appellate review of any rate change
filed under Section 205 that takes effect without Commission
action.
The first proposed bill would amend a provision of the
Federal Power Act, Section 203, that requires public utilities
to seek Commission approval before engaging a wide range of
corporate transactions. In particular, this bill would change
the Act so that utilities would only need prior FERC approval
to merge or consolidate facilities, subject to the Commission's
jurisdiction, if the facility's value was in excess of $10
million. In other words, mergers or consolidations of
facilities with a value less than that amount would not need
FERC approval.
This bill would align this provision of the FPA with the
other subsections of Section 203(a)(1) which regulate other
transactions by public utilities, each of which already
contains a $10 million de minimis threshold. In my view, the
proposal to add the same de minimis threshold to Section
203(a)(1)(B) of the FPA could ease the administrative burden on
Commission staff and the regulatory burden on industry without
a significant negative effect on the Commission's regulatory
responsibilities. Transactions below that threshold are
unlikely to impose a significant negative impact on competition
or the rates of utility customers.
Second, H.R. 2984 would permit rehearing and appellate
review of changes to rates made under Section 205 when those
rates take effect without Commission action. To change rates or
other tariff provisions under Section 205, a public utility
typically makes a filing with FERC and the Commission will take
action on the proposal during a 60-day statutory time period.
In very rare cases, the Commission has not acted on that filing
within the time period, and the filing takes effect when the
period expires.
In my view, rehearing and appellate review are not
currently available when a filing submitted pursuant to Section
205 of the FPA takes effect by operation of law. Appellate
review is an important procedural avenue, though, for those who
do not prevail before an administrative agency. Where review in
the court of appeals may be challenging under this legislation
because the appellate court will not be able to rely on the
Commission's reasoning in the first instance, the possibility
of a rehearing order or a remand from the court of appeals
should reduce this difficulty and allow the court of appeals to
effectively engage in review of the rate change.
That concludes my prepared testimony. I look forward to
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Minzner follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Minzner, thank you, and thank both of
you for your testimony.
At this time I recognize myself for 5 minutes of questions,
and I yield my time to the gentleman from Kansas, Mr. Pompeo.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
for yielding to me as well.
Ms. Miles, thank you for being here this morning. I wanted
to ask you a couple of questions about H.R. 3021.
Can you describe for me some of the benefits of having
access to aerial route survey data for FERC?
Ms. Miles. Well, aerial survey can be very useful in making
general determinations or in some resource areas more specific
determinations. So, certainly, for getting the route and
initial determinations, yes, it can be useful.
Mr. Pompeo. I appreciate that.
Yes, I want to talk about a couple of concerns that you
expressed and try to understand them, so that we might be able
to make some changes to accommodate them, if we need to.
In regard to endangered species, considering all the time
and money spent to protect them, isn't it safe to assume that
we know where those habitats are?
Ms. Miles. Not necessarily on a specific project. The
details would be required for us as well as other Federal
agencies who have responsibility for dealing with the species,
the Fish and Wildlife Service, especially for pipeline
projects.
Mr. Pompeo. But isn't it the case that the company that is
intending to do this survey is going to do their best to
identify that? That is, they don't want to have big amendments
at the end, either. They have an enormous financial incentive
to get this right.
Ms. Miles. Very understandable. As we are seeing and as I
said in our projects so far, most companies, where they can
have project access early, are gathering that data. We all want
to do as much as we can during prefiling.
Mr. Pompeo. Yes. Yes. No, that makes perfect sense, and
when you have ground access, that is great. But in those
instances where I think this is most important is the places
where ground access is not available; it has been denied. And
so, the only other option would be being very disruptive to the
landowner, either eminent domain or something of that nature.
This is a way to mitigate the impact to those landowners and
still get the information that we all need to make sure that
that certificate is properly granted.
It seems to me we have struck the right balance here. Do
you agree with that?
Ms. Miles. I think on a narrower course of that, it would
be. I am not sure the bill is specific about the areas where
there isn't access, there isn't on-the-ground access.
Mr. Pompeo. That makes sense. And the same thing with
respect to historic sites, those are listed. Right? Most often,
we don't have to guess. I suppose there is a handful that are
unknown, but that has to be the rarest of creatures.
Ms. Miles. I am sorry, I missed what----
Mr. Pompeo. With respect to historic sites, you expressed
some concern that a narrow survey might not adequately identify
an historic site. There is a registry of historic sites. I
mean, that is not hard to figure out where they are.
Ms. Miles. I think that many of those, though, will require
on-the-ground work. Yes, there is a register of historic sites,
but sometimes there are sites along the way that haven't been
identified. We know there are archaeological or cultural sites,
but they haven't been identified and they are not on the
register yet. And so, it could take on-the-ground survey to get
at that information.
Mr. Pompeo. Yes, I just think about these companies that
are trying to do this. They are going to try to get that right.
They have the most vested interest in making sure that they do
that right. And if they need a ground survey to do it, I am
confident they will work through it. I just think it is
important that they and FERC have access to this tool, so that
we can be less disruptive to landowners as we are working our
way through the process.
Thanks for your testimony.
Mr. Minzner, a question for you on the amendment to the
draft, to Section 203. Tell me what the scale of the burden
that this would relieve on FERC is. Can you give me man-hours?
If we adjust these limits to the place that is proposed, tell
me what benefits accrue to FERC in terms of reduced burden.
Mr. Minzner. Congressman, thank you for that question.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Minzner, be sure and pull your
microphone closer. Interestingly enough, we have people
watching this on the Internet, and they have complained that
they didn't hear everything you said.
Mr. Minzner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you for your question, Congressman.
I don't think I have an estimate of the number of man-hours
that it would save the Commission. I do know that about 20
percent of the Section 203 applications that FERC considered in
fiscal year 2015 would fall below the statutory threshold, and
therefore, would not have needed approval if this bill were in
place last year.
I can tell you that every filing that comes into the
Commission under Section 203 otherwise looks at it closely and,
if Commission action is required, a draft order is prepared for
the Commission. And so, every filing is taken seriously and
staff works on it intensively.
Mr. Pompeo. Do you see any downside risk from creating
parity between acquisitions and dispositions? Right, they are
very similar? Do you see any burden or any downside to what we
are proposing in just making parity as between those two types
of transactions?
Mr. Minzner. Well, the value of the bill, of course, as you
said, would bring parity between this provision of Section 203
and otherwise. It is, of course, a policy choice of how much
oversight Congress wants these mergers to have at the
Commission level. In my view, transactions that are below the
de minimis threshold pose relatively limited risk to rates or
competition.
Mr. Pompeo. Great. Thank you very much.
And thank you again for yielding, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentleman from
Illinois, Mr. Rush, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Now, Ms. Miles, in your statement you note that, currently,
``most project applications include ground surveys for a
significant portion of the right-of-way.'' You also state that
``waiting to verify large amounts of aerial data until late in
the project development process, or after issuance of a
certificate, could in some cases pose difficulties.''
Are you concerned that policy change outlined in the AIR
Survey Act of 2016 may impact, actually, the need to raise an
additional cost for our pipeline projects rather than
expediting these same projects? And can you explain your
concerns?
Ms. Miles. I think if it is carried out similarly to now,
where the companies are doing the on-the-ground surveys where
they have access, and in the majority of the cases companies do
have access to a good bit of survey route and are able to do
the on-the-ground surveys in the earlier stage of the
certification process, as long as that continues, I think that
is fine. As I said in my testimony, aerial survey data can be
useful where there is not on-the-ground access, as long as
there is the opportunity to verify that later in the process by
actual on-the-ground surveys for the resource areas where it
would be necessary. It is not necessary for all resource areas.
Mr. Rush. Thank you.
Mr. Minzner, in your statement you cited serial mergers as
a possible concern with the merger in Section 203 of the
Federal Power Act. You state that, ``The Commission would no
longer have the authority to review and approve mergers valued
at less than $10 million even in situations where the merger
took place as one of a series of transactions that exceeded the
limit in total.''
However, you also state that you believe that FERC has
other tools available to protect consumers and the public
interest if circumstances such as what I describe would arise.
Can you explain what are these other tools that the FERC has at
its disposal that would help in the situation that I describe?
Mr. Minzner. Yes, Congressman. Thank you.
The Commission has a range of regulatory tools that it
exercises in its oversight of public utilities regulated under
the Federal Power Act. For instance, if a utility gains market
power and is in a situation where it has authority to charge
market-based rates, the Commission can modify or eliminate that
authority to charge market-based rates.
To the extent that a public utility is operated in one of
the Commission-approved organized wholesale electric markets,
there are a range of Commission-approved mitigation measures
that are designed to limit or eliminate the exercise of market
power. And, of course, the Commission retains its enforcement
authority to regulate misconduct that is a violation of
Commission rule or order or rises to a level of market
manipulation.
Those are three examples of mechanisms that the Commission
would have to regulate the exercise of market power or other
misconduct, even in the absence of the merger authority.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Olson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the chair.
And welcome to our friends from FERC.
I am going to talk about natural gas and pipelines. The
questions will be mostly for Ms. Miles, but, Mr. Minzner, if
the spirit so moves you, please answer if you feel comfortable.
There has been big change in the last decade. Our electric
grid relies heavily on natural gas. If the President's Clean
Power Plan survives in court, that trend will continue and
accelerate.
Gas is critical as a baseload power. It is immune to
weather, and it is critical for ramping up and down wind and
solar on our grids. But gas can't keep the lights on without a
robust pipeline system. And that is why this committee examines
legislation designed to make the permitting process more
reasonable.
My first question is for you, Ms. Miles. It is a broad one
on the pipeline landscape. I have a few specifics about siting.
First, what trends do you see in pipeline construction and
what does this tell you about the future of natural gas?
Ms. Miles. We have seen a tremendous increase in the
workload before us, both for natural gas pipelines as well as
for liquefied natural gas facilities, at least doubling in the
number of projects that are before us, in some cases tripling
in the capacity that would move through those pipelines, and
similar increases in interest in liquefied natural gas
projects.
Mr. Olson. Mr. Minzner, care to comment, sir?
Mr. Minzner. Nothing to add to Ms. Miles.
Mr. Olson. That is oK. That is fine.
Again, Ms. Miles, as FERC is a lead agency for siting
natural gas pipelines that cross across State lines, you all
are responsible for sending the schedule and coordinating all
the various environmental permits, is that correct?
Ms. Miles. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Olson. Would you prefer to review those various
permits, like Clean Water Act permits and all the other boxes
that need to be checked, done concurrently on the order they
are submitted as opposed to successively? Do you prefer that,
concurrently as opposed to successively?
Ms. Miles. The more that we can work at the same time in
gathering information and reviewing that information, working
together on our environmental documents, yes, that is a good
thing.
Mr. Olson. Concurrently versus successive, oK, great.
Are you aware of any situations where a State agency,
acting pursuant to a Federal delegated authority, has failed to
meet the schedule established by FERC? Anytime this happened, a
State agency not meeting your schedules? Are you aware of that?
Ms. Miles. I am sorry, I am not prepared to answer that
today, but I would be happy to get back to you on it.
Mr. Olson. Thank you.
Mr. Minzner, I would ask you to swing at that one, sir.
Mr. Minzner. I also don't know the answer to that question,
but I would second Ms. Miles' comment, to the extent that we
can collaboratively with other agencies, that is an important
and valuable thing for us to do.
Mr. Olson. Final question about LNG. I have heard that FERC
has slipped past in some deadlines recently on some LNG export
terminals. As you all know, the first export of LNG to
scheduled to happen later this month, maybe early March, at
Sabine Pass in Louisiana, right next to Texas, my own State.
With a weak Commander-in-Chief, the best tool we have to
hurt OPEC, Iran, ISIS, and Russia is taking their money from
our energy, getting on the global market, selling our natural
gas to our allies.
What is FERC doing to address the energy exports in a
timely manner, to make sure we get that energy on the market
now and hurt OPEC, hurt Russia, hurt ISIS, and hurt Iran?
Ms. Miles. As with all the projects before us, both LNG and
pipeline projects, we work to expedite them as best we can.
Well, for LNG projects, they are required to use our prefiling
process. We think that is a very good opportunity for all the
agencies, tribes, as well as the company, to look at what
issues and what information is needed. So that when the
application is filed, it is a complete application and we are
able to go as quickly as we can to our environmental analysis
of the project.
Mr. Olson. Yes, please, please expedite because another
project right across the river from Sabine Pass is having some
problems moving forward with the permitting process. So,
please, please do that, because, then, that is the biggest tool
we have to battle the guys who don't like us, again, OPEC,
ISIS, Iran, and Russia.
I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
At this time the Chair recognizes the gentleman from
California, Mr. McNerney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. I thank the chairman, and I thank the
witnesses this morning.
Ms. Miles, what, if anything, would be missed by relying on
aerial surveying in lieu of ground surveys?
Ms. Miles. I think the issue that we have is we need to
make sure that we and the other agencies who have Federal
permits that need to be carried out have the information they
need in order to do that. For some resource areas, as I have
said, it may require an on-the-ground survey. So, it can be
done sequentially with an aerial survey first, as long as the
data is collected before the certification or at least before
construction occurs.
Mr. McNerney. Well, in your opinion, can ground surveying
be completely eliminated in any conditions?
Ms. Miles. I do not believe right now that ground surveys
in some instances could be eliminated.
Mr. McNerney. Although in your experience, though, there
are some common causes for delayed--or what are some of the
common causes for delays in construction time, start times?
Ms. Miles. The certificates that are issued will include
requirements for the company to get any outstanding permits. I
don't have data across the board, but in some projects we are
needing to do water quality certification, have that
certification from the agencies or Endangered Species Act
consultation completed.
Mr. McNerney. Well, are there any areas in which FERC can
help improve the permitting, licensing, and construction
processes?
Ms. Miles. I think what we are trying to do is to work
during the prefiling. In pipelines, also, it is not a
requirement that companies use the prefiling process, but we do
encourage the large pipelines to do so, and they have been
doing it routinely. It is during that prefiling process that
both we and the companies are working with not only us, but the
other agencies that are involved. Many, many agencies are
cooperating agencies with us in our environmental document, and
that is a very valuable thing to do.
Mr. McNerney. I mean, so you are saying that the value is
in the pre-application process, the work together cooperatively
to find some of the hotspots and fix those beforehand. But what
is the difference in terms of ultimate time between the initial
application and the licensing if you take into account the
time, the pre-licensing time?
Ms. Miles. As long as the application that is filed is
complete, then we are able to move quite quickly to the
environmental document. I am not quite sure----
Mr. McNerney. I mean, ultimately, if you want to get a
permit, how much time do you save by going through a pre-
permitting process as opposed to just going into it and
wrestling with FERC during the permitting process?
Ms. Miles. Our experience is that most projects move more
quickly if they have used the prefiling process. There are some
that it is not necessary on, where there aren't a lot of
issues. But, where there are, it is a valuable thing to use.
Mr. McNerney. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Minzner, you mentioned that FERC has tools to protect
consumers and the public interest if a serial merger is taking
place. How often does FERC use those tools and have they ever
been used when reviewing actions under Section 203?
Mr. Minzner. Well, our primary tool, when looking at
actions under 203, is, in fact, the merger authority. The broad
set of tools I referred to involves FERC's overall authority of
the rates, terms, and conditions of the services of public
utilities.
One of the goals of the Section 203 and the merger approval
is to ensure that a merger does not have an effect on
competition or rates. That is one mechanism that FERC carries
out its statutory mission to ensure that electric rates are
just and reasonable.
The other tools are other mechanisms. The Commission is
constantly looking at the rates that are filed by electric
utilities that operate in Commission markets. It has an active
program of reviewing the market-based rates. It is also
continually looking at the mitigation efforts in the organized
wholesale markets. So, it is something the Commission does
routinely as it is looking at the behavior of public utilities.
Mr. McNerney. Can you answer briefly how many enforcement
actions did FERC take in 2015?
Mr. Minzner. I am not aware of the number of enforcement
actions the Commission has taken in 2015. We will have to get
back to you with that.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time the Chair recognizes the
gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just have one issue. It is on, I think, the last bill
noticed. Hopefully, I will be here for the second panel for Mr.
Marsan's testimony.
But I want to weave the story about language of law,
congressional intent, and, then, obviously, agency
implementation, or lack thereof, which is a thing that we
always talk about here and that our public always harasses
about, because we have the language of law. We have Members who
are present in the Conference Committee. We have the record,
but, then, somehow through agency or Commission activities,
things don't handle. And then, you fall into litigation and
lawsuits and all this other stuff.
So, let me go back to the 2005 energy bill. Again, Mr.
Marsan has it, I think, properly identified in his testimony.
He is on the second panel. And I was lucky to serve on the
Conference Committee for the passage of that bill, led by at
that time Chairman Barton.
The sole purpose of one of the revisions was to update the
pricing of the cost of doing a project from decades ago to a
$10 million threshold where, if it is under that, Commission
involvement was not needed. We upped that dollar amount to what
they needed to be, based upon $10 million. So, I think the
original threshold was $50,000 40 years ago. That was the
intent. That is what we did. The law was passed.
Now it seems that on the equation line there is a debate
about purchases versus divestitures, and that our argument
would be that the intent of the legislation in the 2005 energy
bill was to set a new threshold for a dollar amount when the
Commission should be involved. We don't think you all are doing
that. That is why I think we have the last bill in this series
of bills listed for the hearing, to address that.
We sought to address this issue in H.R. 8 last year, and we
appreciate that we are staying committed, this committee, to
make this simple fix once and for all on this piece of
standalone legislation. We are just trying to really,
unfortunately, fix something we don't think needs to be fixed,
based upon Commission reading into intent of the language of
law that was never meant to be intended by those who served on
the Conference Committee.
Do you understand the weaving of the question and do you
have any comments to that?
Mr. Minzner. Yes, Congressman. I am not aware of any
published legislative history in 2005.
Mr. Shimkus. Well, I can tell you what it is.
[Laughter.]
I was there. Some of us were there.
Mr. Minzner. Yes, you are correct that, prior to that
legislation, Section 203 contained a $50,000 figure that the
Commission had interpreted through its regulations as applying
to all the provisions of Section 203. As a result of the change
in EPAC 2005, and the statute was broken into subsections,
three of which contained a $10 million figure, and the one that
we are discussing today currently does not. You are correct,
the Commission has interpreted that as not imposing any de
minimis threshold for mergers and consolidations. Obviously,
this would add that provision into the statute and put us in a
situation where the same financial threshold applies to all
provisions under Section 203, which was the case prior to EPAC
2005. Then, of course, it was $50,000 rather than $10 million.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. That is, actually, a great answer
because I think, in answering that, you identified the problem.
Three of the provisions were accepted under the $10 million,
and the Commission by themselves decided that one did not. We
would argue that it was always the congressional intent for $10
million to be that. So, I would hope that our colleagues would
ask questions as we move this forward and get this fixed in an
area that we probably shouldn't have needed to fix.
With that, Mr. Chairman, thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
At this time the Chair recognizes the gentleman from New
York, Mr. Tonko, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Ms. Miles and Mr. Minzner, thank you for being here today.
Ms. Miles, at what point during the natural gas pipeline
application process are data from surveying used?
Ms. Miles. The data that is gathered would be used in our
environmental document.
Mr. Tonko. So, your prefiling?
Ms. Miles. Once the application is filed, we would be
looking to make sure that we have all the data that we need to
analyze the issues that have been raised. And then, that would
be analyzed in that document and made available to the public
to comment on it.
Mr. Tonko. OK. Thank you. Today is FERC able to accept
aerial survey data?
Ms. Miles. Yes, we are.
Mr. Tonko. And what about the Army Corps of Engineers or
any of our State environmental agencies?
Ms. Miles. I am not able to speak for them. I understand
that they do accept it differently, but I have not experienced
that. So, I am not able to speak for them.
Mr. Tonko. OK. I appreciate that. I understand that FERC is
the coordinating agency on these projects, but it seems to me
that this bill is really about the data that other agencies,
including non-Federal agencies, are willing to accept as they
work on their studies as part of the application process. I
think it would be important to hear from those agencies also.
Ms. Miles, this bill allows aerial data to be verified by
ground surveys after the fact, is that correct?
Ms. Miles. Yes, after the certification would be issued,
then where there is a need to verify the data by ground survey,
that would be done then, before construction could begin.
Mr. Tonko. OK.
Ms. Miles. And the license would spell that out. I mean,
the certification would spell out exactly what is needed for
which resources.
Mr. Tonko. OK. And do you foresee the potential for
problems or delays if an agency decides that it needs this data
to be verified much later in the process?
Ms. Miles. As I said in my testimony, there are some cases
where it has the potential to delay or add additional expense
if there is more analysis or perhaps even a rerouting of the
pipeline at a later date.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And when a natural gas pipeline
application is finalized and submitted, about how long does it
take for FERC to make a decision on any given project?
Ms. Miles. I am sorry, could you restate the question,
Congressman?
Mr. Tonko. Sure. When a natural gas pipeline application is
finalized and submitted, about how long does it take for FERC
to make its decision on a project?
Ms. Miles. That does vary from project to project, but our
record shows that we have issued about 92 percent of our
projects within 1 year from the filing of the application.
Mr. Tonko. So, pretty much an average of perhaps less than
a year?
Ms. Miles. Yes.
Mr. Tonko. And since 2005, FERC has authorized a lot of
natural gas pipeline infrastructure, over 10,000 miles of
interstate transmission pipeline. Am I right in that
assumption, in that fact?
Ms. Miles. I would need to check that fact.
Mr. Tonko. OK. This bill is a solution, I believe, in
search of a problem. FERC is able to process applications
currently at an appropriate speed while allowing for public
discussion and thorough environmental review. My fear is that a
transition to primarily aerial surveying would alter that
dynamic and it would promote expediency at the expense of
property owners' rights. So, with that, I think we should be
somewhat concerned with these proposed changes and err on the
side of property owners and their rights.
I thank you both again for your testimony today.
With that, Mr. Chair, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
At this time the Chair recognizes the gentleman from Ohio,
Mr. Latta, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for today's
hearing, and thank you very much to our witnesses for being
with us today. We appreciate your testimony today.
I know some of the questions, it is kind of like it might
sound a little bit redundant, but we are just kind of asking,
not quite asking the same questions the same way, but just with
a little bit different twist.
Ms. Miles, I would ask you the first few questions. Do you
think that the changes in H.R. 3021 work to balance
environmental concerns while allowing FERC to more effectively
fill its mission as the lead agency under Section 7 of the
Natural Gas Act?
Ms. Miles. I think the changes, as I have said, the
changes, we are accepting aerial survey data at present.
However, the companies are tending to do on-the-ground survey
when they have access, and that is the key.
Mr. Latta. So, when you are saying you are accepting it
right now, FERC doesn't have any objection right now for
allowing aerial surveys for that information to come before you
then?
Ms. Miles. We do not.
Mr. Latta. OK. Would FERC object to a State agency using
aerial survey data to issue a conditional Clean Water Permit
when it is required for a FERC certificate?
Ms. Miles. I am not able to speak for the other agency.
Mr. Latta. OK. And does FERC have any reason to oppose H.R.
3021?
Ms. Miles. I don't think there is a reason to oppose. We
have mentioned what could possibly be a problem if we get a
majority of the survey data through aerials late in the
process.
Mr. Latta. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Minzner, if I could turn to you, regarding the Fair
Rates Act, in those situations when filings have taken effect
under Section 205 without a Commission order, how does the
Commission handle the rehearing requests of those parties that
have sought rehearing?
Mr. Minzner. Under the current structure of the Federal
Power Act, my view and the stated view of the Commission is
that rehearing does not lie. So, the rehearing conditions are
simply dismissed. That has happened twice. So, rehearing is
just not acted on.
Mr. Latta. If the Commission dismisses these rehearing
requests, what recourse do the parties have? Can they appeal
the decision to the court of appeals?
Mr. Minzner. Our position is, under the current version of
the Federal Power Act, there is no opportunity for rehearing if
the rates take effect as a matter of law. And because rehearing
is a prerequisite to appellate review, there is no appellate
review, either.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
And you note in your testimony that the Fair Rates Act
would have significant benefits. Please explain on these
benefits, particularly with respect to the parties seeking
rehearing before the Commission and, also, parties seeking a
redress in the court of appeals.
Mr. Minzner. Rehearing and appellate review are important
ways where individuals and entities that have not succeeded at
the administrative stage could seek review of administrative
action. It is an important procedural protection, and the
primary benefit is that it would allow individuals who disagree
with the action of the agency to seek redress in the court of
appeals.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I am going to yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. The gentleman yields back.
At this time the Chair recognizes the gentlelady from
California, Mrs. Capps, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hear
and, also, to today's witnesses for your testimonies.
We all agree that we need to ensure a regulatory landscape
that successfully addresses energy needs across this Nation.
But decisions we make regarding our Nation's energy
infrastructure could have both positive and negative impacts on
our local economies, on public health, and environmental
safety.
Some of these impacts have been seen, unfortunately,
negatively in my District. Some of you may know that in May of
last year an oil pipeline ruptured near the coast in my
District, resulting in a spill that both polluted the land and
the adjoining water. This oil fouled our beaches, and they are
key for recreation and tourism in the area, marred the pristine
landscape, threatening the health of local plants and animals
as well as the economy of the region. Questions about the
safety of local seafood forced fisheries to close, resulting in
lost wages, uncertainty in this industry, which is critical to
the economy and culture of California's central coast.
Now cleanup efforts have remediated much of the immediate
impact and fisheries have reopened, but we still have no idea
what the long-term impacts will be. While I know that the AIR
Survey Act that we are discussing today is focused on natural
gas pipelines, the fact is that extraction, storage, and
transportation of fossil fuels, whether oil or natural gas,
this is a dirty and dangerous business.
The ongoing Aliso Canyon natural gas leak just south of my
District is a clear example of this danger. Not only is the
methane from this leak significantly increasing the region's
greenhouse gas emissions, it is leading to adverse health
impacts and it is forcing the relocation of nearby residents.
So, we must prioritize the health of our constituents, the
safety of the environment, make sure we are working to ensure
these priorities. One way to do that, of course, is to continue
the push toward adopting clean renewable energy. And while we
do that, we must also ensure that we are doing all we can to
ensure safest practices for the development and operations of
our Nation's energy infrastructure until we can fully replace
fossil fuels.
Utilizing all the tools available to us when making
decisions regarding public health and environmental safety
makes a great deal of sense. However, I have several concerns
regarding the replacement of one method with another when they
may be fundamentally unable to produce the same results.
My question to you, Mrs. Miles, it touches on what many
have been asking about, but I want to zero-in on the detail.
Are aerial surveys able to identify all of the same details as
ground surveys? For example, would aerial surveys be able to
unequivocally state whether endangered or threatened species
are present or if the landscape is a seasonal wetland,
something of this nature?
Ms. Miles. Thank you, Congresswoman.
As I said, aerial surveys are not able to identify some
particular resources in the detail that is needed to do an
analysis and make a finding. Some of those that we have found
that is the case to be, endangered species, cultural resources,
and it could be wetlands also.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you.
You know, my fear is that the language in this bill
requires different survey methods to be given equal weight and
allows for one method to functionally replace the other,
regardless of equivalency. Furthermore, while I appreciate that
this discussion addresses one aspect of the energy
infrastructure development, it is only the beginning of a much
larger conversation we must have in this committee regarding
not only pipeline siting, but also pipeline safety and
supporting renewable energy technologies.
Mr. Chairman, I do look forward to continuing to work with
you and other efforts to improve our Nation's energy
infrastructure.
Thank you very much, and I have no further questions. I
will yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentlelady yields back.
At this time the Chair recognizes the gentleman from West
Virginia, Mr. McKinley, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Director Miles, if I could focus back on the five
hydroelectric projects, there doesn't seem to be any real issue
with those. So, I just wanted to look a little bit more. Is
this common to seek an extension? How common is that to occur
for an extension under the Section 13?
Ms. Miles. I don't have any statistics on it, but we do get
some requests.
Mr. McKinley. So, I am curious whether this is becoming
more problematic. Do we need to do some things here to
streamline the process to do that? You don't have any opinion
on that then?
Ms. Miles. No. The one thing that I do see that is
happening is we are issuing a lot more licenses for original
construction of hydropower at existing dams. Years ago, 10
years ago, we were doing all relicensing.
Mr. McKinley. Right.
Ms. Miles. So, there is a lot of interest now in adding
hydropower at existing dams, so there are more projects out
there to go through the task of getting to construction.
Mr. McKinley. Director, if we didn't pass this, what would
happen to the license? Would they have to start all over again?
Ms. Miles. Well, we would be required to terminate that
license. It would expire. They would have to begin again. If
the data is available and current enough, we would try to use
as much as we possibly could, but we would need to go through
the process with another public comment period.
Mr. McKinley. So, essentially, it would delay the
hydroelectric, it would delay the whole project, would it not?
Ms. Miles. It would delay construction, yes, to go through
that process.
Mr. McKinley. And I can remember about 3 years ago we had a
representative of FERC here talking about, if we didn't start
replacing some of the coal-fired power plants, particularly in
the Mid-Atlantic, that we were going to see some rolling
brownouts by next summer, mid-2017. So, I think it is very
imperative that we keep moving to try to make that replacement
as long as it is available.
I thank you for your testimony and I hope people will
consider without any more question pushing these five projects.
Thank you very much. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
At this time the Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas,
Mr. Green, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and the ranking member,
for holding the hearing.
I want to thank our witnesses for being here.
Ms. Miles, it is clear from today's hearing that FERC has a
lot on its plate. Currently, natural gas exports, pipelines,
the LNG, and hydropower liability all fall under FERC. In
addition, if the House passed H.R. 8, it would expand FERC's
permitting authorities to most of these sectors.
In your position as Director of the Office of Energy
Projects, most of these issues fall in your office. Has the
increased activity of the last few years affected your office?
Have you required additional experts or have you been able to
make do with the existing personnel?
Ms. Miles. We regularly review our resources to make sure
they match with our tasks before us, and we discuss with the
Chairman any needs for additional. We also use our contracting
availability to help us with the peaks and valleys that are an
inevitability of applications for pipelines, LNG, and
hydropower projects.
Mr. Green. OK. We are on the horizon of another
appropriations season. Does the Office of Energy Projects
posses the resources to handle additional responsibility and
activities or do you anticipate additional needs?
Ms. Miles. I think we are managing as we are able, and that
is something that I talk about with our Chairman. It comes in
as our budget requests.
Mr. Green. OK. FERC occupies such a unique role of
coordinating with all the Federal agencies and State. Can you
identify for us the top challenges facing the projects your
office handles? What slows down the projects the most?
Ms. Miles. As I have said before, I think one of the most
important things for the gas projects, and, actually, for the
hydro projects also, is using our prefiling process, that it
can be extremely valuable if everyone is active during that
time.
The other thing that is very important is that the
information that is needed for us to move forward and for other
agencies also to do their permitting is collected during that
prefiling stage. So that when the application is filed, it is
complete and we are able to notice and go right to our
environmental document.
Mr. Green. Let me follow up on that. Is there a particular
Federal agency or State agency that doesn't respond as timely?
Because I know prefiling helps a lot, but it still can be
slowed down by agencies not getting back the information for
you.
Ms. Miles. Right. I think we work really well to bring all
the agencies to the table during this prefiling time and have
regular conversations with them. Things vary from project to
project in different parts of the country. So, I can't speak to
any one in particular.
Mr. Green. OK. I know from Texas, obviously, we always have
a lot of natural gas pipelines and cross-border with Mexico
because we are actually selling more gas to Mexico. I was just
wondering if it was a particular problem.
As you know, this can be challenging and potentially when
dealing with State and local officials that possess different
points of view than the Commission or the applicants. What
remedial steps can FERC take as the coordinating agency if
State and local officials do not cooperate in a timely fashion?
Ms. Miles. Well, we try to work with them. If someone is
not able to come to the table, to bring them to the table, so
they do participate. If not, we certainly make sure they
understand how to participate in the process. And then, we keep
the process moving along.
Mr. Green. So, is there any problem with any individual
State that they may not get back with you as quick as they can
or participate?
Ms. Miles. I can't speak to any in particular agency that
that is the case. On one project every now and then we will
have to work a little harder at it.
Mr. Green. And could the same be said about a Federal
agency, because you have to also coordinate all the Federal
agencies along with the State?
Ms. Miles. Yes, many, many of the Federal agencies and
State agencies who are carrying out Federal authorizations are
cooperating agencies with us in our environmental document.
That is a very good way to have a simultaneous look at effects
on all resources. So, we encourage that, and most agencies are
very interested in doing that.
Mr. Green. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back 16 seconds.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Griffith, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Miles, I have listened to your testimony in regard to
H.R. 3021, the Pompeo bill. I think what you are saying makes a
lot of sense. I like aerial surveying in the first place, but I
do think that some of my friends on the other side aisle have
raised some issues, and you have touched on it a little bit as
well in regard to being able to identify everything on the
ground. You have indicated that there ought to be something
before construction, if we use an aerial survey, because you
can't spot salamanders and certain small creatures or
understory plants necessarily. You might spot areas that look
like they might have that growth, but you can't do it.
Is there anything in the bill that we need to change to
make sure we get to where you want? I want to see the aerial
surveying be equal, at least in the initial stages, as you have
indicated you are fine with. But is there anything in the
language that is currently proposed that we ought to change or
look at in order to assure that we are also making sure that we
don't overlook some important ecological asset?
Ms. Miles. I am not looking at the bill this moment.
Mr. Griffith. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Miles. We would be happy, staff would be happy to work
with the committee on that.
I think the one thing that I have commented on is that,
where ground access is available, currently, we are finding
that the companies--and they want to also--are providing that
data. So, that is an important point.
Mr. Griffith. And I agree with that. It is also good if you
are trying to figure out where you want to a line. I think it
is quick. Particularly, you may see some problems if you are
looking at siting a gas pipeline, that you can do that
sometimes a lot faster in the air than you can on the ground.
So, there are advantages and disadvantages, I suppose, to both.
In regard to H.R. 2984, Ms. Miles, I am not going to ask
you to comment, the Fair Rates Act. I would just have to say to
Mr. Kennedy that I have a lot of constituents who are willing
to dig coal, ship it to you by train or truck. We can lower
your electric prices. We don't even need FERC action. What we
may need is a little EPA action. But if we were allowed to, we
could take care of your high rates for you.
Mr. Kennedy. You are a good man, my friend.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Griffith. With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Thanks, Mr. Griffith.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Vermont, Mr.
Welch, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for being here and helping us.
I want to just talk a little bit about the Kennedy bill. It
seems like it is just our linguistic mistake that there can be
no appeal when the statute essentially was designed to give the
ratepayers an opportunity to appeal. Are there any policy
reasons that would suggest that what the Kennedy bill is
proposing would in any way interfere with the capacity of FERC
to carry out its responsibilities? I guess I will ask you that,
Mr. Minzner.
Mr. Minzner. Well, the bill is aimed at a situation that,
while it has occurred, is relatively unusual. It has not been a
common occurrence that rates have changed without a Commission
order.
Mr. Welch. No, I get that, but it happens. So, the way it
is working around here is that a lot of times we don't get the
new person appointed, so we can have a two-two situation, not
just in FERC, but otherwise. The problems we have in trying to
get a person confirmed, or the Senate has, shouldn't be the
ratepayer problem, I think is the point of the bill.
What I am asking you is that, if this bill were passed,
and, then, it meant that if it were a two-two decision,
ratepayers would be able to do what they are now entitled to do
if it were a three-two decision or a five-zero decision. Would
that in any way compromise the responsibilities of FERC?
Mr. Minzner. I think the only difficulty I foresee with the
bill is one of reviewability or administrative functionality at
the court of appeals. Right now, when an action goes up to the
DC Circuit, they review the Commission order and they review
the action. The DC Circuit may have a more difficult challenge
if there is nothing to review from the Commission, but----
Mr. Welch. I don't understand it. If there is a two-two
decision, there is a two-two decision, right?
Mr. Minzner. That is not exactly right, Congressman. There
is no Commission action because it is two-two. It is not a
situation like you might see from the U.S. Supreme Court where
there is an actual opinion with two votes on either side. Here
it just takes effect and there isn't a decision, and that would
be the difficulty in administrative review. The court of
appeals wouldn't have anything to look at. I do think that is a
difficulty that could be overcome, if you were concerned about
that.
Mr. Welch. Right, by writing a decision or having the two
write their decision and the two write theirs. So, there would,
then, be something to review.
Mr. Minzner. When it has happened in the past, there is
simply no Commission order. There is nothing on either side.
Mr. Welch. No, I get that, and I think the effort here is
to try to provide that opportunity. Because it just seems kind
of bizarre, whichever side of the case you are on, that you
have got a statutory right to appeal unless it is deadlocked at
two-to-two. So, all right.
Let me just go on to the second thing. Anyway, Mr. Kennedy,
thank you for that legislation, which I hope we can all
support.
The Supreme Court decision on demand response, from my
point of view, is a tremendous tool that is going to help FERC
try to help ratepayers keep their costs down. Can you talk, Ms.
Miles, I guess, a little bit about that, or Mr. Minzner, and
how you see that as being a useful tool for FERC in trying to
address ratepayer concerns? And that is commercially and
individual.
Mr. Minzner. Sure, I can answer that question. The Supreme
Court largely agreed with the Commission's argument that there
is Commission jurisdiction to allow demand response to
participate in the wholesale electric markets, and that is
something the Commission has done in the past. In my view,
demand response can be an effective tool at helping keep rates
down by allowing the opportunity to avoid paying high-priced
energy at peak times.
Mr. Welch. Right. Our largest utility, Mr. Chairman, Green
Mountain Power, is a strong supporter of demand response, and
our utility users seem to be very happy with it. That includes
some of our major companies. So, keep up the good work on that.
Mr. Minzner. Thank you.
Mr. Welch. Thank you. And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
At this time the Chair recognizes the gentleman from Ohio,
Mr. Johnson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
the panel for being with us today as well.
I represent a District in eastern/southeastern Ohio that
borders the Ohio River, the Muskingum River. We have got a lot
of hydropower potential there.
I want to kind of take off on something that Representative
McKinley said. Given that so many projects miss the 2-year and
4-year statutory deadlines, often due to issues that are beyond
the project's control and the applicant's control, perhaps it
makes sense to update the Federal Power Act to either provide
FERC with greater discretion on setting those deadlines, maybe
more flexible deadlines, or to increase the number of years
that an applicant can have to commence construction. Does FERC
have an opinion on that?
Ms. Miles. Speaking only for myself, given that, however,
the Chairman and former Chairmen have said up to 10 years was
all right, if FERC had that authority to just do it itself,
then folks would not need to come to Congress.
Mr. Johnson. Right, right. OK. Well, that is good to know
because we certainly need to work that because, with the
plethora of Federal regulations and environmental studies and
all kinds of things that applicants have to go through, it has
lengthened out these project timelines to get all of this stuff
approved. So, I appreciate that.
Ms. Miles, as you are aware, the committee is keenly
interested in supporting new energy infrastructure projects.
One of the opportunities we see is in the hydropower sector,
specifically adding generation to existing nonpowered dams. We
have some of those in Ohio. That is what we are talking about
as part of today's hearing.
So, these low-impact, renewable, and clean energy
resources--that is what they are--are important. Yet, we
continue to hear of problems getting projects approved,
financed, and built, particularly in comparison to other energy
projects.
So, what is your view on these opportunities with
hydropower adding power generation to existing dam structure
and what is the reason we have not seen more of these type
projects built?
Ms. Miles. My view is that there is a lot of hydropower
potential in the U.S. at existing dams. I think the Department
of Energy has issued reports to that effect.
Mr. Johnson. What is the holdup?
Ms. Miles. I think that we have worked very hard with the
other agencies who need to issue permits on those projects to
be able to move them through the process expeditiously while
being thorough and fair in addressing all resource areas.
Mr. Johnson. Do you see it as a FERC issue? Is it a Corps
issue? Is there anything that FERC can do and, more
importantly, is there anything Congress can do that would help
move these projects along more quickly?
Ms. Miles. I think that the issue is really trying to work
through these things simultaneously or everybody working at it
together. That does vary, depending on agencies that we are
working with at some of these projects.
Mr. Johnson. Let me make sure I understand what you are
saying. So, you are saying that--and I am paraphrasing--so, you
are saying that sometimes these projects become serial agency
to agency to agency rather than parallel agencies----
Ms. Miles. Correct.
Mr. Johnson [continuing]. Moving things along
collaboratively? How do we solve that problem?
Ms. Miles. Well, we have been working with the other
agencies where we----
Mr. Johnson. So, you do think it needs to be solved?
Ms. Miles. That is an issue. Frankly, I mean, we have
worked with the Corps of Engineers quite a lot on this. We have
a Memorandum of Understanding for how we will work together,
and we are in the process right now of working further with
them on how to have our processes work well together.
Mr. Johnson. But it is clearly still a slow process.
And my time is up. I am going to have to yield back.
Is it safe to say you agree that we need to do better
collaboration between the agencies to parallel these things
where we can? Is that what I am hearing you say?
Ms. Miles. Yes.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Ms. Miles. At projects where that is not happening now,
yes.
Mr. Johnson. All right. Thank you very much, and I yield
back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
At this time the Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas,
Mr. Flores, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Flores. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Miles, we talked a few minutes ago about the
electricity rates of the Northeast being among the highest in
the country. Can you tell me why that is? What is the reason
for that?
Ms. Miles. I can't speak to that. Do you want to speak to
it?
Mr. Minzner. I can speak to it only in the most general
sense. The electric rates vary across the country for a wide
range of reasons. I don't think there is a specific reason.
Mr. Flores. What would the top two or three reasons be?
Mr. Minzner. It is really a mix of the location,
generation, and load across the country. So, it is, frankly,
the intersection of supply and demand of energy.
Mr. Flores. OK. So, part of it could be the fuel sources
that they are restricted to use, correct? I mean, Mr. Griffith
sort of touched on this a few minutes ago. If there were more
infrastructure to get natural gas pipelines in the Northeast,
they could have natural-gas-fired electricity generation.
Wouldn't they be better off? Wouldn't that solve a lot of the
rate issues?
Mr. Minzner. I am not sure I can speak specifically to
that.
Mr. Flores. Ms. Miles, can you speak to that?
Ms. Miles. I can't, either.
Mr. Flores. Well, I was going to say I can answer it for
you. The answer is yes. And so, I think that is the reason the
aerial survey bill is very important to look at. I do agree you
have got to have ground surveys as well, but I think the aerial
surveys help with the initial siting, and so forth.
This is something I think you need to take a look at. How
can the Northeast, how can New England be helped with their
electricity rates? And the best thing is for better
infrastructure. So, I would ask you to think about that as you
are going through your permitting planning process in the
future.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
At this time the Chair recognizes the gentleman. Mr.
Barton, did you want to ask questions?
Mr. Barton. No.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Mr. Hudson of North Carolina is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hudson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this important hearing.
Thank you to our panel for participating.
I am proud to be a cosponsor of Representative Pompeo's
bill to amend Section 203 of the Federal Power Act, as well as
Representative Kennedy's Fair Rates Act. I am also glad to see
Representative Foxx's bill move forward regarding the Kerr
Scott Hydropower Project in Wilkes County, North Carolina.
These are common-sense bills, and, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate
your bringing them before this subcommittee.
To get to my questions, I would like to build on the line
of questioning my colleague Mr. Johnson raised dealing with
hydroelectric power. Ms. Miles, you note in your testimony that
FERC has generally taken the position of not opposing
legislation that would extend the commencement of construction
deadlines no further than 10 years from the date that license
in question was issued. So, because each of the hydro bills
before us today provides for commencement of construction
deadlines that do not exceed 10 years from the dates the
respective licenses were issued, is it true that FERC does not
oppose any of these bills?
Ms. Miles. Yes, we do not; I do not.
Mr. Hudson. Thank you.
Historically, hydropower has played a primary energy
storage role with hydro pump storage currently providing 97
percent of energy storage in the U.S. What is your view on the
energy storage and pump storage in particular?
Ms. Miles. Pump storage does provide considerable grid
scale storage, and it can be very valuable. We have noticed an
increase in applications for pump storage projects, especially
in areas where there is a lot of wind and solar projects.
Mr. Hudson. Well, what are the market issues that need to
be addressed to support development of new pump storage and
what can FERC do, either by itself or working with State PUCs
and the ISOs, RTOs?
Ms. Miles. I am not really able to speak to market issues.
Our primary responsibility is to analyze the projects that come
before us in a very thorough, fair, and scientifically sound
way, and to have a process that allows us to do that.
Mr. Hudson. I appreciate that.
Have there been any issues working with State PUCs and
others that could be addressed or better handled, either
through your agency or things that we could do to support that?
Ms. Miles. The State PUCs typically are not involved with
us as we do the environmental review and licensing of those
kinds of projects, action on those kinds of projects.
Mr. Hudson. OK. Would you agree that FERC has a significant
level of expertise and experience in analyzing environmental
effects of hydro projects under its jurisdiction?
Ms. Miles. Yes.
Mr. Hudson. Does FERC currently employ biologists and other
scientific experts to provide guidance on analyzing the
environmental effects of hydro projects?
Ms. Miles. Yes. Our resources, we have experts in each
resource area that we analyze.
Mr. Hudson. What is the number and experience of the staff
administering the licensing and regulation of hydro projects,
the number of PhDs, master's degrees, et cetera?
Ms. Miles. I can't give you the specific number, but many
of our staff have master's degrees; some have PhDs.
Mr. Hudson. And if you could provide us that list?
Ms. Miles. The list of which do? Certainly.
Mr. Hudson. That would be great. And master's degrees, just
what the expertise levels are.
Ms. Miles. Certainly.
Mr. Hudson. That would be great.
Regarding the FERC hydropower licenses generally, do you
agree that the licensing processes could be shortened if the
Commission had the ability to set enforceable deadlines and
coordinate the other Federal and State approval involved?
Ms. Miles. I didn't come prepared really to testify on--I
think you are getting at H.R. 8. However, I have spoken in the
past that enforceable deadlines can be a valuable, can be--I am
going to move back and say I didn't come prepared, but we would
be happy to answer questions.
Mr. Hudson. OK. I would appreciate that, if you can provide
us with an answer.
Ms. Miles. Sure.
Mr. Hudson. All right. Mr. Chairman, that exhausts my line
of questioning. I would yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
At this time the Chair recognizes the gentleman from
Mississippi, Mr. Harper, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thanks to you, witnesses, for being here.
Just to comment, Ms. Miles, I believe you addressed it
earlier with Mr. Johnson, but just as a side note, it is my
understanding that four new hydro projects have been approved
in Mississippi, and we appreciate FERC's diligence in those
matters.
Mr. Minzner, you state in your testimony that the
legislation to amend Section 203 of the Federal Power Act could
ease the administrative burden on the Commission staff and the
regulatory burden on the industry without a significant
negative impact on the Commission's regulatory
responsibilities. Can you please elaborate or briefly expand on
these potential benefits of the legislation?
Mr. Minzner. Thank you, Congressman. On the burden side,
certainly every 203 filing requires review by Commission staff
and action by the Commission through some sort of order. A de
minimis threshold would mean that, for those falling below the
$10 million level the Commission would not need to take that
action. And similarly, on the side of industry, they would not
need to make the initial filing, which would ease their burden.
In terms of the effect on the regulatory program, the
filings that come in for mergers or consolidations of smaller
facilities, those below the $10 million, are ones that are less
likely to impose potential consequences on rates or on
competition.
Mr. Harper. Great. Thank you.
With the interest of time, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
At this time I want you all to know we are not trying to
discriminate against Mr. Kennedy. He is a member of the Energy
and Commerce Committee, but he is not a member of this
subcommittee. Even though we are considering one of his bills
today, he has patiently waited until everyone else has asked
questions. So, at this time we will recognize Mr. Kennedy for 5
minutes.
Mr. Kennedy. Mr. Chairman, thank you very, very much. I
appreciate the opportunity to join you and squat in on the
Energy and Power Subcommittee.
I appreciate the kind words from my colleagues on the other
side of the aisle on the offer for both purchasing of coal, Mr.
Griffith, very well noted. Thank you. And to the rest of my
colleagues as well, thank you.
Mr. Minzner, a couple of questions for you, sir, to begin
with. You mentioned in your testimony that Section 205 of the
Federal Power Act includes a 60-day clock for review in which
FERC will take action. Can you discuss what requirements the
Commission has within those 60 days and does FERC have an
affirmative requirement to actually act?
Mr. Minzner. The statute does not require the Commission to
act. However, the Commission typically does take action on the
filing by approving it, denying it, or requesting additional
information from the utility. The consequences, though, if the
Commission does not act in that time period, is the rates do
take effect.
Mr. Kennedy. And I know you are well aware, obviously, of
what happened in New England in 2014 with that Capacity Auction
No. 8 done by the Commission. You mentioned in your testimony
and response to questions that that is an exceedingly rare
occurrence. Does that only occur when there are four
Commissioners present or has it happened when there is an even
number--or excuse me--an odd number of Commissioners as well?
Mr. Minzner. Rates have taken effect not solely as a result
of a two-two split of the Commission. In fact, under the
Federal Power Act, the situation you mentioned, ISO New
England, I believe is only the second time that I am aware of
that it has happened as a result of a two-two split. It has
happened under other occasions, though.
Mr. Kennedy. Can you just shine some light on what those
other occasions, if you can recall what those other occasions
were?
Mr. Minzner. We don't know the reason for all of them. On
one occasion, the Commission stated that the rates took effect
inadvertently because of Commission failure to act.
Mr. Kennedy. OK. Given that the Commission is currently
down to four Commissioners, what tools does the Commission have
to avoid a deadlock on any rate change filed across the
country? I realize that most changes are noncontroversial and
unlikely to result in a deadlock anyway, but this outcome is
certainly, obviously, not impossible. Before we can, hopefully,
get this bill across the finish line, what options are
available to FERC to provide proper access to administrative
and judicial review for ratepayers? There is, as you are well
aware, an auction set to take place in New England next week.
Given the fact that there are four--another Commission has
noticed his intent to retire; no other nomination is currently
in the pipeline--what, if any, tools does FERC have to make
sure we don't end up in the same place?
Mr. Minzner. I know the Commission staff and the
Commissioners are very dedicated to working collaboratively to
reaching outcomes that can have the support of the majority of
the Commissioners. I think certainly the Commission has
endeavored to do that in the past and has effectively managed
to reach a majority vote on almost every occasion.
Mr. Kennedy. But there is nothing--and I appreciate that
and I understand that--but has there been any specific policy
change internal to FERC where, with four Commissioners, in the
advent of a hearing having to go through with four
Commissioners, and that notice being put forth, that there
would be some sort of review? Provided that this bill doesn't
make it to the President's desk by the time that those
Commission results are near, do the auction results need to be
certified?
Mr. Minzner. In my view, under the current version of the
Federal Power Act, if the Commission does not act as a result
of a two-two split or otherwise, there would not be rehearing
or appellate review available under the current statutory
framework. Other than working to reach consensus and a majority
vote, I am not aware of other internal policy changes.
Mr. Kennedy. OK. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back, and that
concludes the questions for the first panel.
Ms. Miles and Mr. Minzner, thank you for being with us. We
look forward to working with you, as we continue our efforts on
all of this legislation.
At this time I would like to call up the witnesses on the
second panel, if you all would come and have a seat.
I know that Mr. Kennedy is going to be introducing one of
our witnesses. So, I will call on him to make that introduction
at this time.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I am pleased to introduce a fellow member of
Massachusetts that has come down on relatively short notice to
join us here today, Mr. Bottiggi, who runs the Braintree Power
Plant, a municipal power plant, who has a deep knowledge in how
our energy systems work in Massachusetts, how our capacity
markets work, and the intricacies surrounding the increase of
cost that we have seen in recent history in Massachusetts. He
is one of the few people I have found, Mr. Chairman, on this
planet that can actually explain this in language that people
understand, for which I am eternally grateful.
So, we are grateful to have you here. I look forward to
your testimony and the light that you can shine on how things
are working and how they are not working in Massachusetts and
across the country.
Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you very much for that
introduction.
I will at this time introduce the other members of this
panel.
First, we have Mr. Timothy Powell, who is the Director of
Land, GIS and Permits at the Williams Company.
We have Mr. Edward Lloyd, who is the Evan Frankel Clinical
Professor of Environmental Law at Columbia University School of
Law. He is here today on behalf of the New Jersey Conservation
Foundation and the Stony Brook-Millstone Watershed Association.
We also have Mr. Bill Marsan, who is the Executive Vice
President and General Counsel and Corporate Secretary of the
American Transmission Company.
We have Mr. Tyson Slocum, who is the Energy Program
Director of Public Citizen, Inc.
And then, we have Mr. Jeffrey Leahey, who is the Deputy
Executive Director for the National Hydropower Association.
We thank all of you for taking time in your very busy
schedules for being with us today. I am going to call on each
one of you, and you will be given 5 minutes for your opening
statements. Be sure and pull the microphone close, and make
sure the microphone is on.
Mr. Powell, we will recognize you first for your opening
statement for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF TIM POWELL, DIRECTOR OF LAND, GIS AND PERMITS,
THE WILLIAMS COMPANY, ON BEHALF OF THE INTERSTATE NATURAL GAS
ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA; EDWARD LLOYD, EVAN M. FRANKEL CLINICAL
PROFESSOR OF ENVIRONMENTAL LAW, COLUMBIA LAW SCHOOL, ON BEHALF
OF THE NEW JERSEY CONSERVATION FOUNDATION AND THE STONY BROOK-
MILLSTONE WATERSHED ASSOCIATION; BILL BOTTIGGI, GENERAL
MANAGER, BRAINTREE ELECTRIC LIGHT DEPARTMENT, ON BEHALF OF THE
NORTHEAST PUBLIC POWER ASSOCIATION; BILL MARSAN, EXECUTIVE VICE
PRESIDENT AND GENERAL COUNSEL, AMERICAN TRANSMISSION COMPANY;
TYSON SLOCUM, ENERGY PROGRAM DIRECTOR, PUBLIC CITIZEN, INC.,
AND JEFFREY LEAHEY, DEPUTY EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, NATIONAL
HYDROPOWER ASSOCIATION

STATEMENT OF TIM POWELL

Mr. Powell. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, and members of the
subcommittee, my name is Tim Powell, and I am the Director of
Land, GIS and Permits for the Williams Companies. I am also
appearing today on behalf of the Interstate Natural Gas
Association of America, the industry association representing
the interstate natural gas pipeline industry.
Mr. Chairman, I appear today to support House Resolution
3021, introduced by Representative Pompeo and cosponsored by
Representatives Mullin, Schrader, and Meeks, which endeavors to
address a permitting challenge facing jurisdictional pipelines,
which I shall explain. We thank the committee for including a
version of that language as part of H.R. 8.
FERC has long served as the lead agency for considering
pipeline applications, pursuant to the Natural Gas Act. In
Section 313 of the Energy Policy Act, this committee and this
Congress instructed Federal and State agencies involved in the
process to cooperate with the FERC and comply with the
permitting schedule established by the Commission.
However, the permit process followed by some Corps of
Engineer Districts and corresponding State agencies, pursuant
to their Clean Water Act responsibilities, can cause them to
fail to meet the FERC schedule, resulting in permit delays.
This is most notable in the agency's deeming they have
insufficient field survey data to initiate their review. These
processes are not required by the Clean Water Act and could be
modified to better conform with the FERC schedule. That is the
goal of this legislation.
Often, the first time an affected landowner has face-to-
face contact with the company is when an agent is knocking on
their door and asking that landowner to sign a form giving the
company permission to begin performing field surveys. These
data are used to support the NEPA review, identify the least-
damaging alternative, determine constructability, and obtain
other permits and approvals, such as those required by the
Clean Water Act.
Many landowners elect to participate in the process, but
some elect to exercise their right to deny permission. In my
experience, Williams receives approximately 70 to 80 percent
survey permission prior to the certificate filing.
For various reasons, the remaining landowners either delay
survey approval or outright deny it. Williams and other INGAA
member companies fully respect each landowner's right to decide
if and how they participate in the project. The problem is that
some Corps of Engineer Districts and State agencies with 401
water quality certification responsibility will require an
applicant to conduct up to 100 percent full survey in order to
deem a permit application complete. In other cases, the Corps
and responsible State agency will begin processing
applications, but will not make a decision without 100 percent
field survey. This approach is not required and, indeed, in
some cases the agencies will accept the best-available data and
move forward with condition permit decisions.
If any agency is to require a percentage of field survey
beyond which the company can obtain in order to deem an
application complete, the company is placed in a classic Catch-
22 situation. The FERC process anticipates that companies will
submit applications for Federal approvals prior to or
concurrent with the application for a certificate. Typically,
the time between a certificate filing and an order is around 1
year. This is the same timeline that an agency administering
the 401 water quality certification has to act once they deem
an application complete. These two timelines can only align if
the 404 application is deemed complete and runs in parallel to
the certificate proceeding.
The solution is to direct all other agencies involved in
issuing Federal authorizations to accept data gathered by means
other than on-the-ground surveys. If the agency elects, any
permits issued based on remote sensing could be conditioned
upon ground survey verification once access has been obtained.
This is an important point and bears emphasizing.
If the agency deems it necessary, no ground disturbance
would occur on remote-sense tracks prior to verifying that data
by on-the-ground survey. Non-field-survey data-gather methods
may include satellite photography, sensors attached to fixed-
wing aircraft, helicopter aerial photography, previous mapping,
or by studying the area from accessible locations.
The proposal solution has a number of obvious benefits. It
allows pipeline companies and regulators to assess likely
impacts and make informed decisions, aligns the certificate
proceeding with other Federal reviews, and allow FERC to
effectively fulfill its lead agency mandate while minimizing
the adversarial relationship between landowners and the
pipeline company, when agencies require more ground survey than
property owners want to provide.
In summary, Mr. Chairman, we believe the legislation being
discussed is a win/win for all involved in the permitting
process and we urge its adoption.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Powell follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much.
Mr. Lloyd, you are recognized for 5 minutes for your
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF EDWARD LLOYD

Mr. Lloyd. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, and
members of the committee.
I take a different view than the last witness.
Unfortunately, I don't think the aerial surveys are going to
solve the problem that we all want to solve. Scientists for the
New Jersey Conservation Foundation have looked at 1,000 plant
and animal species in New Jersey that would have to be surveyed
under the Endangered Species Act and other rare and specified
species. We found that less than 1 percent of those species can
be identified with aerial surveys.
So, the problem is that, if we begin to rely on aerial
surveys, especially in the prefiling process, we are going to
have to go back and verify. To me, at the end of the day, it is
going to delay the process, not expedite it.
I think all of us want the best data we can have. The
problem is that aerial surveys, by and large, are not going to
get us the data that we need to do the proper analysis by the
agency. Of the 1,000 species we looked at, there were only 1
percent that actually could be identified by aerial surveys.
So, it means we are going to have to go on the ground and
ground-truth it.
If we don't do it upfront, it could lead to having to
revisit it. If we go to verification, then we have to revisit
those surveys, and we may have to change the pipeline route. It
is not efficient for any of us.
So, we would suggest that the aerial surveys are really not
solving a problem and, in fact, may create more delay and drain
more resources from the agency.
The other thing I wanted to mention is the impact on
landowners. In New Jersey we have already experienced the use
of aerial surveys. We have had a number of complaints from
landowners that they have been disturbing, especially in rural
areas, livestock and the peaceful privacy of homeowners. So,
aerial surveys can have unintended negative consequences for
homeowners, and I think we have to be very careful about how
quickly we want to authorize those aerial surveys in place of
the ground surveys, which give us much better data and, in
fact, I think the data that is needed for the agency.
Finally, I just want to mention what we have seen, as this
committee has heard this morning, a proliferation of pipeline
proposals. There are now 80 pending proposals before FERC. We
would highly recommend that FERC begin to look at these,
instead of as individual pipelines, look at these on a regional
basis.
I think a programmatic environmental impact statement is
one way to address that, where, again, it would save agency
resources if we look at these pipelines together on a
programmatic basis. Then, there may be additional individual
pipeline analyses we need to do, but the programmatic EIS would
enhance our decisionmaking process, would enhance FERC's
ability to make these analyses, and it would save resources for
the companies and for FERC.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lloyd follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Additional information submitted by Mr. Lloyd has been
retained in committee files and also is available at http://
docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF03/20160202/104387/HHRG-114-IF03-
Wstate-LloydE-20160202-SD088.pdf.]
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Mr. Bottiggi, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BILL BOTTIGGI

Mr. Bottiggi. Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member Rush, and
members of the committee, thank you for inviting me to speak at
today's hearing. I also wish to extend a particular thanks to
Congressman Kennedy for his work bringing attention to the
problems with the forward-capacity market in New England and
for inviting me to speak today.
I am Bill Bottiggi, the General Manager of the Braintree
Electric Light Department. Braintree Electric is a nonprofit
municipal utility owned by the residents of Braintree,
Massachusetts. Our service territory is limited to just the
town of Braintree, and we have been providing highly reliable
electric service at the lowest reasonable rates since 1892 to
the residents and businesses in Braintree.
Braintree Electric belongs to the Northeast Public Power
Association, NEPPA, which represents municipal utilities in six
New England States. I am testifying on behalf of NEPPA, but my
views today are my own.
Braintree Electric also belongs to the American Public
Power Association, which I am on the board of directors. These
remarks are also a top priority of the American Public Power
Association and the 48 million customers that they serve.
My remarks today will be focused on the forward-capacity
market and the Fair Rates Act, H.R. 2984. Deregulation. In the
1990s in New England, in Massachusetts, deregulation of
electric utility markets occurred, transitioning the
historically vertically integrated utility markets, the
utilities, to a centralized competitive market for wholesale
power. The belief was that forcing investor-owned utilities to
sell their generation assets would result in the private
development of new high-efficient generation in a competitive
market, driving down the cost of electricity.
Thousands of megawatts of generation, all natural gas, was
built in the early 2000s. Surprisingly, though, the existing
generation which was purchased from the investor-owned
utilities did not retire as expected, and that created a large
surplus of generation in New England.
The primary revenue stream at the time--this was before the
forward-capacity markets started--was payments for the
electricity that the generators produced. With a surplus of
generating capacity, some plants were not running frequently
enough to provide their owners with the revenue they needed to
cover their fixed costs. As a result, there were several
bankruptcies. A lot of the new plants declared bankruptcy
because they had the high debt service to cover, and they
weren't getting the revenue they needed to cover that.
So, ISO New England recognized the markets were not working
and implemented the forward-capacity market, starting in 2007,
with FERC approval. Unlike the energy market, where power
plants bid their marginal cost into ISO New England, and the
ISO called them the cheapest units to run first, these markets
provided capacity payments to the generators in exchange for
having a physical resource available to run, for just being
there.
Capacity prices were set, and are still set today, based on
the need for new generation. With a surplus of generation
capacity, prices stayed low, capacity prices stayed low from
the first auction held in 2007 through the seventh auction held
in 2013. It is a forward auction, so that seventh auction is
taking place starting in June of 2016 for 1 year.
Meanwhile, municipal utilities--Braintree Electric is one
of them--were carved out from deregulation in the 1990s, and we
were allowed to self-supply our own generation. We were left
vertically integrated. We didn't have to sell our power plants.
We were allowed to provide our own capacity to our own
customers.
Self-supply allowed municipal utilities to build
generation. That way, we could cover our own capacity needs.
Braintree Electric built 115 megawatts of quick-start, gas-
fired oil backup generation in 2009 under this self-supply
provision, giving us price certainty for our capacity for a
long time in the future.
This provided us and other municipal utilities with our
ability to cover our own capacity cost. So, we weren't
dependent on the forward-capacity auction, which creates a lot
of variability in capacity cost, as you have seen in my written
testimony.
Unfortunately, as our needs for capacity have grown, in the
future, currently, we are unable to self-supply from capacity.
In 2013, ISO New England petitioned the FERC, who removed the
right for municipal utilities like Braintree Electric to
provide their own capacity, their own self-supply. They thought
we exerted too much buyer-side market power.
So, where are we today? In 2014, the eighth forward-
capacity auction was held, and that was the first auction where
new generation was needed. That big surplus that was created at
the start of deregulation was gone. Part of that was Vermont
Yankee, Brayton Point, Norwalk Harbor, and many other older
plants finally were retiring for reliability reasons and
environmental reasons.
These retirements in that one auction cycle totally 4300
megawatts of electricity, and only 1500 megawatts of new
generation cleared that auction. So, that created an imbalance,
driving up the cost-to-capacity payments to an administrated
cap by ISO New England to $15 a kilowatt month. As a reference,
previous to that, it was $3 a kilowatt month. So, prices jumped
in one auction fivefold, from $3 to $15, which is what
Congressman Kennedy referenced has happened in that auction,
Forward-Capacity Auction No. 8.
Some believe the closure of Brayton Point manipulated the
market, causing the shortage of capacity, driving up capacity
payments for all generation, including the fleet of plants, in
addition to Brayton Point, that was also owned by that same
company.
All told, capacity starting in 2018 will cost New England
consumers $4 billion a year, up from $1 billion a year in 2016.
So, from 2016 to 2018, prices are quadrupling. That translates
into $21 a month on the average residential electric bill, just
for the capacity portion, not all the other components that
have gone up as well.
This dramatic increase demonstrates how dysfunctional the
market is and should have presented an opportunity for the FERC
to investigate the last-minute closure of Brayton Point. As we
have been discussing earlier today, due to FERC's vacancy, the
one Commissioner vacancy, they were unable to investigate
because they had that two-two tie in the vote, and it was
ordered a rule of law and the rate was enacted.
So, the Fair Rates Act is an important piece of legislation
because it would make the same administrative review procedures
currently approved by the Commission applicable to rates that
just take effect by law, by operation of law. Many of us would
like to see an investigation into what happened in the eighth
forward-capacity auction, and those in public power would like
to see the capacity markets fundamentally reformed, including
our right to self-supply, so we could provide our own
generation to our own customers.
However, this, while it is a narrow step, is a critical
first step. This bill will ensure that, if the FERC is
deadlocked again in the future over questionable rates, the
problem does not reoccur in New England or other regions. With
this Act, ratepayers will now have an avenue to challenge
unfair rates.
In conclusion, I want to thank Congressman Kennedy for
introducing the bill and the committee for holding this hearing
on what can be a confusing topic, a confusing subject, on
behalf of Braintree Electric, NEPPA, and APPA, and myself. I
hope the committee will continue to examine mandatory capacity
markets throughout New England and the rest of the country.
Thank you, sir.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bottiggi follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Mr. Marsan, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BILL MARSAN

Mr. Marsan. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Rush,
and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity
to testify today in support of legislation to amend Section 203
of the Federal Power Act and make the law work as intended.
I am Executive Vice President/General Counsel to American
Transmission Company. We construct, own, and operate electric
transmission property in Wisconsin and the upper peninsula of
Michigan, as well as hold ownership interest in transmission
property in California.
ATC is a transmission-only utility which was formed in
2001, when other utility companies transferred their
transmission assets to create the new company. This formative
transaction was subject to Section 203 of the Power Act.
Subsequent to our formation, ATC has continued to acquire
utility properties, subject to FERC's Section 203 regulation.
The Energy Policy Act of 2005 amended Section 203 to
increase the dollar threshold from $50,000 to $10 million on
FERC's authority to preapprove dispositions by public utility
of jurisdictional utility facilities. FERC's regulations and
orders implementing this change have failed to account for
congressional intent.
Specifically, FERC has relied on apparent oversight in the
text of the statute to reverse its own decades-old application
of the minimum monetary threshold. Finally, the new Section 203
eliminated the monetary threshold entirely for acquisitions or
mergers of jurisdictional facilities.
This has led to some absurd results. For example, FERC has
required preapproval, pursuant to Section 203, for the $1
purchase of 10 miles of depreciated transmission line, as well
as the purchase of an electrical disconnect switch and
associated wiring for $10. Conversely, the sellers of the same
equipment I just described were not required to make any
filings with FERC at all.
FERC's interpretation requires prior approval for the
acquisition of utility property that has any monetary value
attached to it or no monetary value at all. FERC's
interpretation frustrates the intent of the amendment to
Section 203 and EPAC 2005. Congress intended to reduce the
regulatory burden on utilities by raising the threshold of FERC
preapproval, and Congress did this with good reason.
Public utilities regularly buy and sell utility assets that
have minimal impact on the bulk electric system and do not
affect FERC's ability to regulate. The prior threshold of
$50,000 made no sense in 2005 and let alone today's economy.
Congress sensibly raised the threshold to $10 million in
order to spare utilities the administrative cost of the
preapproval process for small transactions while maintaining
FERC's oversight on transactions with a potential to impact
utility operations and rates.
FERC's current interpretation of Section 203 has imposed a
new and unnecessary regulatory burden on public utilities. It
has also increased the risk that public utilities will be
targeted by the FERC Office of Enforcement for violations of
Section 203. At least one such FERC enforcement action for
failure to receive preapproval for relatively de minimis
acquisitions has been resolved, and it is reasonable to expect
more.
FERC has refused requests to revise its regulations to
conform with the intent of EPAC 2005 and has made it clear that
only a statutory change to Section 203 will force a shift in
FERC policy.
On December 3rd, 2015, the House passed H.R. 8, the North
American Energy Security and Infrastructure Act of 2015.
Section 3222 of H.R. 8 clarifies Section 203 to expressly
include a monetary threshold of greater than $10 million for
FERC preapproval of mergers and acquisitions of jurisdictional
utility property, just as Congress intended when it passed EPAC
2005.
This change would serve at least three important purposes.
It would make Section 203 internally consistent. It would give
clear instruction to FERC about this preapproval authority. And
it would relieve an unnecessary regulatory burden on public
utilities.
The bill before the subcommittee today adopts the language
of Section 3222 of H.R. 8 as a standalone measure. ATC strongly
supports this legislation.
On behalf of ATC, I want to thank the subcommittee for
inviting me to testify, and I stand ready to answer any
questions the members may have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Marsan follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much.
Mr. Slocum, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TYSON SLOCUM

Mr. Slocum. Thank you very much, Chairman Whitfield,
Ranking Member Rush, members of the committee.
My name is Tyson Slocum, and I direct the Energy Program at
Public Citizen. Public Citizen is a national nonprofit,
nonpartisan consumer advocacy organization funded in part by
the more than 400,000 members and supporters we have across the
country.
In my capacity as Energy Program Director, I serve on the
United States Commodity Futures Trading Commission Energy and
Environmental Markets Advisory Committee, and I also frequently
intervene and comment in a number of FERC proceedings.
So, I am here to talk about two pieces of legislation. One
is the bill that would exempt from FERC review any merger or
consolidation under $10 million, and the second is the Fair
Rates Act, H.R. 2984.
On the legislation that would extend a $10 million
threshold to exempt mergers and consolidations, on the face of
it, that might seem reasonable. But, when you understand the
way that energy markets operate, you quickly understand that it
is not necessarily the dollar value of a transaction, but what
the impact of that facility has on the operation of an energy
market. With power facilities, these are known as what is known
as pivotal suppliers.
In two landmark market manipulation cases that I have
brought before FERC that are still under review, it was either
one power plant in the case of New England or a very small
collection of power plants that, had it been a merger or
consolidation, very likely would have been under that $10
million threshold.
And so, it is very important that Congress retain the
language that was plainly included in the Energy Policy Act of
2005 because, remember, the Energy Policy Act of 2005 repealed
one of the landmark utility regulations in this country, the
public utility holding company, after 1935. As part of that
agreement to repeal that longstanding utility regulation,
Congress was very aware of the need to ensure that FERC had
full authority over all mergers and consolidations. That is why
they explicitly did not include that threshold dollar figure in
the plain language of the Energy Policy Act of 2005.
On the second piece of legislation, the Fair Rates Act,
H.R. 2984, this is a great piece of legislation that directly
addresses a market manipulation case that I brought before FERC
in 2014 that has been much talked about at today's hearing, the
2014 forward-capacity auction in ISO New England.
We made an allegation in our FERC filing that a Cayman-
Islands-based private equity firm named Energy Capital Partners
had acquired a fleet of power plants in New England, and six
weeks after closing on that transaction, announced the
retirement of one of them. That retirement moved the New
England market from a surplus to a deficit, thereby triggering
a significant price increase by about $1 billion in that
auction.
We filed our market manipulation complaint saying that
their actions were the subject of market manipulation and that
the resulting rates were unjust and unreasonable. As has been
explained, FERC deadlocked two-to-two on my complaint. And so,
they did not set for hearing whether or not to consider if the
rates were lawful. Instead, they issues this notice that the
rates had become effective by operation of law.
We asked for rehearing. FERC denied our rehearing. We,
then, filed a petition to review in Federal court. FERC made a
motion to dismiss. The court did not grant FERC's motion to
dismiss, and we have filed initial briefs and reply briefs, and
the court is actively considering this reviewability question.
It is clear that the Fair Rates Act of H.R. 2984 would help
alleviate this problem if it were to occur in the future. That
is why Public Citizen supports that legislation.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Slocum follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Mr. Leahey, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JEFFREY LEAHEY

Mr. Leahey. Thank you, Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member
Rush, and members of the subcommittee.
I am Jeffrey Leahey, Deputy Executive Director of the
National Hydropower Association, and I am pleased to be here to
discuss legislation to reinstate and extend the deadline for
the commencement of construction for five licensed hydropower
projects and how these projects demonstrate new growth
potential we see in the hydropower industry.
The U.S. hydropower fleet is made up of 2200 plants with a
capacity of almost 80 gigawatts. These plants provide roughly 7
percent of all electricity and close to half of all renewable
electricity, making hydropower the largest provider of
renewable power in the United States.
Hydropower's contributions to the electric grid are many:
baseload power, peaking power, load following, energy storage,
reliability, and more. Because of the need for more of these
services, the industry has grown in recent years. In fact, the
U.S. experienced a net capacity increase of 1.4 gigawatts from
2005 to 2013, and that is to power over half-a-million homes.
A prime growth area is on existing infrastructure, such as
nonpower dams and conduits. The projects today showcase these
opportunities. Two would add generation to Bureau of
Reclamation dams, two to Army Corps of Engineers dams, and
another dam owned by New York City. They are all small
projects, ranging from 4 to 15 megawatts, and together, they
will add 51.7 megawatts to the system, enough to power close to
21,000 homes.
Of the 80,000 dams in the United States, only 3 percent
have electric-generating facilities. The vast majority were
built for other purposes, water supply, navigation, irrigation.
The Department of Energy recognized this untapped potential
of nonpower dams and in 2012 released a report of these
projects. The map you see on the screen depicts the size and
locations of the top prospects.
The study showed 12 gigawatts of total potential, with 8
gigawatts available at the top 100 sites alone. Eighty-one of
the top 100 sites were located on Corps of Engineers dams.
These types of projects, including the five here today, are
some of the lowest-impact developments in the energy sector. No
new dams need to be built, and the projects aim to utilize
existing flows. What better way to maximize the benefit of this
infrastructure by also generating renewable carbon-free power?
These projects can face a variety of obstacles that push
back construction timelines, thus, requiring the action that
the subcommittee is taking today. Speaking generally, these
include delays in post-licensing construction approvals,
refinements in project design, negotiations on power purchase
agreements, and others.
To begin, hydropower has the most complex development
timeline of any renewable resource. It can take 10 years or
longer from the start of licensing through construction to
being placed in service. It also requires considerable upfront
financial commitment from the developer for the studies needed
for Federal and State approvals.
Water is a public resource, and NHA recognizes the need for
thorough review of new project applications. However, the
overall process can also be a factor for delays in moving to
start of construction. For example, when adding generating
facilities to nonpowered Federal dams, FERC may issue a
license; yet, that project cannot start construction until it
receives additional approvals from the Federal dam owner. If
there are unanticipated delays for those approvals, no work can
commence.
NHA notes that the House passed H.R. 8 and the Senate is
debating is S. 2012, energy bills that contain bipartisan
provisions to address inefficiencies and improve coordination
in the hydropower process. We note the Water Resources Reform
and Development Act of 2014 provided direction to the Corps to
prioritize hydro development and complete permitting in a
timely and consistent manner.
Also, S. 2012 specifically aims to address the issue at
hand today. It contains a provision allowing applicants to
receive an extension of the commence construction deadline for
up to 8 additional years. NHA strongly supports all of these
efforts.
Further, design changes for projects at Federal facilities
can result from discussions with the Federal owners as
developers move to construction. Working cooperatively,
developers must show the final construction plans will not
interfere with the original purposes of the Federal dam and,
also, not harm its integrity.
There have been instances where design changes were
proposed post-licensing and pre-construction that differed from
the design that was originally licensed. As such, more
consultation was needed between the developer FERC and the
Federal owner to approve these changes.
Lastly, industry members also report difficulty securing
power purchase agreements. In testimony before the subcommittee
last year, Cube Hydro, a developer, stated that regulatory
uncertainty and risk of delays can negatively impact acquiring
PPAs, and that failure to obtain one, in turn, inhibits the
ability to obtain project financing. This can include post-
licensing financing to cover construction costs, which can also
impede the ability to meet the start construction deadline.
To conclude, hydropower projects have a critical role to
play in meeting our Nation's energy, climate, and economic
development objectives. The five projects the subcommittee
considers today are prime examples of the tremendous growth
potential at existing water infrastructure across the country.
It is NHA's hope that the time granted by these extensions
allow the projects to complete the process and protect the
significant investment of time and financial resources, both by
the developers and also the Federal Government.
I thank the subcommittee for inviting me to testify, and I
look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Leahey follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Leahey, and thank all of you
for your opening statements.
At this time I will recognize myself for 5 minutes of
questions.
Mr. Bottiggi and Mr. Slocum, let me ask you, the Cayman
Group that purchased these power plants in the Northeast, how
many did they purchase and what did they pay for it? What was
the purchase price?
Mr. Slocum. I can't remember the exact number of power
plants. I believe it was a deal that included, I think, five or
six total power plants in two different geographic markets in
PJM and in ISO New England.
I don't know if there was a public purchase price. Because
Energy Capital Partners is a private equity firm, it doesn't
have to submit Securities and Exchange Commission filings. But
it was most likely in excess of $10 million, and it also was
not a merger; it was a disposition.
Mr. Whitfield. So, FERC did approve the acquisition?
Mr. Slocum. Yes, sir.
Mr. Whitfield. And so, Brayton Point is the plant that was
closed? Is that the one you refer to in your testimony?
Mr. Bottiggi. Yes, sir. That was a 1500-megawatt, coal-
fired power plant.
Mr. Whitfield. Now, Mr. Slocum, you said market
manipulation. If it is coal, I would think environmental had
something to do with it as well.
Mr. Bottiggi. Well, the low price of natural gas has put
pressure on coal-fired electricity.
Mr. Whitfield. Right.
Mr. Bottiggi. So, it was closed for economic reasons----
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
Mr. Bottiggi [continuing]. Is what they claimed.
Mr. Whitfield. But the EPA regulation on existing coal
plants also makes a big difference.
Mr. Bottiggi. Right.
Mr. Whitfield. But, whatever the reason, they closed that
down and that created a shortage of supply, is that correct?
Mr. Slocum. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bottiggi. Correct.
Mr. Whitfield. And so, that contributed to these higher
rates?
Mr. Bottiggi. It did.
Mr. Whitfield. Now, on the capacity markets, I am certainly
not an expert on capacity markets, and I know it is pretty
complicated, but it is my understanding there are two areas of
the country that have mandatory capacity markets, is that
correct?
Mr. Slocum. Yes.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. And one of them is ISO New England, and
one, is it PJM?
Mr. Slocum. Yes, sir.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Now why do they feel like they are
necessary, say, in New England, these mandatory capacity
markets, but they are not necessary in other parts of the
country?
Mr. Bottiggi. In other parts of the country where there are
no Regional Transmission Authorities, RTOs, which ISO New
England is one of them, they still use a cost-of-service model
to finance power plants. A utility will still be vertically
integrated and will still own their own capacity, their own
power plants. So, they will develop and construct a power plant
and go to the State regulators, and the State regulators will
review the cost structure. As long as it is just and
reasonable, they will pay the utility the full cost to
construct and maintain that power plant.
Mr. Whitfield. And did I understand that the ISO New York
has not allowed you to self-supply anymore? Is that correct?
Mr. Bottiggi. ISO New England, correct.
Mr. Whitfield. I mean ISO New England.
Mr. Bottiggi. Yes, correct. We are grandfathered for our
existing power plants, municipal utilities are, but if we want
to build a new plant in the future now, we can't build it just
on the backs of our own ratepayers to satisfy our own----
Mr. Whitfield. So, when you were talking about reforming
the capacity markets, were you primarily focusing on the
ability to self-supply or is there other area of reform you
were referring to?
Mr. Bottiggi. Well, the forward-capacity market for all
utilities, for all generation in New England, setting aside
self-supply for the moment, what happens is, if an old power
plant is still in existence, like many still are, when an
auction clears like the 8 forward-capacity auction, new
generation gets paid that very high price. It was $15 a
kilowatt month. But existing generation gets an average price.
So, in this case, existing generation went from being paid $3 a
kilowatt month to $7 a kilowatt month. Putting that in dollar
terms--we have an old power plant, so I am familiar with the
numbers--we currently get about $2.5 million a year in capacity
payments. It is really value because we self-supply.
Mr. Whitfield. Right.
Mr. Bottiggi. It is $2.5 million a year, and it costs us
about $2.5 million a year to maintain that plant. So, just to
have it sit there is a break-even proposition.
After FCA 8 went through, if we were an independent
generator, that $2.5 million for our old power plant jumps to
$6 million a year. So, it is a windfall for the old plants that
are just hanging around.
The next auction in 2019, when FCA 9 cleared--and this will
happen--that old power plant that we have would go from $2.5
million to $6 million, now to $9.5 million a year we are going
to get just for sitting there, just for hanging around. So,
that is why this $1 billion in 2016 is jumping to $4 billion in
2018.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes. OK. Well, I wish we could talk more
about this. My time has expired.
So, Mr. Rush, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Slocum, the bill amending Section 203 that would exempt
mergers or consolidation of facilities with a value of less
than $10 million from FERC's merger review authority has been
portrayed as a very innocuous bill that would simply correct a
drafting error from EPAC 2005 language. However, in your
testimony you take a decidedly different view on this
legislation. You are stating that, even with mergers or
consolidations under $10 million, it is possible that--and I am
quoting you--``a single facility or contract has the ability to
be a pivotal supplier in a given market, providing the owner
with an ability to unilaterally charge unjust and unreasonable
rates.'' End of quote.
Can you give an example of how allowing this exemption from
FERC review of mergers under $10 million might result in unjust
and unreasonable rates?
Mr. Slocum. Yes, sir. Let's take this Brayton Point
facility that has been the subject of parts of this hearing. As
the chairman pointed out, that was not a merger and it also was
in excess of $10 million. But let's assume, theoretically, that
the Brayton Point facility was a standalone company that Energy
Capital Partners was going to merge with in order to combine
the two companies into one. It is likely that, because of the
age of the Brayton Point facility, that that transaction could
have been valued at less than $10 million. And therefore, FERC,
under this proposed legislation, would not be able to review
that transaction. And that would be a problem because, as we
identified in our market manipulation complaint, that single
facility was what economists term ``a pivotal supplier'' in
that market, and therefore, not allowing FERC the discretion to
look at that kind of transaction I think is problematic.
It is important to note that it isn't like FERC is a
difficult place to submit a merger application. I cannot find
in the last 20 years a single merger consolidation proposal
that FERC has rejected outright. So, this is not necessarily a
difficult process.
I understand that the $10 million threshold sounds like it
is a reasonable proposal, but there are a number of examples
where instituting this threshold would deny FERC the
opportunity to review pivotal supplier transactions.
Mr. Rush. Well, Mr. Minzner from the first panel indicated
that FERC has other tools at its disposal to protect consumers,
even in a situation where a series of mergers take place, but
not individually meet the $10 million standard. What do you
think about that statement?
Mr. Slocum. Well, I think that in the case of the
transaction of the Energy Capital Partners' acquisition of a
portfolio of power plants, FERC approved that transaction. And
yet, the result of that transaction was that one entity was
able to utilize the capacity of one power plant to have a
billion-dollar swing in energy prices.
And so, in this case, FERC reviewed the transaction,
approved it, and then, did not have safeguards in place. Even
after we brought our market manipulation complaint, FERC still
did not rule on it because they deadlocked two-to-two.
So, at its core, the Federal Power Act is all about
reviewing transactions. We think it is very important that FERC
retain the ability to be able to review any and all mergers and
consolidations of facilities under its jurisdiction.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Marsan, you look like, did you want to
say something?
Mr. Marsan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I don't think anything that Mr. Slocum is saying frustrates
the intent of Section 203. As he stated, he is bringing a
complaint for market manipulation right now, and FERC still
has, as the general counsel stated, market power authority over
all rates. And folks like Mr. Slocum and other citizens who
want to bring a contest to market suggesting market power can
do so, and FERC has full authority to review that. So, I don't
think any change to Section 203 frustrates FERC's ability to
monitor these things.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time has expired.
At this time, Mr. Flores, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Powell, a couple of quick questions for you.
Mr. Powell. Yes, sir.
Mr. Flores. Would allowing an agency to utilize aerial data
and to condition a permit on a followup ground survey interfere
in any way with the integrity of the environmental review?
Mr. Powell. No, sir, I don't believe that it would. It is
very common practice, even today. Landowners routinely deny
survey permission. That is very common in every proceeding.
FERC uses its conditional authority to require us to go back
and close any gaps that those other agencies administering
those Federal reviews require.
Mr. Flores. OK. Well, let's go ahead and build on that. In
Mr. Lloyd's testimony, the testimony appears to be driven by
his dissatisfaction with the FERC public interest review rather
than any substantive criticism of H.R. 3021, outside of the
notion that, for some reason, that FERC wouldn't require air
survey data to be verified by a ground survey.
So, two parts to this. In your experience with these
permitting decisions, do you have any reason to believe that an
agency would ignore the authority provided in H.R. 3021, which
states very clearly--and I quote--``An agency accepting aerial
survey data may require, as a condition of approval, that such
aerial survey data be verified through the use of ground survey
data before the construction or extension of a facility that is
subject of such application.''? Unquote. Do you have any reason
to believe that FERC or any other agency would ignore that
authority that is provided in H.R. 3021?
Mr. Powell. I would say, as a general rule, no. I think
there might be some specific places where, I would say
particularly a State agency that is administering 401, might
because they may want 100 percent before they would deem the
application complete, which is why this legislation is that
important.
Mr. Flores. OK. Good. Do you think that Mr. Lloyd's
concerns are well-founded, given that it is verified by a
ground survey?
Mr. Powell. Not in my experience, sir.
Mr. Flores. OK.
Mr. Powell. As a matter of practice, prior to prefiling,
applicants approach the regulatory agencies, the Fish and
Wildlife Service or the State agency administering their listed
species program, the SHPO--I'm sorry--State Historic
Preservation Office, and discuss which species should be
considered in a particular project, what the survey protocol
should be for those resources. As you might imagine, most
species don't occur across all geographies.
And so, it tends to be a very small subset of the overall
list, and they tend to be unique to specific habitats, which
you can identify by and large. You may not be able to determine
specifically whether the individual is there today, but you can
very much limit the area that requires resurvey, as a general
rule. There are other species that are more broadly distributed
and you would need to do that.
Mr. Flores. OK. I have got a little bit of time left. Do
you have any general comments on anything that has been said
about FERC's environmental review process today?
Mr. Powell. Well, I think FERC's environmental review
process is very good.
Mr. Flores. OK.
Mr. Powell. They strongly encourage applicants to work with
the landowners, and we do that. We do that throughout the
process. We do that all the way to the very end of a process.
We want to obtain survey permission, and we want to do the
required surveys to complete the record. There is really no
benefit to us to having an incomplete record that late in the
project. So, we do very diligently try to get that, but what is
needed is a solution.
There are going to generally be some landowners that are
going to say no, and we need a mechanism where a regulatory
agency can't say, well, this one individual said no. Therefore,
I don't have to review your permit, and I can wait until after
the certificate and after the order and after imminent domain,
until you can gain access. And, oK, now my regulatory review
clock starts. And that happens.
Mr. Flores. OK. Thanks, Mr. Powell. I thank the rest of the
witnesses for their testimony.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. McNerney is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. I thank the chairman, and I thank the
witnesses this morning.
Mr. Slocum, what would be the practical effects of the
merger legislation?
Mr. Slocum. The practical effects would be that any merger
or consolidation under $10 million would not be subject to FERC
review.
Mr. McNerney. So, you think there would be a rush of
unquestioned mergers at that point?
Mr. Slocum. I don't know if there would be a rush, but I
think that, theoretically and practically, you could have a
merger or consolidation structured in a way to ensure that you
get under that threshold amount.
Mr. McNerney. OK.
Mr. Slocum. And particularly as we see a lot of older
generation, whether they are older nuclear power plants or
older coal-fired units, that for a variety of reasons, by
themselves are not worth very much, but as part of a larger
portfolio could be extremely valuable. We just think that it is
not prudent policy to not allow FERC to review those
transactions when they are first proposed.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Mr. Leahey, in your testimony you mention that S. 2012
contains provisions to extend construction timelines to 8
years. What are some of the biggest obstacles that prevent
construction post-licensing?
Mr. Leahey. Sir, thank you. As I mentioned in my testimony,
particularly on these pieces of infrastructure, these existing
dams that are owned by the Federal facilities, once FERC issues
the license for the project, there still may be supplemental
permits that are required to get either from the Bureau of
Reclamation or from the Army Corps of Engineers. Delays in that
permitting process can, then, cause those delays that require
the applicants or the licensees to come back to Congress
individually.
The cases before you also have a variety of other issues
that come up post-licensing. In one of the cases, I believe it
was getting easements for purposes of the transmission line. In
others, there were unexpected issues that resulted when work
started at the dam. So, a variety of things can pop up post-
licensing that could cause those delays.
Mr. McNerney. Mr. Lloyd, would you please explain----
Mr. Whitfield. Your microphone.
Mr. McNerney. Oh, thank you. We lost power or something. I
will speak up.
Can you please explain if an aerial surveying can
effectively identify the full range of critical mass in the
environment and cultural resources on the ground from such a
distance?
Mr. Lloyd. Unfortunately, I think the answer is no. The
data that we have looked at shows that often endangered species
are underground. Often, if you have to delineate a wetland, you
have to do digging in the ground to find out the kind of soils
that are there. I wish I could tell you the aerial surveying
would solve the problem, but for a large number of species that
we have looked at it will not solve the problem.
If I may, our experience has been that FERC is not getting
enough environmental data to adequately do its job. What we are
finding is, when a State permitting agency has to come in and
do permits, they have to look at those permits in a much more
granular way, generate a lot more environmental data. It
enables them to make a better decision. We think that that
information ought to be in front of FERC when FERC makes its
decision in the first place, and that that would help the
process, not harm it.
Mr. McNerney. Well, another one of the things you mentioned
is that some folks might be offended by aerial activities. What
about drones, unmanned drones? How is that going to fit into
this?
Mr. Lloyd. I don't think we have experienced it yet. We
have had concerns about helicopters and low-flying aircraft. To
be honest with you, given where the technology is going in this
country, I think drones may be the next step. We may all need
to look at that to see whether that is not an invasion of the
use of private property by using drones to go over private
property.
Mr. McNerney. I mean, in my career prior to coming to
Congress, I did a survey of a competitor's equipment. I don't
think they would have been too happy if they had known about
it, but they didn't have any way to stop me.
[Laughter.]
Is that the kind of thing we are talking about?
Mr. Lloyd. It is the kind of thing we are talking about.
Landowners in New Jersey have already experienced adverse
impacts from helicopters. As I have said, I expect that drones
might be even more invasive, and I don't think we have
addressed that issue at all as yet.
Mr. McNerney. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, I think that concludes our questions,
except for our friend Mr. Kennedy. So, we will recognize him
for 5 minutes as well.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
time, and I appreciate the witnesses being here and your
testimony. And if you guys stick around for me, I will ask you
a couple of questions as well.
Mr. Bottiggi I heard also say that the market rules are
vital to ensuring reliability. I was wondering if you could
share your take on that? Are capacity markets the only way to
make sure that new generation gets built?
Mr. Bottiggi. Electric utilities have been around since the
1800s, including Braintree Electric, and we think we have
provided very reliable service in that 120 years. Capacity
markets have been around since 2007. So, there was a way to do
it before the capacity markets. I do not think they are vital.
I think generators have to be paid enough revenue to cover
their costs, but paying this windfall to old generation I don't
believe is necessary.
Mr. Kennedy. So, I was interested in analyses that showed
that over 90 percent of new generating capacity has been
constructed under bilateral contracts or utility ownership, but
not solely for sale in the capacity markets run by RTOs. What
do you think this finding says about the ability of capacity
markets to achieve the needed generation mix to meet the
reliability and policy goals?
Mr. Bottiggi. The forward-capacity market as we experience
it, in my opinion, drives short-term decisionmaking. A long-
term decision for a utility is 40 years, whether it is
electrical infrastructure or generation assets. So, the RTOs
drive utilities to make short-term or the owners of generation
to make a fairly short-term decision. Seven years now is what
you get paid for capacity if you clear the auction as a new
resource. That is a short-term decision.
Those same decisions, that same short-term window is only 1
year. Each year is a new market for existing generation. So,
the nuclear power plants that are closing in New England,
Vermont Yankee, Pilgrim Nuclear Power Plant, and, then, in New
York, FitzPatrick, they are all basing that decision on a
short-term window.
When you get out of the RTO markets and you get down South
and they are still building generation under the old cost-of-
service model, that long-term view of the world that you need
for these major expenses, that is why those assets are being
built down there and they aren't being built in New England.
Mr. Kennedy. You mentioned that Braintree has been able to
self-supply its capacity, but that auction was taken away for
further generation. What does that mean for your ratepayers
going forward and how does the current ratemaking process for
Braintree work within the structure of capacity markets?
Finally, with regard to that, in your opinion, how critical is
a review by the Federal regulator to ensure that rates are, in
fact, just and reasonable?
Mr. Bottiggi. Braintree Electric being a municipal utility,
for the most part, is not regulated. We set our own rates. I
report to a three-member light board. The rates that we control
within town, like our distribution system, we are not
regulated. The capacity markets are regulated at the State and
regional level in New England by ISO New England.
When deregulation occurred, since we were allowed to stay
vertically integrated and own our own generation, the next step
was, when the capacity markets was started, the ISO New England
agreed you can self-supply your own generation. You don't get
paid for it as a generator and your load doesn't pay for it.
You are revenue-neutral. So, off we went and I built the 115-
megawatt new state-of-the-art gas turbines that way.
The ISO was led to believe that we had market power, the
little municipal utilities had market power over New England.
We only have a few hundred megawatts of generation in this
33,000 megawatts of generation, but they were convinced that
that gave us market power to manipulate the system. So, they
took that self-supply option away from us.
Flash forward to today. We have an old combined-cycle power
plant, about 40 years old now, that we would like to replace
with new modern generation. If we could self-supply, I could go
to the town, borrow money, general obligation bonds at a very
low rate, build a new power plant. Our ratepayers would pay off
the debt service, and we would provide that capacity for our
own needs.
Since we can't self-supply, we need to bid against other
private companies into the forward-capacity market in order to
try to replace that old generation. It is much harder to do. We
have been at it for 3 years. We would be well underway
replacing that generation now if we knew we could with
certainty get paid, will get credit for that capacity.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. I think we need to spend more time on these
capacity markets.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Bottiggi. I can come back.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Rush, do you have additional questions?
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do have an additional
question for Mr. Lloyd.
Mr. Lloyd, recent studies have suggested that many of the
States in the Northeast region do not require new natural gas
infrastructure to meet their energy needs. According to Post-
2014 State-of-the-Market Report, the Northeast is a net
exporter of natural gas, as in the summer of 2014 the attorney
general of Massachusetts commissioned a study that determined
the New England States do not need new infrastructure to meet
their energy needs.
Given the Northeast region is a net exporter of natural
gas, is there a risk of overbuilding natural gas infrastructure
in the Northeast? And how does FERC's policy of certification
of new interstate natural gas pipeline facilities address the
possibility of overbuilding?
Mr. Lloyd. Thank you, Congressman.
I think there is a risk of overcapacity, and this goes
directly to the FERC process. As I said, it has got 80
pipelines pending in front of it right now. Many of them are in
the Northeast. They are looking at those pipelines on an
individual basis and they are assessing the need for those
pipelines by looking at whether those pipelines have a contract
for gas.
Now we have some examples where the companies contracting
for gas are related corporate entities to the companies that
are building the pipelines. So, there is self-dealing going on
there, and it doesn't appear that FERC is going beyond just
looking at the contract.
So, what we are seeing, I don't think FERC is adequately
examining all of the infrastructure at once. They are looking
at it pipeline-by-pipeline. And then, we don't have an
opportunity to look at what is the infrastructure that we
actually need in the Northeast. Do we need 12 pipelines, for
instance, crossing the Delaware River or could we meet our
needs with far fewer pipelines?
As you pointed out, because the Northeast, and New Jersey
in particular, are net exporters of gas now, it is a real
question about whether there is a need for gas. And if we build
the new infrastructure, the danger is we are going to be taking
gas from the existing infrastructure and we are going to end up
with wasted assets.
And we have experienced this. If I may, we experienced this
in New Jersey with the nuclear industry where, in fact, we
began to look at three nuclear power plants. We spent a billion
dollars in looking at those plants and never built any of them.
Now the good news is, because we didn't build them, there
was no environmental impact. The bad news is, because we didn't
have a mechanism in place, a regulatory mechanism in place to
review those expenses before the utilities made them, the
ratepayers ended up paying them.
I fear that we may face the same situation with natural gas
infrastructure where we are building pipelines that ultimately
we may not need. And then, we will have to pay for those
investments in one way or the other.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Let me just ask a question. We have had a
lot of hearings on the supply of gas in the Northeast. I was
not aware that the Northeast is considered a net exporter of
natural gas. Is that the case or is that not the case?
Mr. Lloyd. As the congressman said, the attorney general of
Massachusetts did just an analysis and said that they were a
net exporter. This was, as I understand it, in regard to
pipelines that were proposed to serve Massachusetts.
We have had the same experience in New Jersey where, in
fact, we have no net need for gas right now. One of the bases
that the companies are justifying the pipeline is redundancy,
but this is a question I think that FERC needs to address:
should we have a redundant supply in New Jersey, in the
Northeast, or anywhere? And I don't think FERC has mechanisms
in place to examine that.
One way we have suggested that they might get at that is
through a programmatic environmental impact statement which
would look at a number of pipelines, not just one pipeline, and
see what, in fact, the overall need is. And perhaps it would
lead to a decision that assures that we have adequate supply
for the Northeast and for New Jersey, but also assure that we
are not overbuilding, to leave ratepayers with a bill that they
may not want to pay.
Mr. Whitfield. Did you have a comment on that, Mr. Powell?
Mr. Powell. No, sir.
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Mr. Powell. I am not expert on market.
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, if I might respectfully request
that you ask the attorney general of Massachusetts----
Mr. Whitfield. I am going to go up there and see him.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Rush. Well, take me with you.
Mr. Whitfield. I will.
[Laughter.]
I have been wanting to go up there to Braintree, anyway.
[Laughter.]
I do want to ask one additional last question for Mr.
Marsan because in his written testimony he said that, since
enactment of the Energy Policy Act of 2005, that FERC has been
interpreting I think Section 203 to mean that any acquisition
of any utility property, that they would have to get
preapproval. I was just curious if you might just give us a
couple of examples of that which you consider particularly
maybe egregious.
Mr. Marsan. Correct. I can speak from my own experience on
this. I will just give you three of our own company's
transactions we have had to seek 203 approval for: a 12-
kilovolt line and land rights for $1,513; a relay for $2,802,
and miscellaneous substation equipment, $2,874.
Mr. Whitfield. I'm sorry, would you just turn your
microphone on, so that our transcriber can hear?
Mr. Marsan. OK. Can you hear me better now?
OK. I will just go through those again: $1,513 for a 12-
kilovolt line and land rights; $2,802 for relays, and $2,874
for miscellaneous substation equipment. So, in each of those
cases we had to take the expense of drafting a 203 application,
the legal fees and such associated with it, file it with FERC.
FERC had to do their due diligence, as the general counsel of
FERC stated before, on transactions that would have no impact
whatsoever on the grid.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you very much for that, and
thank you all for your testimony. We look forward to additional
contact with you, as we try to decide what we are doing with
this legislation.
I also would ask unanimous consent that we enter into the
record a letter of support from Advanced Hydro Solutions, a
statement for the record from Clark Canyon Hydro, a statement
from Congressman Zinke in support of H.R. 2080 and 2081, and a
statement of record from the American Rivers. I think you all
have seen this.
Mr. Rush. No objection, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. No objection?
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Whitfield. So, that will conclude today's hearing, and
the record will remain open for 10 days.
We look forward to working with you all. Thank you very
much for your time and your testimony.
That concludes today's hearing.
[Whereupon, at 12:42 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Today we will examine eight bills as part of our ongoing
bipartisan work to strengthen our domestic energy
infrastructure to help keep costs affordable and reliable for
consumers and job-creators.
Three of these bills make process changes at the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC), the result of which will
be more streamlined agency oversight of the Nation's natural
gas infrastructure and electricity system. Specifically, they
will allow greater use of aerial survey data in natural gas
infrastructure approvals, create a new process for public
challenges to certain electric rate changes previously not
subject to redress, and raise the monetary threshold for FERC
jurisdiction over electricity acquisitions which will help
facilitate increases in transmission capacity for the utilities
that need it. These are small but important changes that will
help yield a more effective regulatory process at FERC, and
ultimately a more affordable and reliable supply of energy
delivered to folks in Michigan and across the country.
Five of the bills before us today extend the licenses of
hydroelectric power projects. Renewable hydropower is a
critical component of our all-of-the-above energy strategy, and
its benefits are many. Hydro is cheap and reliable and has
minimal environmental impacts. Each of these hydroelectric
projects will create many high-paying construction jobs and
expand the electricity supply for the communities directly
served. They are precisely the kinds of power projects that
both sides of the aisle can, and should, get behind. But as the
law currently stands, the FERC licenses for these five projects
have or will soon expire before construction has started, and
for reasons outside the control of the companies undertaking
them. These bills would extend the licenses and allow
construction to commence in the future.
All eight of these bills are steps in the right direction
for American energy, and I urge my colleagues to support them.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
