- DISCUSSION DRAFT OF THE EPS IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 2016

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DISCUSSION DRAFT OF THE EPS IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 2016

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JANUARY 12, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-109

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

___________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
99-854 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2016

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California7
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               JERRY McNERNEY, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        PAUL TONKO, New York
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREGG HARPER, Vice Chairman          GENE GREEN, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     LOIS CAPPS, California
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             KATHY CASTOR, Florida
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   PETER WELCH, Vermont
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILL FLORES, Texas                   FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma               officio)
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     1
Hon. Renee L. Ellmers, a Representative in Congress from the
State of North Carolina, opening statement.....................     2
Hon. Jerry McNerney, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     3
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................    36

Witnesses

Jennifer Amann, Buildings Program Director, American Council for
an Energy-Efficient Economy....................................     7
Prepared statement...........................................    10
Answers to submitted questions...............................    44
Pekka Hakkarainen, Ph.D., Vice President, Lutron Electronics, on
behalf of the National Electrical Manufacturers Association....    15
Prepared statement...........................................    17
Answers to submitted questions...............................    48

Submitted Material

Discussion Draft, H.R. ___, the EPS Improvement Act, submitted by
Mr. Whitfield..................................................    38
Letter of January 19, 2015, from Patrick Keal, Government Affairs
Director, Big Ass Solutions, to Mr. Upton and Mr. Pallone,
submitted by Mr. Whitfield.....................................    41

DISCUSSION DRAFT OF THE EPS IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 2016

----------

TUESDAY, JANUARY 12, 2016

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:03 a.m., in
room 2322 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed Whitfield
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Whitfield, Shimkus, Latta,
Harper, McKinley, Ellmers, Flores, Mullin, Hudson, McNerney,
Tonko, Engel, Green, Capps, Welch, Loebsack, and Pallone (ex
officio).
Also present: Representative DeGette.
Staff present: Nick Abraham, Legislative Associate, Energy
and Power; Will Batson, Legislative Clerk; Leighton Brown,
Press Assistant; Allison Busbee, Policy Coordinator, Energy and
Power; Rebecca Card, Assistant Press Secretary; Patrick
Currier, Senior Counsel, Energy and Power; A.T. Johnston,
Senior Policy Advisor; Dan Schneider, Press Secretary; Jennifer
Berenholz, Democratic Chief Clerk; Christine Brennan,
Democratic Press Secretary; Jeff Carroll, Democratic Staff
Director; Rick Kessler, Democratic Senior Advisor and Staff
Director, Energy and Environment; and Alexander Ratner,
Democratic Policy Analyst.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Mr. Whitfield. I would like to call the hearing to order
this morning, and today's hearing is going to be on the EPS
Improvement Act of 2016. And I will introduce our witnesses
after we have an opportunity to make an opening statement.
But this hearing this morning is going to be focused on our
efforts to correct a little glitch in the 2005 Energy Policy
Act relating to external power sources and solid state liquid
lighting systems.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Ed Whitfield

The Obama administration Department of Energy has enacted
34 energy conservation standards since 2009. Many of these
standards are not perfect and contain flaws that need to be
corrected. We have included a few such bipartisan corrections
in our recent energy bill, and today we address another one
affecting light emitting diodes, or LEDs. I thank my colleagues
Renee Ellmers and Diana DeGette for their draft bill that would
address this issue and benefit both the manufacturers and users
of these products.
By way of background, the Energy Policy Act of 2005
required DOE to set energy conservation standards for external
power supplies, such as the ones we use to plug in our laptops
and cell phones, but DOE also included devices that power solid
state lighting products, also known as LEDs, for purposes of
regulation. The latest standards will take effect next month.
However, the statutory definition of an external power supply
was created back in 2005, and this old language did not
anticipate the subsequent development of LEDs.
LED systems contain components that DOE has determined fit
within the broad definition of an external power supply, but in
reality these lighting technologies have several unique
characteristics that make compliance with DOE's new standard
nearly impossible. I might add that LEDs have many advantages,
so a DOE rule that makes it harder to produce them would be
counterproductive to the statute's efficiency goals.
The EPS Improvement Act of 2016 scales back the external
power supply rule in order to preserve the market for LED
products. While keeping the efficiency standard in place for
most external power supplies, it creates a specific exemption
for LEDs. In addition, the law authorizes DOE to enact a
subsequent, more appropriate standard targeting LEDs if the
agency deems it necessary.
Manufacturers and energy efficiency advocates agree that
this change makes sense, and we will hear from representatives
of both groups today.
Let's kick off 2016 by making one DOE regulation more
workable for those who make their livelihoods from LEDS as well
as those who use them.

[The proposed legislation appears at the conclusion of the
hearing.]
Mr. Whitfield. And at this time I am going to call on Renee
Ellmers to give her opening statement. She and Diana together,
it is their bill, and I want to give them an opportunity to
talk about it.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. RENEE L. ELLMERS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA

Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you, Chairman Whitfield, so much for
this opportunity and for holding this hearing today, and I want
to thank our panel for being here as well. There are many
people who have been working on this issue trying to correct
the glitch in the regulations, coming up and helping to draft
this legislation and make this hearing possible.
First, I would like to thank my colleagues, Mike Pompeo,
Diana DeGette, Doris Matsui, and Charlie Dent, and their staff
for their support and hard work throughout this process.
Finally, but most importantly, Mr. Chairman, I would like to
thank the committee staff itself. You have put up a great
teamwork together on this issue and you have been wonderful in
working with my staff and throughout this whole process. I am
truly thankful and grateful for their time and effort.
The EPS Improvement Act of 2016 is a bipartisan and
commonsense bill that would provide certainty to manufacturers
and resolve the underlying issues of the DOE external power
supply rule. In 2005, Congress directed the Department of
Energy to develop energy efficiency standards for external
power supplies and they developed a definition for EPS devices.
DOE stated that the products that were intended to be covered
by these standards, quote, convert household electric current
into DC or lower power voltage to AC to operate consumer
products such as laptop computers or smart phones. And that is
pretty much the plan.
Years after the passage of the Energy Policy Act of 2005,
new technologies arose such as OLED and LED drivers were
introduced into the marketplace. We all know how quickly
technology is advancing, and innovation. While the development
of this technology increased energy efficiency, it has also
caused uncertainty in the manufacturing sector as DOE roped in
drivers as products to also be covered.
DOE is now attempting to regulate a product that was not in
the marketplace at the time Congress initially directed the
Department to set external power supply standards. Both
manufacturers and the energy efficiency community agree that
this was not the intent of Congress, as LED and OLED drivers
were not in the marketplace in 2005 when Congress directed DOE
to develop these standards. DOE has continued with this
misguided rule despite the distinct differences in the design
and use of LED drivers to that of the design and use of EPS.
One example of the differences is that EPS use single stage
power conversion while LED drivers use a two stage power
conversion. Thankfully, this legislation resolves the problem
by excluding SSL drivers for this technology and prevents it
from being included in other broad rulemaking. This regulation
will not only stifle innovation but inject uncertainty into the
manufacturing sector while creating less energy-efficient
products and higher energy prices for consumers.
Without congressional action by February 10th of this year,
this rule could unintentionally threaten thousands of jobs. I
look forward to hearing from our witnesses, and with that, Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you, Mrs. Ellmers, very much. We
appreciate that. And at this time I would like to recognize the
gentleman from California, Mr. McNerney, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JERRY MCNERNEY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. McNerney. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. We are here
today to hold the legislative hearing on the External Power
Supply, or EPS, Improvement Act, which addresses an important
issue for LED innovation, manufacturers and future investments
in this exciting industry. The EPS Improvement Act would exempt
electrical drivers that power solid state lighting products
from the Department of Energy's energy conservation standard
for external power supplies.
This targeted bill sponsored by my colleagues Renee Ellmers
and Diana DeGette would amend the Energy Policy and
Conservation Act to exclude LED drivers from standards that go
into effect on February 10th of this year. Energy efficiency
standards are important as they save consumers money on their
energy bills and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
It is estimated that the national appliance and equipment
efficiency standards have saved, believe it or not, 5.4
quadrillion BTUs of energy in 2014 alone. The standards enacted
to date will save consumers and businesses more than $1.1
trillion through 2035--I see heads nodding here--and the
technology innovation spurred by these standards is critical.
We need to support innovation to address climate change with
energy efficiency and renewable technology.
My Grid Innovation Caucus co-chairwoman, Congresswoman
Ellmers, and I believe that we must promote technologies that
help us adopt to our growing energy needs and provide
additional options for consumers, businesses and the economy.
And we must use the energy standards in a manner that does not
confuse the market. At the time the Energy Policy and
Conservation Act was amended, LED drivers were an emerging
technology but they still fell under the broad definition of an
external power supply. LED drivers represent the next wave of
lighting technology and capabilities enabling smart buildings,
industry facilities and homes and reduce their costs and
enhance their performance.
Investments in LED driver technology are robust and
ongoing; new standards at this time could slow down additional
investments. Leaving LED drivers in the EPS final rule could
hinder the transition to more energy-efficient lighting in the
marketplace and increase energy use and the cost for consumers.
This legislation, however, does not grant the Department of
Energy the authority to prescribe energy conservation standards
down the road, or it does grant--excuse me--the DOE the
authority to prescribe energy conservation standards down the
road so that it can implement more appropriate standards for
the LED industry when the time is appropriate.
I support this EPS Improvement Act because it clarifies
congressional intent by clarifying the statutory definition of
external power supplies to exclude LED drivers. This measure
was developed in consultation with the DOE and is supported by
industry stakeholders. We should provide LED manufacturers
market stability so they are able to improve technology that
has already been demonstrated in its ability to increase energy
efficiency in consumer and commercial applications.
I thank our witnesses for joining us today and look forward
to hearing your testimony. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much, Mr. McNerney. Mr. Upton
is not here this morning. Is there anyone else on our side of
the aisle that would like to make a comment about this hearing,
the subject matter of this hearing? If not, then I will
recognize the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Pallone, for 5
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you
and the ranking member of the subcommittee for holding today's
legislative hearing on the EPS Improvement Act of 2010. This
bill authored by Representatives Ellmers and DeGette would
exempt LED consumer light bulbs from new mandatory efficiency
standards for external power supplies. And the development of
LED light bulbs has been an energy efficiency success story and
I am concerned about any action no matter how well intentioned
that might interfere with that success.
More than a decade ago, Congress amended the Energy Policy
and Conservation Act to set efficiency standards for external
power supplies. An external power supply, or EPS, is typically
used to convert household electric current to help operate
consumer products. For most Americans that means the big plugs
that are associated with laptop computers, home cordless
phones, answering machines and the like. As part of this
regulation, the DOE has moved forward on a plan to include
power drivers for solid state lighting which are an integral
part of highly efficient LED replacement light bulbs. In its
comments with stakeholders it is clear that DOE needs statutory
authority to alter the law's definitions.
Meanwhile, the National Electrical Manufacturers
Association argued that Congress didn't intend to cover
consumer LED light bulbs when it enacted EPACT 2005, or when it
amended the law in the 2007 Energy Independence and Security
Act. I am inclined to agree that Congress did not intend to
capture LED light bulbs in the 2014 rule. The regulation of
EPSs has been discussed at length both in this committee and
within the stakeholder community. Never once had LED light
bulbs been contemplated; instead, the discussion was focused on
television sets, computers and stereo equipment.
So it is clear to me, however, that Congress' multiple
efforts to legislate in this area over a short time frame has
added confusion rather than clarity to the statute who
explicitly carved out some things like medical devices from the
definition of an EPS, but we did not carve out LED light bulbs.
I think that had we known more about the workings of LED light
bulbs at the time we would have exempted them specifically from
mandatory efficiency standards from the start.
So right now, a modern LED light bulb that replaces the
kind of 60-watt light bulb we used in the last century will
only consume nine watts of power to produce the same amount of
light, last for a decade, and sells for as little as $3.99.
That is a great deal for any consumer and I see no benefit to
the consumer, the environment or the economy from regulating
the efficiency of these light bulbs at this time.
I am encouraged by today's legislative hearing to put this
issue in perspective and I am hopeful we can work together to
expeditiously move this bill forward. And I would just like now
to yield the balance of my time to the lead sponsor of the
legislation, the gentlewoman from Colorado, Ms. DeGette.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

I want to thank the chair and ranking member of the
subcommittee for holding today's legislative hearing on the EPS
Improvement Act of 2016. This bill, authored by Reps. Ellmers
and DeGette, would exempt LED consumer light bulbs from new
mandatory efficiency standards for external power supplies. The
development of LED light bulbs has been an energy efficiency
success story and I'm concerned about any action, no matter how
well-intentioned, that might interfere with that success.
More than a decade ago, Congress amended the Energy Policy
and Conservation Act to set efficiency standards for external
power supplies. An external power supply, or EPS, is typically
used to convert household electric currents to help operate
consumer products. For most Americans that means the big plugs
that are associated with laptop computers, home cordless
phones, answering machines and the like.
As a part of its regulations the DOE has moved forward on a
plan to include power drivers for solid state lighting, which
are an integral part of highly efficient LED replacement light
bulbs. In its comments with stakeholders, it's clear that DOE
needs statutory authority to alter the law's definitions.
Meanwhile, the National Electrical Manufacturer's Association
argued that Congress didn't intend to cover consumer LED light
bulbs when it enacted EPACT 2005 or when it amended the law in
the 2007 Energy Independence and Security Act.
I'm inclined to agree that Congress did not intend to
capture LED light bulbs in that 2014 rule. The regulation of
EPSs had been discussed at length both in this committee and
within the stakeholder community. Never once had LED light
bulbs been contemplated. Instead, the discussion was focused on
television sets, computers, and stereo equipment.
It's clear to me, however, that Congress' multiple efforts
to legislate in this area over a short time frame has added
confusion, rather than clarity, to the statute. We explicitly
carved out some things like medical devices from the definition
of an EPS, but we did not carve out LED light bulbs. I think
that had we known more about the workings of LED light bulbs at
the time, we would have exempted them specifically from
mandatory efficiency standards from the start.
Right now, a modern LED light bulb that replaces the kind
of 60 watt light bulb we used in the last century, will only
consume 9 watts of power to produce the same amount of light,
last for a decade and sells for as little as $3.99. That's a
great deal for any consumer and I see no benefit to the
consumer, the environment or the economy from regulating the
efficiency of these light bulbs at this time.
I am encouraged by today's legislative hearing to put this
issue into perspective and I'm hopeful we can work together to
expeditiously move this bill forward.
Thank you, and I yield the balance of my time to the lead
Democratic sponsor of the legislation, the gentlelady from
Colorado, Ms. DeGette.

Ms. DeGette. Thank you very much for yielding to me,
Ranking Member Pallone. I am really proud to be leading this
bill with Representative Ellmers, truly working across the
aisle, literally, today. And as has been said, this bill will
allow the Department of Energy to provide, to prescribe a
separate energy conservation standard for LED drivers.
As we have been discussing, when this committee wrote the
Energy Policy and Conservation Act of 2005 it directed the
Department of Energy to develop a conservation standard for
various external power supply products. That term was meant to
cover products that convert household electric current in order
to operate a consumer product like a laptop computer or a smart
phone.
At that time in 2005, LED lighting was in its very early
stages. And as much we try and often succeed, we didn't have a
crystal ball to see into the future of LED lighting. So since
that time because of the broad definition we created for
external power supplies, emergent LED drivers were swept up
into a conservation standard that just doesn't make sense. This
means that, although LED drivers are highly energy-efficient,
they can't meet the EPS conservation standard and their ability
to compete in the competitive lighting market is now an open
question.
Well, it seems like a technicality, but the bill is
actually vitally important. LED drivers represent the next wave
of lighting technology allowing for better and faster Internet
connections, enabling smart buildings, industry facilities and
homes to reduce their costs, improving consumer experiences in
the retail industry and even leading to even faster recovery
times in hospitals by controlling the color and timing of the
lights in recovery rooms.
It is estimated that switching to LED lighting could reduce
national lighting electricity use by nearly one half by 2030.
That is the annual equivalent to saving three quadrillion BTUs,
which is worth $26 billion in today's standards. So by passing
the EPS Improvement Act of 2016 will let the LED lighting
revolution continue, and in turn help lower energy prices for
every American business.
I want to thank the panelists for coming today. I look
forward to your testimony, and I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. That concludes our opening statements. And
before I introduce our panel of witnesses I do want to thank
both the Democratic and Republican staff, certainly Diana
DeGette and Renee Ellmers for working together on this
important legislation. And we appreciate very much the National
Electrical Manufacturers Association and the American Council
for an Energy-Efficient Economy helping us to craft this
legislation.
And we are delighted that we have two witnesses here today
representing those organizations. First of all, we have
Jennifer Amann who is the Buildings Program director at the
American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy, and then we
have Dr. Pekka Hakkarainen who is vice president of Lutron
Electronics. I think they are from Pennsylvania, I believe. And
you are testifying on behalf of the National Electrical
Manufacturers Association.
So we appreciate both of you being with us this morning,
and we look forward to your opening statement and your
expertise in this area. And with that Ms. Amann, I will
recognize you for your 5-minute opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF JENNIFER AMANN, BUILDINGS PROGRAM DIRECTOR,
AMERICAN COUNCIL FOR AN ENERGY-EFFICIENT ECONOMY, AND PEKKA
HAKKARAINEN, PH.D., VICE PRESIDENT, LUTRON ELECTRONICS, ON
BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL ELECTRICAL MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION

STATEMENT OF JENNIFER AMANN

Ms. Amann. My name is Jennifer Amann, and I am----
Mr. Whitfield. Amann, I am sorry. Be sure and turn your
microphone on.
Ms. Amann. I am the Buildings Program director for the
American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy, or ACEEE. We
are a nonprofit organization that acts as a catalyst to advance
energy efficiency policies, programs, technologies, investments
and behavior. We were formed in 1980 by energy researchers.
Personally, I have been involved in energy efficiency issues
for the past 20 years with a focus on energy efficiency in
buildings, appliances and equipment including lighting and
electronics, the subjects of today's hearing.
National appliance and equipment efficiency standards are a
proven energy saving policy. The first standards were
established in 1987 and signed into law by President Reagan.
ACEEE estimates that efficiency standards saved 5.4 quadrillion
BTUs, or quads, of energy in 2014 alone. That is roughly five
percent of total U.S. energy use in that year. Standards
enacted to date will save consumers and businesses more than
$1.1 trillion through 2035.
External power supplies, or EPS, are also known as power
adapters, the small boxes on the cord of many small or portable
electronic devices such as laptop computers, modems, cordless
and cell phones. According to DOE, annual shipments of these
products number about 345 million units.
In the 1990s, with the emergence of low-cost chips and
portable electronics, new EPS technologies were developed to
significantly reduce the size of the products while offering
better performance and improved energy efficiency. A standard
for EPS would capture savings from new power supply
technologies across all of the broad spectrum of products that
utilize external power supplies much more effectively than
establishing separate standards for each of the types of
products, individual classes of products that use them.
The Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007
established the first standard for external power supplies
which took effect in 2008, and it also instructed DOE to
complete future rulemakings to revise the standard as
warranted. DOE estimates the standard, the initial standard,
will save approximately 3.8 quads--that is equivalent to the
total energy consumption of the State of Pennsylvania--and
yield $42.4 billion in energy savings for products shipped from
2008 to 2032.
In February of 2014, DOE published a final rule revising
the efficiency requirements for external power supplies, and
these new standards take effect this February and they will
reduce EPS energy use by 30 to 85 percent depending on the type
of device. The new standard will yield consumer energy bill
savings of approximately $3.8 billion. So the EPS standard has
been very effective in achieving the intended objectives of the
rule.
But at the time that EISA was enacted, solid state lighting
was very much in its infancy for general service lighting
applications. There were few products on the market other than
for niche applications. Today, a wide variety of solid state
lighting products are available, market share is growing
rapidly, and the efficiency of the technology now surpasses
that of other light sources making it a very important
contributor to reducing national electricity use.
Solid state lighting products use power supplies, or SSL
drivers, to power LED lighting. The broad definition of EPS in
EISA captures, or in the Energy Policy Act captures the power
supplies used with solid state lighting, but the products are
somewhat different from other products using EPS. And of
particular note, these products do not perform and cannot be
tested when disconnected from a power using load, so they can't
be shown to comply with some portions of the standard, and as a
result the required efficiency requirements.
The bill under consideration would exempt those external
power supplies that are used to power these lighting products
from the existing EPS standards while ensuring that DOE retains
the authority to set standards for these products in the
future. If it is determined that there are wasteful LED power
supplies on the market, DOE can then develop an appropriate
test method and standard for these specific products.
The provision in the bill explicitly granting DOE authority
to set future standards on these products is critical to ACEEE
support for the bill. Absent passage of this technical
correction, manufacturers would be at risk of selling LED
lighting products that cannot be shown to meet the standard.
ACEEE is satisfied with the outcome in this bill because it
removes a potential obstacle to the continued growth of a
leading energy efficiency technology while preserving DOE's
ability to develop a standard on power supplies for these
products in the future, if warranted.
This concludes my testimony and I thank you for the
opportunity to present these views.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Amann follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you very much. And Dr.
Hakkarainen, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PEKKA HAKKARAINEN

Dr. Hakkarainen. Good morning, Chairman Whitfield and
Congressman McNerney and members of the committee. My name is
Pekka Hakkarainen. I am vice president at Lutron. I have been
employed there for 25 years.
I want to first thank the committee for giving me the
opportunity to testify on the EPS Improvement Act. The bill
before you fixes a needed technical issue with the Department
of Energy's February 2014 EPS energy conservation standard that
goes into effect on February 10th of this year. I am here today
testifying on behalf of Lutron Electronics and the National
Electrical Manufacturers Association.
A number of NEMA's members who manufacture and distribute
solid state LED lighting products are impacted by the DOE
external power supply standard. My company Lutron Electronics
is a privately held manufacturer founded in 1961 and is
headquartered in Coopersburg, Pennsylvania. Our products range
from consumer dimmers to motorized window shades to lighting
management systems for both residential and commercial
buildings, and they also include LED drivers. And we estimate
that in the U.S. alone, our products save about $1 billion a
year in consumer electricity bills.
In 2005, Congress amended the Energy Policy and
Conservation Act to define and direct the Department of Energy
to set standards for external power supplies, such as this
device that I am holding here. An external power supply was
defined as a device, a circuit that is used to convert
household electric current into DC current or low voltage AC
current to operate a consumer product. It can be readily seen
that the definition of an external power supply uses the words
``external,'' ``power,'' and ``supply,'' but as technology has
advanced this definition has created significant confusion in
the lighting industry.
According to the Department of Energy, the EPS products
that were meant to be covered are those that as it says convert
household electric current to operate a consumer product such
as a laptop computer or a smart phone or an answering machine,
et cetera. However, given the broad definition in EPACT 2005,
additional products were brought into the definition of a
covered product via the DOE rulemaking process.
In 2014, DOE issued a final rule for the latest round of
standards for external power supplies. Despite Lutron and other
companies asking in writing and in public meetings for the
Department to clearly identify what types of products impacting
lighting technologies might be covered as external power
supplies, no clear answer was provided until the final rule was
issued. The final rule includes as regulated EPS certain
drivers for solid state lighting products, such as perhaps this
one, which industry and the efficiency community agree were
never intended by Congress to be considered external power
supplies.
The EPS Improvement Act resolves this unintended
consequence by amending and clarifying the statutory definition
of external power supply to exclude solid state lighting
drivers that are designed to be connected to and power light-
emitting diodes, LEDs, or organic light-emitting diodes, OLEDs
that provide illumination. The bill then restates the
conditions under which the DOE could undertake a rulemaking in
the future for solid state drivers subject to current statutory
requirements. Furthermore, the language also requires that DOE
make public the testing procedure requirements for at least a
year before any energy conservation standard for these
technologies is prescribed.
This necessary fix has wide support. Not only does it have
bipartisan support, but it also has support from both
manufacturers and the energy efficiency community. And the same
language has already passed the House by a voice vote as an
amendment to H.R. 8, the North American Energy Security and
Infrastructure Act of 2015.
Without action before February 10th, solid state drivers
would be left in the EPS final rule which would be disruptive
for the transition to more energy-efficient lighting in the
marketplace. As has already been stated, LED drivers represent
the next wave of lighting technology and capabilities, and
significant investment in this technology is ongoing in
industry. Anything that would slow this evolving and beneficial
technology would threaten additional investment.
I want to, lastly, especially thank Representatives
Ellmers, Dent, DeGette, Pompeo, and Matsui whose leadership is
very much appreciated on this issue. Thank you, and I would be
happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Hakkarainen follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you for your testimony. We
appreciate it, as I said earlier, both of you being here today,
and it is encouraging that when you get to a technical issue
that the parties can come together and try to move
expeditiously.
And one of the questions I would have for both of you, I
have not had an opportunity to talk to Ms. DeGette or Mrs.
Ellmers about it, but we do believe that we ought to pass this
legislation through the House rather quickly, maybe even on
suspension. And I was just curious, have you all been working
on the Senate side at all about moving the bill over there?
Whoever would like to respond to that.
Dr. Hakkarainen. Yes, we have been working on the Senate
side. My colleagues from NEMA would be better experts on where
exactly we stand over there.
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Ms. Amann. And I would say yes, we are just aware that
there are efforts going on in the Senate. We haven't been as
active as we are supporting the manufacturers' efforts in
showing out support for it, but we are----
Mr. Whitfield. OK, good. Now, Dr. Hakkarainen, if February
the 10th rolled by and this regulation did go into effect and
we were not able to get this legislation passed, what would be
the practical impacts on, say, Lutron Electronics?
Dr. Hakkarainen. There would be uncertainty as to whether
the EPS rule affects LED drivers and which ones. The Department
of Energy has not provided industry sufficient guidance on that
issue, and we are here to ask for clarity.
Mr. Whitfield. Would that interfere with your ability to
sell the product?
Dr. Hakkarainen. Quite probably would, yes.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Yes.
Ms. Amann. I would just say, so DOE has a process for
companies to request a waiver if they are not able to follow
the test procedures for a certain product, but that would be
very time consuming and resource intensive for the
manufacturers and for DOE to have to deal with those waiver
applications.
Mr. Whitfield. I would like to just ask you sort of a
generic question about the American Council for Energy-
Efficient Economy. I know you are a nonprofit group and I know
you are involved in policy issues. But I notice that you talk
about advancing energy efficiency technologies and investments.
I was just curious, how do you all go about doing that
advancing new technologies and investments?
Ms. Amann. Sure. So a lot of our work focuses on
researching technologies and different mechanisms for bringing
about energy efficiency, so on the investment side it could be
financing options that increase the adoption of efficient
technologies. So we look at, we keep an eye out on emerging
technologies that are entering the market. We work closely with
utilities and other efficiency program administrators that are
spending billions of dollars a year on energy efficiency to
help them identify the best opportunities, the best markets to
spend their money in and to advance those technologies.
Mr. Whitfield. But do you actually help on investments,
like obtaining money?
Ms. Amann. Yes. We don't actually do any of that type of
thing, but we do things like we hold every year an energy
efficiency finance forum where we bring together folks in the
finance community to talk about different types of like new
loan structures, different types of financial mechanisms for
increasing investment and energy efficiency.
Mr. Whitfield. And when will that be held this----
Ms. Amann. This year it will be in May or maybe early June.
It is May or early June, and it will be in Newport, Rhode
Island.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. I yield back the balance of my time and
recognize Mr. McNerney for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is ironic that
the title ``External Power Supply'' should apply to LEDs,
because when you buy an LED at the store for your home it is
all internal. You don't get an external supply. Does that seem
ironic to you, or am I missing something here?
Dr. Hakkarainen. So in this case we are not actually
talking about the light bulb that has the internal driver. You
are quite right that----
Mr. McNerney. OK.
Dr. Hakkarainen [continuing]. Those are the consumer
products, and they are not, in my understanding, affected by
the EPS standards that the DOE has.
Mr. McNerney. So we are talking about the LEDs that are
inside of----
Dr. Hakkarainen. But it affects products such as this, a
separate driver that goes into a, more like a commercial grade
luminaire lighting fixture where the LED lamps or strips are
separately installed by the luminaire manufacturer.
Mr. McNerney. OK. Ms. Amann, are the DOE's energy
conservation standards that come into effect in February
inappropriately suited for regulating LED drivers?
Ms. Amann. No, I don't believe so. It was never the
intention of the law, I mean, of the rule to do that. And it
was just an oversight, because these products weren't available
in the market at that time. And so when I say that DOE
estimates there are about 345 million power supplies sold each
year, those are the external power supplies like this. And that
is what DOE's analysis is based on and that is what the
efficiency community and manufacturers first discussed when we
made a recommendation to comment on standard levels----
Mr. McNerney. Sure.
Ms. Amann [continuing]. That were passed in 2007 under the
EISA bill.
Mr. McNerney. Well, how does the rule disrupt the
development of a power supply? I don't understand how an
efficiency rule would disrupt the development of a better power
supply.
Ms. Amann. So in this case because the technology for the
solid state lighting driver is very different from the
technology that is used in a standard external power supply, so
the rule doesn't appropriately apply to this other technology.
For instance, for these products I think one of the big
points is part of the standard establishes what we call a ``no-
load,'' a requirement for operation in no-load mode. So if you
plug this into the wall and you had your phone plugged into it,
once you took your phone away this would still be drawing power
and you could set it, put it on a power meter and understand
how much power it drew.
That is not the case with the solid state lighting drivers.
They can't operate in no-load mode at all. So you can't even
test them under the rules as it is set out in the standard, so
you can't show whether or not it can comply with the standard.
And I would ask Pekka to correct me if I made any errors in my
technical explanation, or if you could clarify anything.
Dr. Hakkarainen. No, that is fine.
Mr. McNerney. So the standards, I mean it is apples and
oranges. They don't really apply to the same kind of
technology.
Ms. Amann. That is right.
Dr. Hakkarainen. That is correct.
Mr. McNerney. And that would really hinder the development
because the investment would dry up and so on. So how does the
EPS Improvement Act change that? Did I call it the right thing?
How does the EPS Improvement Act change that?
Dr. Hakkarainen. It changes the situation for LED drivers
because it excludes them from the definition of an external
power supply, and then it further directs DOE in the future to
develop separate standards for LED drivers.
Mr. McNerney. So you believe that this actually removing a
standard promotes stability and confidence in the market?
Dr. Hakkarainen. Correct.
Mr. McNerney. OK. All right, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back. At this time I
recognize the gentle lady from North Carolina, Mrs. Ellmers,
for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and again thank you
to our panelists today on this issue. This is certainly
something that I have become educated on recently as it affects
some of our businesses back home in District 2 of North
Carolina. And again I thank you for your expert testimony in
helping us to understand what it is that we are dealing with
and why. Although the legislation and the actions were well
intended, to direct the Department of Energy as again kind of a
good problem as technology has advanced so quickly we are
finding ourselves in this situation where we now have to modify
the path going forward.
So Dr. Hakkarainen, will you please take a moment to, and
you did explain in your testimony the difference between the
design and use of a typical EPS device compared to that of an
OLED or LED driver or converter. Could you just expand on that
a little bit more now?
Dr. Hakkarainen. Certainly. An external power supply such
as this device here----
Mrs. Ellmers. This is the example that I have been given as
well, so----
Dr. Hakkarainen. It takes household electric current, 120
volts powered from a 120-volt supply, and converts it typically
to a DC voltage, to five volts, nine volts, something like
that. And there is a single stage of power conversion in that
process. In an LED driver there are two stages of power
conversion. First, we convert from the AC power supply, which
could be 120 volts but it is often actually 277 volts in
commercial buildings, and converts that to a relatively high
voltage DC power bus, as we say, inside the driver. And that is
then further modulated to operate the LED lighting properly, to
essentially to drive the LED lighting. So there are two stages
of power conversion.
In addition, these modern LED drivers have other features
as well, such as being connected to the external world, to the
building infrastructure, to the Internet, for example. So there
are additional features here that external power supplies
typically don't have.
Mrs. Ellmers. So again, and I have got mine as well. So
this driver, basically, and we said converter, driver, actually
does more than that. And so basically it is stationary. It is
in the ceiling providing the power supply for the lights
themselves, the LED lights.
And so I just want to touch on the issue of the commercial
component to this, because to me one of the big issues here is
the uncertainty that our manufacturers are experiencing, but
then you can see how it impacts any commercial development and
the cost as well. I mean, I could see that this could be very,
very costly. Am I correct in that?
Dr. Hakkarainen. It would certainly be costly. I am not
even certain that it would be possible.
Mrs. Ellmers. Possible. And I did want to touch on that as
well. I know Ms. Amann had discussed this, but basically as it
is right now the way that the EPS rule stands there really
isn't a way to have a standard test procedure; is that correct?
And this will dramatically affect technology moving forward.
Dr. Hakkarainen. Correct.
Mrs. Ellmers. Correct. And Dr. Hakkarainen, is it fair to
say that by encompassing LED and OLED drivers into the final
EPS rule that it could potentially, I mean, we are basically
saying that this is going to be counterproductive to the whole
process, correct?
Dr. Hakkarainen. Yes, that is correct, because if LED and
OLED drivers are not available then the energy efficiency on
buildings decreases.
Mrs. Ellmers. Decreases. Well, I just, Mr. Chairman, I
yield back. And again I thank the panel so much for their input
and their testimony and your expert ability to help explain a
very difficult technical process so that we can create better
legislation and be working with our business communities. Thank
you so much.
Mr. Whitfield. Mrs. Ellmers yields back, so at this time I
would like to recognize Ms. Capps for 5 minutes.
Ms. Capps. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing, and I am going to thank our witnesses for your
testimonies.
Investing in and implementing technologies that embrace and
improve upon energy efficiency is critical. It is clear that
this is not a simple task. Improvements must be made in every
sector of our lives from every day consumer products to
industrial applications. This is exactly why Congress first
enacted legislation on improving energy efficiency and
established much needed conservation measures.
And one of the most important questions when it comes to
energy efficiency is how we can provide ample energy-efficient
and cost-effective lighting for people all across the world.
Our societies are built around an infrastructure that supports
sufficient, affordable and reliable light.
Just as it is across the world, the pursuit of innovations
and efficient lighting has been and continues to be important
to my congressional district. In fact, the community in my
district where I live, Santa Barbara, has been instrumental in
the development of LED technology, as you both know. Shuji
Nakamura is a professor in the materials science department at
UC Santa Barbara, has spent decades working on LED technology
including developing a process for producing the bright blue
LED. And the blue LED in turn allowed for the development of
the white LED, an incredibly efficient form of lighting that is
changing the landscape of consumer and industrial lighting as
we know it.
Recognizing the importance of this research, Professor
Nakamura was awarded the Nobel Prize in physics in 2014 along
with two other researchers. And my campus, the UC Santa
Barbara, continues to lead the way in research into LED
technologies.
Santa Barbara is also the home of the research lab for
CREE, which is one of the market leading innovators of consumer
LED technology. CREE was responsible for the production of the
first LED that was appropriate for general consumer lighting
and continues to lead the way in innovation production of
energy-efficient LEDs.
Again my district has been at the forefront of accessible
lighting around the world. For example, the Institute for
Energy Efficiency at UC Santa Barbara has worked with the
nonprofit Unite to Light to provide reading lamps to people
across the world which replaces dangerous kerosene lamps with
solar charged LED reading lights. I have one of these in my
home. They are very efficient. And these lights improve health
and promote education by providing safe and reliable lighting
around the world. Unite to Light has distributed over 50,000
lights in 64 countries to date.
And these innovations are making a difference, and while we
certainly need these innovators and entrepreneurs, we also need
to ensure that we have a legislative landscape that supports
and encourages the continued development of this and other
similar technologies.
So Ms. Amann, based on the testimony you provided, it seems
the current rule from the DOE has the potential to
significantly impact the continued growth and availability of
LED technology. Can you elaborate on how the availability of
LED technology would be impacted by the existing rule in the
absence of proposed legislation?
Ms. Amann. In the absence of the legislation there will be
a lot of uncertainty for manufacturers, and as I mentioned
before, the one remedy that they have is to go through the DOE
and use the waiver process or a hardship process. So there is a
way to get around it, but it would be quite complicated,
complex and time consuming and very inefficient use of company
resources and time as well as DOE resources and time in the
appliance standards program.
So I think that there would be, there is a way to get
around it, but it is not, it doesn't make sense. And this
legislative solution really helps us ensure that there is--
everybody can be focused on getting the efficient lighting out
there, but also sets the authority for DOE to set standards in
the future----
Ms. Capps. OK.
Ms. Amann [continuing]. As efficient technologies develop.
Ms. Capps. I wanted to ask Dr. Hakkarainen, would the
legislation that we are discussing today help to ensure that
research and implementation of technologies to improve LED
lighting will continue and, if so, how?
Dr. Hakkarainen. It certainly will help ensure that and to
the how we will be able to dedicate our technical resources to
that development rather than dealing with the regulatory
uncertainty. We all have limited resources and it is the same
resources that would be required for both.
Ms. Capps. I appreciate that. Thank you very much. I yield
back.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentleman from
Ohio, Mr. Latta, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
thanks to our panel for being with us today, really appreciate
it. Sorry we are kind of in and out. We have another committee
hearing running with the same thing downstairs.
But if I could, the lighting industry represents about
2,500 jobs in my home State of Ohio, and having talked with
several of these manufacturers I have serious concerns with the
external power supply energy conservation standard including
LED and OLED technologies. And Dr. Hakkarainen, could you give
us some examples in real-world applications of these products?
Dr. Hakkarainen. So in terms of real-world applications, I
think the sort of examples I would like to give are commercial
building projects where LED lighting is used today. So, for
example, in your State in Ohio, Procter & Gamble headquarters
and Eaton headquarters both use LED lighting today. In
California there are lots of headquarters type projects such as
Apple and salesforce.com and companies like that that have
moved to LED lighting. Wells Fargo in North Carolina is another
example. So they tend to be commercial buildings and industrial
buildings.
A little bit of these types of LED driver products also
make their way to residential buildings, but in residences we
tend to have screw-in lamps more than the higher-cost
commercial grade products. Does that help?
Mr. Latta. Yes, thank you. And if I may, I continue with
another question to you. Could you in regular terms explain to
us again how these drivers are being impacted by the EPS rule?
Dr. Hakkarainen. They are being impacted today because the
statutory definition of an external power supply is pretty
broad and DOE's general counsel has interpreted the statutory
definition to bring in quite a large range of products. So the
debate is indeed about which ones of these LED and OLED drivers
are brought into the definition and there is not sufficient
clarity for manufacturers today and that is why we are here
asking you to provide that clarity.
Mr. Latta. Well, maybe if I could for both of you, Ms.
Amann--am I pronouncing your name correctly?
Ms. Amann. Amann.
Mr. Latta. Amann. Thank you. If you could both in
summarizing your testimony for us here, but if there is one
major thing you would like us to take away from here today what
would that be from today's hearing?
Ms. Amann. Beyond the specifics of this issue I think it
highlights one of the reasons that we are here today and we
need legislation is because DOE doesn't have the authority to
change the definition of a product if that definition is set in
the statute.
So, I mean, one thing I think we can think about is where
there are opportunities to allow DOE a little bit more leeway
to adapt product definitions as the market changes and as new
technologies are introduced as innovation continues to move
forward.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. Dr. Hakkarainen, would you like to
comment?
Dr. Hakkarainen. I don't have really anything further to
add. I think Jennifer said it very well.
Mr. Latta. OK. Thank you very much. And Mr. Chairman, I
yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back. At this time I
recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Amann, I am glad to
see efficiency advocates in industry working side by side. Does
the DOE currently support SSL technology?
Ms. Amann. Oh, absolutely. Absolutely. They are spending a
lot of money under as mandated by Congress to do a lot of
development in solid state lighting and have really made,
really worked closely with industry to improve the market
conditions and advance research and development on new
technologies.
Mr. Green. Are the SSL technologies as energy-efficient as
possible or is there currently room for more improvement?
Ms. Amann. I think there is room for more improvement. The
technology has been surprising everybody in terms of how fast
they are meeting and exceeding their goals for efficiency
improvements, and at this point it is exceeding almost all
other light sources in terms of its efficiency.
Mr. Green. Dr. Hakkarainen, do you have a sense as to why
SSL was not included?
Dr. Hakkarainen. Why SSL was not----
Mr. Green. Was included in the--DOE indicates here in here
in their original NOPR they did not intend to include SSL
products.
Dr. Hakkarainen. So I am not sure that I can answer that
question, really. My sense is that DOE did not analyze any
solid state lighting products in the development of the
external power supply standard. But then, because of the broad
statutory definition of an external power supply, they after
the fact concluded that they may very well be in the scope.
Mr. Green. OK. In your testimony you make references that
the rulemaking could threaten future investments. Would you
explain further what costs would be associated with SSL
inclusion?
Dr. Hakkarainen. If solid state lighting drivers are
included in the external power supply standard, then the sort
of costs, if it is even possible for drivers to meet the
external power supply standard--that is still a question in my
mind--but if we found a way over time to get to that point,
then the driver devices would be significantly more expensive
for consumers and they would take a long time for our technical
staff to develop.
Mr. Green. Is it technically feasible to meet the
requirements of the DOE standard?
Dr. Hakkarainen. In my opinion at the moment, no.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back. At this time I
would call on the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Flores, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Flores. Mr. Chairman, thank you. I have no questions.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Harper, do you have any questions?
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. No questions for me
either.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, that is the end of the questions of
our subcommittee. And Ms. DeGette who is a co-sponsor of the
bill is a member of the Energy and Commerce Committee. She is
not a member of this subcommittee and I didn't want you all to
think we were discriminating against her, so at this time I
would like to recognize Ms. DeGette for 5 minutes.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Chairman, I never think you are
discriminating against me, and I really appreciate you letting
me sit in on this hearing. This is one of these issues where in
retrospect it seems so simple that it should have been right in
the first place, and it wasn't right in the first place. And
now, of course, it could both hurt what--Ms. Amann, when I
heard you talking about what the manufacturers would have to do
to try to get a waiver I was just imagining Cooper Lighting
which is one of my, your members and one of my companies in
Denver, trying to petition the DOE to get a waiver from this
standard. And it is exactly why people get irritated with
Congress. So I am really happy that Congresswoman Ellmers and I
have been able to come together to solve this problem.
I just want to ask a couple of sort of broader questions.
Ms. Amann, I wanted to ask you, in your testimony you noted
that before the EPS standard was developed many external power
supply devices still used decades-old technology. I am
wondering if you could talk for a minute how the EPS standard
has encouraged 21st-century innovation.
Ms. Amann. Sure. So in the technology that had been used
for power supplies I think we can all remember the really huge,
bulky power supplies, and you could never even get two in your
plug. They were hot. That is a very inefficient technology that
had been used throughout most of the twentieth century.
So in the '90s when new technology was developed in
response to low cost for chips, the emergence of portable
electronics, for the first time people wanted to carry their
electronics and their power supplies. We got these new
innovations that made the supplies smaller and much more
efficient--much, much more efficient.
But into the 2000s those products, there were still a lot
of cheap consumer products that were using the bulky, the
inexpensive old school technology, and so that is why the
manufacturers of those power supplies, many of them in
California and other States, came together to agree on power
supply standards so that we could get this new technology out
there into all the different products that use power supplies.
Ms. DeGette. And Mr. Hakkarainen, do you have anything to
add to that? Did manufacturers like you work with the
efficiency advocates in DOE to pioneer the new technologies?
Dr. Hakkarainen. Yes, we typically do work with, actively
work with the energy efficiency community and certainly
collaborate with DOE in their rulemaking processes. Relative to
the external power supplies themselves, I am not sure I can
answer that question because we don't actually manufacture
those devices.
Ms. DeGette. Right, you do those. Yes.
Dr. Hakkarainen. But we manufacture LED drivers.
Ms. DeGette. Yes. And it seems to me that the EPS standard
has been effective in sparking innovation, but then if we
shoehorn the LEDs into that the trend could be reversed and
ironically instead of supporting energy efficiency, the EPS
standard could actually inhibit that. Is that correct?
Ms. Amann. Yes, I think so. And I would just point out, we
had no idea how fast LEDs would develop and they weren't a
product that was available at the time this was written. I
mean, we didn't have iPhones then, smart phones. I mean, so
much innovation has happened since the time that the standard
was first adopted.
Ms. DeGette. Thanks. And did you want to add anything, Mr.
Hakkarainen?
Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I hope we
can pass this on on suspension. And then I actually thought
your question was the most important one, is what do we do
about the other body, because Chairman Upton and I are still
trying to get our 21st Century Cures bill, which passed this
committee unanimously, passed by the Senate. So if you figure
out how to unlock this problem, you can get that bill through,
too. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. We feel quite confident that the Senate will
recognize that we have perfected this legislation and they will
adopt it.
But that does conclude today's hearing, and I want to thank
our two witnesses for being with us and certainly want to
reiterate our appreciation to Mrs. Ellmers and Ms. DeGette for
sort of leading the charge on this. And with that, the record
will remain open for 10 days, and that concludes today's
hearing. Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 10:58 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

We take our obligation to oversee regulations under this
committee's jurisdiction very seriously and whenever there is a
bipartisan opportunity to improve an existing rule, we take
action. This is what we hope to do with the draft EPS
Improvement Act of 2016, and I thank Reps. Ellmers and DeGette
for their efforts on this bill.
We all know that consumer electronics are rapidly
advancing--so fast that the technology sometimes renders
obsolete the laws under which they are regulated. That is the
case with the Energy Policy Act of 2005 and its provision
requiring the Department of Energy (DOE) to set energy
conservation standards for external power supplies, the most
recent of which will take effect in February.
In the decade since the Energy Policy Act was signed into
law, light emitting diodes (LEDs) have been developed and are
growing in popularity. They use a power supply that is very
different than anything contemplated in the 2005 law yet still
fall within the statutory definition of an external power
supply. The bottom line is that the new DOE standard for
external power supplies would cover LEDs, but there would be no
way for LEDs to meet it.
The EPS Improvement Act of 2016 recognizes that LEDs need
to be treated separately. It exempts them from the upcoming
external power supply standard while creating a process by
which DOE could set a new standard specific to LEDs.
This targeted bill would provide relief for LED
manufacturers while ensuring that this popular product remains
available to consumers back in Michigan and across the country.

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
