- EXAMINING LEGISLATION TO IMPROVE PUBLIC HEALTH

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING LEGISLATION TO IMPROVE PUBLIC HEALTH

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 8, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-165

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

22-416                 WASHINGTON : 2017
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ANNA G. ESHOO, California
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             GENE GREEN, Texas
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          LOIS CAPPS, California
Vice Chairman                      MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JERRY McNERNEY, California
PETE OLSON, Texas                    PETER WELCH, Vermont
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  PAUL TONKO, New York
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina         Massachusetts
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TONY CARDENAS, California
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             LOIS CAPPS, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DORIS O. MATSUI, California
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana                   Massachusetts
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             TONY CARDENAS, California
CHRIS COLLINS, New York              FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
JOE BARTON, Texas                        officio)
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Gene Green, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     4
Hon. Marsha Blackburn, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Tennessee, opening statement..........................     5
Hon. G.K. Butterfield, a Representative in Congress from the
State of North Carolina, opening statement.....................     6

Witnesses

Jonathan Leffert, M.D., FACP, FACE, ECNU, President-Elect,
American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists..............     8
Prepared statement...........................................    10
Arthur Dean, Chairman and CEO, Community Anti-Drug Coalitions of
America........................................................    16
Prepared statement...........................................    18
Sonja L. Banks, President and COO, Sickle Cell Disease
Association of America, Inc....................................    29
Prepared statement...........................................    31
R. Sean Morrison, M.D., Professor and Vice Chair, Brookdale
Department of Geriatrics and Palliative Medicine, Icahn School
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, and Director, National Palliative
Care Research Center...........................................    41
Prepared statement...........................................    43
Brad Marino, M.D., MPP, MSCE, Chair Pediatric Congenital Heart
Association....................................................    60
Prepared statement...........................................    62

Submitted Material

Documents for the record submitted by Mr. Pitts..................    95
Article entitled, ``Current Management of Sickle Cell Anemia,''
Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Medicine, 2013, submitted by
Mr. Burgess....................................................   124
Documents for the record submitted by Mr. Bilirakis..............   141
Documents for the record submitted by Mr. Engel..................   155

EXAMINING LEGISLATION TO IMPROVE PUBLIC HEALTH

----------

THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 8, 2016

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
room 2322, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joseph R. Pitts
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Pitts, Guthrie, Barton, Burgess,
Blackburn, Lance, Bilirakis, Long, Ellmers, Bucshon, Brooks,
Collins, Green, Engel, Schakowsky, Butterfield, Schrader,
Kennedy, Cardenas, and Pallone (ex officio).
Also Present: Representative Roybal-Allard.
Staff Present: Paul Edattel, Chief Counsel, Health;
Adrianna Simonelli, Professional Staff Member, Health; Heidi
Stirrup, Health Policy Coordinator; Waverly Gordon, Minority
Professional Staff Member; Tiffany Guarascio, Minority Deputy
Staff Director and Chief Health Advisor; and Samantha Satchell,
Minority Policy Analyst.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Pitts. The subcommittee will come to order. The chair
will recognize himself for an opening statement. Today's
hearing will examine several different legislative proposals
that will address various aspects of the Public Health Service
Act.
H.R. 1192, the National Diabetes Clinical Care Commission
Act, amends the Public Health Service Act to foster more
effective implementation and coordination of clinical care for
people with prediabetes and the chronic diseases and conditions
that result from diabetes.
Today, our witnesses will also be discussing potential
changes to legislation that will make it less disease-specific,
so the focus can be broader, to include related autoimmune and
metabolic syndromes. According to the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, CDC, almost 29 million Americans have
diabetes, and an estimated 86 million American adults have
prediabetes. Diabetes is the seventh leading cause of death in
the United States. It is the leading cause of kidney failure.
The total national cost associated with diabetes in 2012,
according to the CDC, exceeded $245 billion. One in three
Medicare dollars is currently spent upon people with diabetes.
There are 35 Federal departments, agencies, and offices
involved with implementation of Federal diabetes activities.
And this legislation will establish a commission to evaluate,
recommend solutions for better coordination of patient care and
ways to control costs across all of these offices.
And I thank my colleague, Representative Pete Olson, for
sponsoring this important legislation, which will be welcome
news for the over 100 million people afflicted with diabetes or
prediabetes.
H.R. 1717, the Sober Truth on Preventing Underage Drinking
Reauthorization Act, or the STOP Act, sponsored by
Representative Roybal-Allard of California, provides for
programs and activities to prevent underage drinking.
H.R. 1807, the Sickle Cell Disease Research, Surveillance,
Prevention and Treatment Act of 2015, sponsored by
Representative Danny Davis of Illinois and Dr. Michael Burgess
of Texas, would reauthorize the Sickle Cell Disease
Demonstration Program. Sickle cell disease has no cure. It
leads to premature death. This legislation will hopefully move
us one step closer to improving the quality of care and symptom
management for those afflicted.
H.R. 3119, the Palliative Care and Hospice Education
Training Act, sponsored by Representative Engel of New York,
increases the number of permanent faculty in palliative care at
accredited allopathic and osteopathic medical schools, nursing
schools, social work schools, to promote education and research
in palliative care and hospice and to support the development
of faculty careers in academic palliative medicine.
H.R. 3952, the Congenital Heart Futures Reauthorization Act
of 2015, sponsored by Representative Bilirakis of Florida,
coordinates Federal congenital heart disease research efforts
and improves public education and awareness of congenital heart
disease.
Today, we will hear from one panel of experts and
stakeholders as to their ideas and recommendations on these
various bills.
We welcome all of you, and I now yield to Dr. Burgess.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Joseph R. Pitts

The Subcommittee will come to order.
The Chairman will recognize himself for an opening
statement.
Today's hearing will examine several different legislative
proposals that will address various aspects of the Public
Health Service Act.
H.R. 1192, the ``National Diabetes Clinical Care Commission
Act'' amends the Public Health Service Act to foster more
effective implementation and coordination of clinical care for
people with pre-diabetes, diabetes, and the chronic diseases
and conditions that result from diabetes. Today, our witness
will also be discussing potential changes to the legislation
that will make it less disease specific so the focus can be
broader to include related autoimmune and metabolic syndromes.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), almost 29,000,000 Americans have diabetes and an
estimated 86,000,000 American adults have pre-diabetes.
Diabetes is the seventh leading cause of death in the United
States and is the leading cause of kidney failure.
Total national costs associated with diabetes in 2012
according to the CDC exceeded $245 billion. One in three
Medicare dollars is currently spent on people with diabetes.
There are 35 Federal departments, agencies, and offices
involved with implementation of Federal diabetes activities.
This legislation will establish a commission to evaluate and
recommend solutions for better coordination of patient care and
ways to control costs across all of these offices.
I thank my colleague, Rep. Pete Olson, for sponsoring this
important legislation which will be welcome news for the over
100,000,000 people afflicted with diabetes or pre-diabetes.
H.R. 1717, the Sober Truth on Preventing Underage Drinking
Reauthorization Act or the STOP Act, sponsored by Rep. Roybal-
Allard (CA) provides for programs and activities to prevent
underage drinking.
H.R. 1807, the Sickle Cell Disease Research, Surveillance,
Prevention, and Treatment Act of 2015, sponsored by Rep. Danny
Davis (IL) and Rep. Michael Burgess (TX) reauthorizes a sickle
cell disease demonstration program. Sickle cell disease has no
cure and leads to premature death. This legislation will
hopefully move us one step closer to improving the quality of
care and symptom management for those afflicted.
H.R. 3119, the Palliative Care and Hospice Education and
Training Act, sponsored by Rep. Engel (NY) increases the number
of permanent faculty in palliative care at accredited
allopathic and osteopathic medical schools, nursing schools,
social work schools, to promote education and research in
palliative care and hospice, and to support the development of
faculty careers in academic palliative medicine.
H.R. 3952, the Congenital Heart Futures Reauthorization Act
of 2015, sponsored by Rep. Bilirakis (FL) coordinates federal
congenital heart disease research efforts and improves public
education and awareness of congenital heart disease.
Today we will hear from one panel of experts and
stakeholders as to their ideas and recommendations on these
various bills.
I will now yield to Dr. Burgess.

Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And it is with a great deal of pleasure that I recognize
from my neck of the woods, Dr. Leffert being here today. He is
the president-elect of the American Association of Clinical
Endocrinologists, and in another life, I used to refer patients
to Dr. Leffert from my practice in Louisville, Texas, down to
the big city specialist.
So, Jonathan, it is great to see you again. It is great to
have you here as part of this committee.
And Ms. Banks, who is here on behalf of the Sickle Cell
Disease Foundation, who will be talking about the disease that
Danny Davis and I, Representative Davis and I, introduced a
bill. We are going to be looking at legislation that seeks to
identify and improve the overall public health of our country,
and one of those bills is 1807, the Sickle Cell Disease
Research, Surveillance, Prevention and Treatment Act of 2015.
It was back in the middle 1970s when I was a resident at
Parkland Hospital, our obstetric service there, Dr. Jack
Pritchard, Dr. Eric Cunningham, sickle cell disease in
pregnancy was a special project that they put a lot of effort
into. And as a consequence, we ended up seeing a lot of
patients referred from around the country to the program there
at Parkland Hospital in the middle 1970s. It had been some time
since I thought about it again, and then, with Representative
Davis at one of your meetings here on the Hill, it really
struck how there really hadn't been the advancements in this
area that I thought there would have been by this time. So that
is one of the things that this committee has been very active
in the Cures for the 21st Century. We want those things that
are supposed to be there by now, and I would include this as
one of those things that we want to be there by now.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will back and await the
discussion.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlemen and now yields to
the ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr. Green of Texas, 5
minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GENE GREEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to welcome our panel today, and thank you for taking
your time to come before us. We are examining five pieces of
legislation that will improve public health and build on this
committee's record of advancing and enacting very bipartisan
bills. I want to thank the chairman for calling the hearing and
our witnesses for being here with us this morning.
H.R. 1192, the National Diabetes Clinical Care Commission
Act, was introduced and championed by my colleague on our
committee but also my neighbor in Houston, Pete Olson,
Congressman Olson, and Dave Loebsack, who is also a member of
our committee. We would be considering a manager's amendment on
H.R. 1192, which would establish a national clinical care
commission to evaluate and offer recommendations to improve
care, leverage resources, and coordinate efforts around complex
metabolic, autoimmune, and insulin-related diseases. Through
innovation and collaboration and maximizing return on
investment, this important legislation provides the opportunity
to address the enormous economic and human impact caused by
diabetes and other disorders, and I am proud to be a cosponsor
of this legislation.
H.R. 1717, the Sober Truth on Preventing Underage Drinking
and Reauthorization Act, or the STOP Act, was introduced by
Representative Lucille Roybal-Allard. She has been a tireless
champion for this issue. In fact, she has talked to me--I think
we came to Congress in 1993--and she has talked to me all of
the time since then about trying to deal with drunk driving. I
want to recognize her, as she is here, and thank her for her
leadership.
The STOP Act will build on successful efforts to reduce
underage drinking by reauthorizing a number of important public
health programs and add an additional component of screening
and intervention.
H.R. 1807, the Sickle Cell Disease Research, Surveillance,
Prevention and Treatment Act, will enhance our ability to
understand and survey and treat sickle cell disease. Sickle
cell disease is a group of inherited red blood disorders that
affect approximately 100,000 Americans. Unfortunately, it is
difficult to diagnose, as symptoms can be severe, and the
treatment requires comprehensive and complex care.
H.R. 1807, introduced by Representative Danny Davis and
Mike Burgess, also on our committee, will promote research and
prevention and treatment and emphasizes collaboration of
community-based entities focusing on sickle cell disease.
H.R. 3119, Palliative Care and Hospice Education and
Training Act, is an important bill to improve palliative care.
Representative Eliot Engel, also a member of our committee,
introduced this legislation, recognizing that palliative care
enhances the quality of life for individuals with serious and
life-threatening disease by treating the symptoms, the side
effects, and emotional pain experienced by patients. H.R. 3119
would improve training for health professionals, enhance
research in palliative and hospice care, and support projects
to fund the training of physicians and nonphysician healthcare
professionals entering the field of palliative care.
Finally, we are considering H.R. 3952, the Congenital Heart
Futures Reauthorization Act. Each year, approximately 4,000
babies are born with congenital heart defects, making it the
most common type of birth defect in the United States. It is
estimated that 1 million children and 1.4 million adults live
with congenital heart disorders. They require specialized care
and face a lifelong risk of disability and premature death. The
cause is unknown, but several genetic and environmental factors
have been linked in the diseases. H.R. 3952, introduced by
Representative Gus Bilirakis, also from our committee, and Adam
Schiff and Eleanor Holmes Norton, builds on existing efforts by
requiring the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to
enhance and expand its research, surveillance, and education
outreach to providers and the public about congenital heart
diseases. Under this legislation, the CDC would report to
Congress on a cohort study to improve the knowledge of
epidemiology of the disease across lifespans and implement an
awareness campaign. I am proud to support each of these
important bills and thank our sponsors and our committee for
their commitment to improving public health and look forward to
hearing from our witnesses and learning more about each of
these bipartisan pieces of legislation.
Mr. Chairman, unless someone else wants my last 30 or 40
seconds, I will yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
I now recognize the vice chair of the full committee, the
gentlelady from Tennessee, Ms. Marcia Blackburn, for 5 minutes
for opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank our witnesses for being here.
And I am so pleased that we are taking some time to go
through these bills. They all have a significance to public
health. The diabetes bill, I had the opportunity before coming
to Congress to serve on the Diabetes Association Board in my
state, and I appreciate Representative Olson's good work on
looking at this issue.
Of course, the underage drinking bill, when I was in the
state senate, this is something at the state level where we put
a tremendous amount of effort and energy, and Tennessee, my
home State, continues to do so. I know that Reps. Davis and
Burgess have worked hard on the sickle cell disease. It does
need more attention. It needs more research. It needs more
focus, so we are pleased to see that.
We all have heard about palliative care, the importance of
that, as we have been at home and in our districts and talked
to families and to healthcare providers and beginning to think
this through and look for new models. And certainly, in
Nashville, we have a tremendous amount of research and new
focus that has come to bear on the delivery of palliative care.
So I am pleased that we are moving forward there. You know, I
have to say that H.R. 3952, going back to my days as being on
the Board of Friends of Children's Hospital in Nashville and
dealing with congenital heart disease, and as a mom and a
grandmom now, having friends and knowing of families,
individuals from church, that have a baby that is born with
CHD, and just seeing firsthand, living through the anguish and
the desperate reach for resources that can help with this, that
can extend the life of that child. I am so pleased that we are
moving this forward. I do hope that we will see NIH and other
research entities focus on how we deal with this so that these
precious children will live long past that 18th birthday and
will be able to move toward enjoying a full and productive
life.
Mr. Chairman, I will yield my time to whomever would like
it.
Mr. Pitts. Anyone on the majority seeking time?
If not, the gentlelady yields back.
The chair now recognizes Judge Butterfield, North Carolina,
5 minutes for opening statement in place of Mr. Pallone.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. G.K. BUTTERFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA

Mr. Butterfield. Thank you. I too want to thank you,
Chairman Pitts, for holding this important hearing on
reauthorizing important programs to combat the sickle cell
disease and on improving diabetes awareness and care. Let me
join my colleagues in thanking the five witnesses for coming
forward today to testify and to give us the benefit of your
expertise. I know you just didn't wake up this morning and come
to this room. You have been preparing for this day, and we
thank you for your work.
Sickle cell disease and diabetes disproportionately affect
African American citizens, including many in my congressional
district in North Carolina. In fact, more than 30 years ago, I
lost a first cousin to the disease. The two diseases, if not
properly managed, can land people in the hospital multiple
times. In fact, a 2010 study published in the journal of the
American Medical Association shows that people with SCD are
hospitalized nearly three times per year. Many people who have
SCD are unaware of it before tests can confirm the illness.
Even those who know they have SCD find themselves back in the
hospital with problems with pain or other morbidities. SCD is a
serious disease which can dramatically reduce life expectancy.
A study in the New England Journal of Medicine found that the
median age for men with SCD is only 42 years old. For women, it
is 48 years. The disease is caused by a small genetic
abnormality that deforms blood cells and causes them to block
blood flow. SCD can lead to the development of other
conditions, ranging from heart disease and stroke to kidney or
liver problems.
It is estimated, Mr. Chairman, that 100,000 Americans have
SCD. Many more have sickle cell trait, although they never
experience symptoms, may not even know that they have the
trait. Children can inherent SCD if both of their parents have
SCD or sickle cell trait and certain genes are passed on to
them. Many of those who have SCD are African Americans. More
than 1 out of every 400 African Americans have SCD. That is 1
out of 400, and 1 of every 13 has the sickle cell trait.
And so I applaud my friend and colleague Congressman Danny
Davis and other colleagues that have done likewise--from
Chicago--for his longtime advocacy for SCD health programs and
his reintroduction of H.R. 1807, the Sickle Cell Disease
Research, Surveillance, Prevention and Treatment Act of 2015.
This legislation is a priority for many members of the
Congressional Black Caucus, and I am proud to support it. And
this important bill would reauthorize the sickle cell disease
Treatment Demonstration Program, improve research and
surveillance of the disease, and support a grant program for
states to develop and implement prevention and treatment
strategies.
This bill, Mr. Chairman, is a clean reauthorization and
would not increase government spending. It is a meaningful
first step to help prevent and treat SCD, and I urge my
colleagues to support this important bill. We can, we must do
more to support those with this disease. SCD does not currently
have a cure. No treatments have been approved since 1998. For
that reason, I have long advocated to include SCD in the
Pediatric Priority Review Voucher Program, the PRV, run by the
Food and Drug Administration. I am encouraged that there is
currently a viable treatment in clinical trials at the FDA, but
we must do all we can to spur innovation in rare pediatric
disease spaces. More than 100,000 Americans are counting on us
to support sickle cell disease prevention and treatment
programs and need our help to find a cure. I urge my colleagues
to support 1807, and I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
That concludes the opening statements. As usual, the
written opening statements of all members will be made a part
of the record.
And we welcome, as was noted previously, Congresswoman
Roybal-Allard to sit with the committee today.
Without objection, so ordered.
And I ask unanimous consent to submit the following for the
record: a letter from 43 organizations representing physicians,
allied health professionals, patients, community health
organizers, and industry; as well as statements from the
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, Novo Nordisk, and Diabetes
Advocacy Alliance, all regarding H.R. 1192; and both a
statement from the American Society of Hematology regarding
H.R. 1807 along with their State of Sickle Cell Disease 2016
Report.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Pitts. I will now introduce the panelists in the order
of which they will speak, and as usual, your written statements
will be made a part of the record, and you will each be
recognized for 5 minutes for a summary.
So, first, Dr. Jonathan Leffert, Acting Director and
President-elect of the American Association of Clinical
Endocrinologists; secondly, General Arthur Dean, Chairman and
CEO, Community Anti-Drug Coalitions of America; and Sonja L.
Banks, President and COO of Sickle Cell Disease Association of
America, Inc.; then Dr. Sean Morrison, Professor and Vice
Chair, Brookdale Department of Geriatrics and Palliative
Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, and Director
of the National Palliative Care Research Center; and, finally,
Dr. Brad Marino, Chair, Pediatric Congenital Heart Association.
Thank you for coming today.
And, Dr. Leffert, you are recognized 5 minutes for your
summary at this time.

STATEMENTS OF JONATHAN LEFFERT, M.D., FACP, FACE, ECNU,
PRESIDENT-ELECT, AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF CLINICAL
ENDOCRINOLOGISTS; ARTHUR DEAN, CHAIRMAN AND CEO, COMMUNITY
ANTI-DRUG COALITIONS OF AMERICA; SONJA L. BANKS, PRESIDENT AND
COO, SICKLE CELL DISEASE ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA, INC.; R. SEAN
MORRISON, M.D., PROFESSOR AND VICE CHAIR, BROOKDALE DEPARTMENT
OF GERIATRICS AND PALLIATIVE MEDICINE, ICAHN SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
AT MOUNT SINAI, AND DIRECTOR, NATIONAL PALLIATIVE CARE RESEARCH
CENTER; AND BRAD MARINO, M.D., MPP, MSCE, CHAIR PEDIATRIC
CONGENITAL HEART ASSOCIATION

STATEMENT OF JONATHAN LEFFERT

Dr. Leffert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and, Dr. Burgess, for
your kind words. My name is Jonathan Leffert, and I am a
clinical endocrinologist from Dallas, Texas, and the current
president-elect of the American Association of Clinical
Endocrinologists. On behalf of our 7,000 members, I would like
to thank you for this opportunity to testify about H.R. 1192,
the National Diabetes Clinical Care Commission Act. The
subcommittee should be commended for addressing diabetes and
recommending to expand the scope of H.R. 1192 to include other
metabolic and autoimmune diseases and diseases resulting from
insulin deficiency and insulin resistance. We appreciate the
opportunity to work with the bill's sponsors, Representative
Pete Olson and Representative Dave Loebsack, in this
subcommittee on consensus language to amend H.R. 1192.
I will focus my comments today on diabetes, which
represents a significant part of my medical practice as a
clinical endocrinologist and is the most prevalent of the
diseases that will be addressed by an amended H.R. 1192.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, the number of Americans diagnosed with diabetes
over the course of the last 35 years has increased more than
fivefold, from 5.5 million Americans in 1980 to 29.1 million in
2014. The CDC estimates that there are 86 million Americans
with prediabetes, a condition known to progress to diabetes
without appropriate intervention. Diabetes is also the catalyst
for many other diseases. Diabetes is the leading cause of new
cases of blindness among adults. Diabetes is the leading cause
of kidney failure. Diabetes causes increased death rates from
cardiovascular disease and higher rates of hospitalization from
heart attack and stroke. Diabetes is the seventh leading cause
of death in the United States. The total cost of diabetes to
the Nation in 2012 exceeded $322 billion. Sixty-two percent of
this cost is borne by the U.S. Government through programs like
Medicare and Medicaid. By 2025, the total cost of diabetes is
projected to reach $514 billion, a level comparable to the
entire Medicare budget. Our Nation cannot afford for the
current diabetes prevalence and cost trends to continue.
Congress should not let another session go by without
addressing this critical health crisis.
H.R. 1192 provides a cost-effective approach to begin to
address diabetes and the many other diseases and diagnoses
encompassed by this legislation. The commission established in
H.R. 1192 will provide a venue where the expertise of
specialists, primary care physicians, allied healthcare
professionals, and patient advocates will help our Federal
Government partner to evaluate current programs so they are
meeting the goal of improving the quality of patient care.
The commission will also facilitate improved coordination
and communication among Federal agencies. Consider the example
of the FDA approved continuous glucose monitors, referred to as
CGMs. These devices are indispensable to patients with type 1
diabetes by allowing them to constantly monitor blood glucose
levels. Patients with this device no longer fear losing
consciousness from low blood sugar or enduring complications
from constantly high blood sugar levels. Nearly all private
insurance plans cover CGMs. However, once a patient turns 65
and enrolls in the Medicare program, coverage for this
lifesaving device is no longer available. Remedies to fix these
issues often require an act of Congress, which places Congress
in a position to do the job of the regulatory agencies that
failed to work together.
Having the commission available to work through issues such
as this will help all parties to find and implement meaningful
solutions. The expertise on the commission would also be
utilized to prioritize the clinician training and deployment of
new revolutionary technologies, such as the artificial
pancreas, to ensure patient access to these medical innovations
is not comprised.
Agencies can and must work together in a coordinated
national response driven by research experts, specialists,
healthcare professionals, and people living with diabetes. The
commission established under H.R. 1192 will help achieve this
important objective.
On behalf of the American Association of Clinical
Endocrinologists, I would like to thank the members of the
committee for the opportunity to testify today on H.R. 1192,
and I urge you to act now and move this bill forward, ensuring
its passage by the U.S. House of Representatives as soon as
possible.
In addition to the 220 Members of Congress who have
cosponsored H.R. 1192, including many who are members of this
committee, I would like to thank the 45 organizations
representing the patients, physicians, allied health
professionals, community organizations, and industry, and the
Diabetes Advocacy Alliance, who have helped to advance this
legislation.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Leffert follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman for his summary
and now recognizes General Dean 5 minutes for his summary.

STATEMENT OF ARTHUR DEAN

Mr. Dean. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Green, and
esteemed members of the subcommittee on Health, it is my
pleasure to testify in support of H.R. 1717, the Sober Truth on
Preventing Underage Drinking Act, so-called the STOP Act.
I would also like to thank the bill's sponsor,
Congresswoman Lucille Roybal-Allard, for her steadfast
leadership on this issue, and I thank you for the support and
leadership you provided to us.
I am General Arthur Dean, currently serving as the Chairman
and CEO of Community Anti-Drug Coalitions of America, a
membership based, not-for-profit organization, commonly called
CADCA. CADCA is a national nonprofit organization, and our
mission is to build and strengthen the capacity of local
citizens, and we put them into what we call community
coalitions designed for them to have the capacity and the
skills to build safe, healthy, and drug-free communities in the
U.S. and around the world. We work with more than 5,000
communities in the U.S., and it is our role to be here. And
they are very, very concerned about the prevention and the
reduction and combatting underage drinking. Back in 2003, the
National Research Council and the Institute of Medicine
published a report titled ``Reducing Underage Drinking: A
Collective Response.'' This report cited serious underage
drinking and recommended critical components for a national
strategy to reduce alcohol consumption by minors. The original
STOP Act builds upon these recommendations, and in 2016, the
bill passed the House of Congress with a unanimous bipartisan
support. Authorization for the law expired in 2010, as you
know, which makes it urgent that Congress pass a
reauthorization as soon as possible.
H.R. 1717, the STOP Act reauthorization bill, would
maintain and enhance the original provisions of the STOP Act,
and quickly I would describe some of those things that we are
concerned about. It reauthorizes the highly successful
community-based coalition enhancement grants. We take trained
coalitions and give them a small grant to work this issue.
Provides grants for current and former drug-free community
grantees and partners and allows them to partner with higher
education to prevent underage drinking on college campuses. It
reauthorizes the Interagency Coordinating Committee to Prevent
Underage Drinking--we call that ICCPUD--which coordinates the
efforts of 16 Federal agencies to combat this problem. It
reauthorizes a highly visible national adult-oriented media
campaign to raise the awareness of this issue and provide
education. It reauthorizes epidemiology studies on excessive
drinking and analyzes how young people drink and how they
obtain alcohol in the relationship associated with that.
And, lastly, 1717 creates a new grant program for pediatric
healthcare providers. We think it is important that those that
are treating our youth understand and focus on best practices
around screening, brief intervention, and referral as
appropriate.
In the 10 years that have passed since STOP Act was
created, it is clear that law's coordinated provisions have
effectively been reducing underage drinking. As we look at the
most recent Monitoring the Future study, it shows that lifetime
alcohol use by those in the 8th grade, 10th grade, and 12th
grade is currently at the lowest level since each of these
grades were included in the study. While this is welcome news--
it is important news--underage drinking continues to be a very
serious problem that is faced in this country: 17.2 percent, or
nearly one in six, high school seniors still binge drink, which
is unfortunate. Between 2006 and 2010, approximately 4,300
young people under the age of 21 died from excessive drinking,
which is critical. And the total annual economic costs of
underage drinking are estimated at $24.6 billion.
So H.R. 1717 builds upon the effective data-driven, Drug-
Free Communities Program as the most cost-effective way to
prevent and reduce underage drinking. The community-based
coalition enhancement grants included in the STOP Act are just
one vital component of a comprehensive approach to improve
public health and address underage drinking.
I respectfully urge the committee to support swift passage
of H.R. 1717, the Sober Truth on Preventing Underage Drinking
Act. I will be submitting a detailed statement for the record,
which includes information for your consideration.
And we ask that, as in the past, this bill be unanimously
supported and passed quickly so that it can become law during
this session of Congress. I thank you so very much for your
attention to this issue, and we understand that underage
drinking, although data says we have made progress, there is
much progress that still needs to be made, and many, many young
people will be better served if this passes, takes place
quickly. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dean follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
I now recognize Ms. Banks 5 minutes for your summary.

STATEMENT OF SONJA L. BANKS

Ms. Banks. Good morning, Chairman Pitts and Ranking Member
Green----
Mr. Pitts. Could you turn on the microphone now? The light
should be on.
Ms. Banks. Good morning. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member
Green, this distinguished committee, thank you for holding this
hearing and allowing me the opportunity to testify in support
of H.R. 1807, the Sickle Cell Disease Research, Surveillance,
Prevention and Treatment Act. I also would like to thank Dr.
Burgess, the lead Republican cosponsor of this legislation, and
Representative Butterfield, for their leadership on this
important legislation. We would also be remiss if we did not
recognize Representative Danny Davis for not only leading this
important legislation but remaining one of the sickle cell
community's key champions.
I am here representing the Sickle Cell Disease Association
of America, the Nation's only organization working full-time on
a national level to resolve issues surrounding sickle cell
disease and sickle cell trait. Since 1971, SCDA has been on the
forefront for improving the quality of life, health, and
services for individuals and families impacted by sickle cell
disease, promoting policies and research and fighting for a
universal cure.
Now allow me to take you on a journey. I want you to think
about the worst pain that you have ever experienced in your
life, a broken bone, a stomach virus, a flu, or maybe for you
women in here who have children, labor pains. Now I want you to
take that pain, and I want you to magnify it by two. Now
magnify it by five. Now magnify it by 10. Now imagine the pain
hitting you at any time, anywhere, with no control, no
treatment, and no way to manage it. Now imagine it rearing its
ugly head monthly, weekly, and even daily. Though not the
journey we all long for, it is one that is a reality. These
unpredictable pain episodes are the hallmark of sickle cell
disease and the reality for those who are afflicted with it.
They can start as early as 6 months of age and span throughout
the lifetime, impacting school, work, and ordinary daily
living.
Sickle cell disease is an inherited blood disorder
affecting approximately 100,000 Americans. This disease causes
the destruction and deformation of red blood cells, producing
extreme complications that could include stroke in children and
adults, lung problems, chronic damage to organs, including
kidneys, liver and spleen, and, yes, severe painful episodes,
and even death. One in every 400 African American newborns have
sickle cell disease, as does 1 in every 1,200 newborns in
Hispanic descent.
Despite its first noted discovery well over 100 years ago,
progress has been relatively slow, and the sickle cell
community still faces numerous challenges. For instance, the
average life expectancy of a person with sickle cell disease is
relative young, age 40 to 45. Presently, there is only one
medication that has been FDA approved to treat this disease.
There is an overwhelming shortage of physicians that treat or
specialize in sickle cell disease, which makes it very
difficult for patients to have a primary care physician or
medical home. A vast majority of our patients make the
emergency room their medical home. There is no comprehensive
model here to help reduce the major healthcare complexities
that SCD patients encounter.
It is because of these challenges and more that H.R. 1807
is so crucial for the sickle cell community. Reauthorization is
needed to assure program stability, establish more effective
care coordination, set in motion a model of care, and allow for
a broader reach into areas of the country where people with
sickle cell disease are not adequately served. This legislation
will allow states to receive Federal funding for patient
counseling, education initiatives, and community outreach
programs, set the groundwork for 25 sickle cell treatment
centers across the country to treat our patients, support the
continuance of a national coordinating and evaluation center,
allow the Centers for Disease Control to establish and continue
its surveillance program.
Through this initiative, we are hopeful that data collected
would help us to understand and improve current estimates about
the incidence and prevalence of sickle cell disease.
Distinguished leaders, I humbly stand--and I know I am
sitting--before you as an advocate. No, I do not have sickle
cell disease. I am not personally affected by it. I do not have
anyone in my family with it, but I am an advocate. I, like you,
believe that every American deserves equitable quality of life.
Individuals with sickle cell disease deserve better treatment.
They deserve better access to care, and more importantly, they
deserve a better quality of life. So will you stand with me and
support this legislation? It can and it will change many lives
for the better. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Banks follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady and now
recognizes Dr. Morrison 5 minutes for your summary.

STATEMENT OF R. SEAN MORRISON, M.D.

Dr. Morrison. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Green, and
members of the Energy and Commerce Health subcommittee, good
morning, and thank you for the opportunity to address H.R.
3119, the Palliative Care and Hospice Education and Training
Act. My name is Sean Morrison, and I am professor and vice
chair of geriatrics and palliative medicine and director of
Palliative Care at the Mount Sinai Health System New York City.
I am a former president of the American Academy of Hospice and
Palliative Medicine, and I am here today representing the
Patient Quality of Life Coalition, a group of over 40 patient,
provider, and health systems focused on improving the quality
of life for persons living with serious illness and their
families. I would also like to thank Representative Engel, a
fellow New Yorker, for his continued leadership, and the 33
other bipartisan members of this committee who have signed this
bill.
As a practicing physician, health services researcher, and
teacher, I am acutely aware of the challenges faced by the
seriously ill in this country. Multiple studies have
demonstrated that inadequately treated systems, fragmented care
systems, poor communication between patients, families and
their physicians, strains on caregivers, and escalating
healthcare use all characterize the experience of living with a
serious illness in this country. Five percent of seriously ill
Medicare beneficiaries account for over 50 percent of spending,
and contrary to the popular perception, only 11 percent of
these persons are in the last year of life. The majority live
for many years with progressively debilitating illness that
interferes with their quality of life and ability to work and
live independently.
Palliative care is team-based care: doctors, nurses, social
workers, and chaplains, focused on relief of pain and other
symptoms and support for the best quality of life for patients
and families in the setting of a serious illness. It should be
provided at any age at the time of diagnosis of a serious
illness and concurrently with all other appropriate medical
treatment, including those directed at cure and life
prolongation. Palliative care has been shown to enhance quality
of life, doctor-patient family communication, satisfaction with
care, reduce healthcare costs, and in cancer, improve survival.
Over 95 percent of mid- to large-size hospitals now have
palliative care teams, and palliative care is being rapidly
integrated into the nonhospital settings.
Yet three major challenges remain if palliative care is to
become universally accessible and, indeed, inserted into the
genome of American medicine. First, based on a recent national
survey, over three-quarters of patients and families who could
benefit from palliative care don't know what it is and thus
cannot request it when it would be most beneficial. Yet when
read a definition of palliative care, more than 90 percent said
they would want it for themselves or their family members and
that it should be universally available throughout the country.
Targeted educational efforts to increase patient, family, and
provider awareness about palliative care and its benefits are
appropriately recommended in H.R. 3119.
Workforce shortages prevent patients from accessing
palliative care. There are simply too few palliative care
specialists to meet the needs of the population. The 134
existing palliative medicine fellowship programs graduate fewer
than 300 new doctors a year, less than a 10th of what is
needed. Because palliative care was recognized as a
subspecialty, after the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 limited the
number of Medicare-supported residency spots, training in
palliative medicine is now supported only by private sector
philanthropy and variable and inconsistent institutional
support.
H.R. 3119 would support specialist training in palliative
care, palliative care education for students and trainees, and
mid-career training in the core palliative care knowledge and
skills for nonpalliative-care practicing healthcare
professionals.
Finally, the knowledge base to support palliative care is
inadequate. Treatment for symptoms, such as breathlessness,
fatigue, itching, and pain, are primitive compared to the
science underlying most disease treatments. Despite four
reports from the Institute of Medicine calling for major
Federal investment in palliative care research, a recent study
found that less than 1/100th of a percent of the NIH budget is
focused on improving quality of life in the setting of serious
illness.
I struggle daily with the fact that opioids with all of
their attendant risks remain the most effective treatment for
my patients in severe pain. H.R. 3119 would require the
Director of the National Institutes of Health to expand and
intensify research specific to palliative care.
To close, H.R. 3119, the Palliative Care and Hospice
Education and Training Act will help address the barriers
preventing all Americans from enjoying the highest quality of
life in the setting of serious illness. I would like to again
express my sincere thanks for the opportunity to address this
important issue and legislation on behalf of the Patient
Quality of Life Coalition with you this morning. Thank you
again.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Morrison follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes Dr. Marino 5 minutes for your summary.

STATEMENT OF BRAD MARINO, M.D., MPP, MSCE

Dr. Marino. Good morning. My name is Brad Marino. I am a
pediatric cardiologist at Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's
Hospital of Chicago. I am a professor of pediatrics at
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine. I am the
chair of the Medical Advisory Board for the Pediatric
Congenital Heart Association, and I currently chair the Council
for Cardiovascular Disease in the Young for the American Heart
Association.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to offer testimony
today in support of H.R. 3952, the Congenital Heart Futures
Reauthorization Act of 2015. I wish to thank Chairman Pitts and
Ranking Member Green for holding this hearing and
Representative Bilirakis and Representative Schiff and the
dozens of congressional cosponsors for the bipartisan effort to
build upon existing programs which promote lifelong research,
track epidemiology, and raise awareness for congenital heart
disease, or CHD, the most common birth defect.
On behalf of Lurie Children's, the Pediatric Congenital
Heart Association, the American Heart Association, the
Children's Heart Foundation, and the Adult Congenital Heart
Association, and the millions of individuals with CHD, I want
to offer my strongest support for this very important
legislation. Lurie Children's, the sixth ranked children's
hospital nationally by U.S. News and World Report, is the
largest provider of pediatric specialty care in Illinois, as
well as serving children from all 50 States and 46 countries,
many of whom have congenital heart disease.
As a practicing pediatric cardiac intensivist,
epidemiologist, and outcomes researcher, for more than 20
years, I have borne witness to the catastrophic results of CHD
on affected children and their families that last a lifetime.
Critical information about the epidemiology of CHD, the
effectiveness of treatments, and lifelong outcomes is seriously
lacking at best and nonexistent in specific areas such as
secondary sequelae of CHD.
Over the last several decades, tremendous advances in care
have dramatically reduced mortality rates for children with the
most complex congenital heart disease and increased life
expectancy of adults with CHD. In the absence of U.S. data,
extrapolation of Canadian data suggests that there are
currently more than 2.4 million individuals living in the
United States with CHD, half of whom are adults. However, while
survival has improved, the reality is that complex CHD and its
treatments may result in significant cardiovascular
complications and organ-specific comorbidities, including
kidney and liver disease and brain injuries, that significantly
impact health status, physical, and psychosocial functioning,
and quality of life.
Early intervention for CHD is not a cure, underscoring the
need for those with CHD to have lifelong care by expert
providers. We need to better understand and improve the
transition from pediatric to specialized adult cardiovascular
care. Estimates suggest that less than 25 percent, one out of
four, adults with complex congenital heart disease are
receiving appropriate subspecialty care. People born with CHD
require lifelong, costly specialized cardiac care. As a result,
healthcare utilization among the CHD population is
disproportionately higher than the general population.
It is estimated that compared to the medical costs of care
for the general population, the medical costs for individuals
with CHD are 10 to 20 times greater. Around half of all dollars
spent on pediatric CHD-related inpatient admissions is paid by
Medicaid.
To improve care and reduce costs, it is essential that
Congress enacts legislation supporting increased understanding
of CHD across the lifespan. The Congenital Heart Futures
Reauthorization Act of 2015 calls for the robust public health
research and surveillance that will help us better understand
and improve long-term outcomes for the more than 40,000 babies
born each year with CHD.
Since the enactment of the Congenital Heart Futures Act of
2010, Congress has appropriated nearly $15 million to support
CHD activities at the CDC, which has led to the standardization
of research methods and an increased understanding of the
public health burden that CHD poses. Continued Federal
investment is desperately needed to better understand CHD
across the lifespan, improve outcomes, and reduce costs. The
Congenital Heart Futures Reauthorization Act of 2015 does just
that. This legislation assesses the current state of biomedical
research for CHD across the lifespan by directing the NIH to
provide a status report on its current research on CHD. This
will improve an understanding of the causes of CHD and drive
innovation and effective treatments for CHD and related disease
processes. H.R. 3952 expands public health research on CHD by
directing the CDC to plan, develop, and implement a
representative cohort study. The data from this cohort will
help to describe basic U.S. demographics of CHD, assess
healthcare utilization, and develop evidence-based practices
and guidelines for CHD care, eliminating our reliance on
statistics from Canada to describe the burden of CHD in the
United States.
This bill also directs the CDC to establish and implement
an outreach, education, and awareness campaign, and ensuring
that those with CHD receive appropriate care across their
lifespan. With this critical education campaign, individuals
with CHD and their families will better understand their
lifelong healthcare needs and the necessity of receiving
appropriate lifelong specialized cardiac care.
Congenital heart disease is common. It is costly, and it is
a critical public health issue. In enclosing, on behalf of the
Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, the
Pediatric Congenital Heart Association, the American Heart
Association, the Children's Heart Foundation, and the Adult
Congenital Heart Association, I urge you to take swift action
to enact H.R. 3952, the Congenital Heart Futures
Reauthorization Act of 2015. It is essential that Congress pass
this legislation to provide improved care, outcomes, and
quality of life for the millions of individuals in the United
States with CHD.
Thank you for your time and consideration.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Marino follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
And I will begin the questioning and recognize myself for 5
minutes for that purpose.
Dr. Leffert, we will just go down the line. Thank you for
highlighting the impact that metabolic diseases, such as
diabetes, have on our healthcare system. Can you talk
specifically about some of the issues or problems with the way
the Federal Government currently administers programs for
diabetes and related diseases that the commission is intended
to address?
Dr. Leffert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We have over 30 agencies across the Federal Government
landscape that are engaged in either diabetes research or
clinical care. And over the 5-year timeframe from 2007 to 2012,
there has been a 48 percent increase in the money spent on
diabetes care and lost productivity due to diabetes. The
commission will recommend programs and activities to affect the
quality of life, productivity, cost to society of patients with
diabetes, prediabetes, and related conditions. Additionally,
there are examples of inconsistent and sometimes
counterproductive policies emanating from Federal agencies that
reflect a lack of communication and coordination in the
administration of Federal diabetes activities. The commission
is intended to provide a venue that brings these agencies to
the table on a consistent basis to improve upon those issues.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you.
General Dean, in your written testimony, you state that the
incidence of underage drinking has been going down in each year
among 8th, 10th, and 12th graders. If this is true, why do we
need to continue investment in this STOP Act, and what work is
still left to be done?
Mr. Dean. In fact, it is true, but there is much work that
needs to be done to address underage drinking in the country.
And we believe that the STOP Act has been a catalyst for these
improvements, and without it, we don't believe these
improvements will continue. But we need to keep the pressure up
to maintain these efforts. Despite our progress, in response to
our 2015 survey of coalitions, alcohol continues to be the
number one problem they face in their communities, and also we
know that students that are underage in universities are
significantly abusing these as well. The restructuring of the
STOP Act will cause our coalitions to work directly with higher
institutions of education to address these problems as well.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you.
Ms. Banks, can you elaborate on the biggest barriers to
quality health care for those suffering from sickle cell
disease?
Ms. Banks. Well, I think some of the largest barriers for
individuals with sickle cell disease, first and foremost is the
lack of access to care. As mentioned, there is a shortage of
primary care physicians, and therefore, our patients do not
have a medical home, which means that they frequent the
emergency room often, so that is a huge deficit for us. Also,
there is no comprehensive model of care and what our patients
lack and what we do not have in our community is a care
coordination program where someone is actually providing care
coordination with our patients. Our patients are born with
sickle cell disease, so we know throughout the lifespan that
they are going to have it. There is no cure for it. So the goal
would be for us to coordinate their care throughout the
lifespan, and that is what is really missing in the sickle cell
community.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you.
Dr. Morrison, how does palliative care specifically help
those individuals and families of those who are suffering from
a serious but not necessarily terminal illness?
Dr. Morrison. Living with a serious illness in this
country, such as congestive heart failure, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, cancer, Alzheimer's disease, is associated
with a number of distressing symptoms--pain, breathlessness,
fatigue, nausea, anxiety--which people live with on a daily
basis. It provides an enormous strain on family caregivers, who
often give up their jobs, their work, to care for a seriously
ill older relative. Palliative care addresses these needs by
providing an added layer of support to patients, their
families, and doctors. It treats the pain and symptoms of a
distressing illness. It helps facilitate communication and
provides support to patients and families. It addresses
psychological, emotional, and spiritual needs, and it allows
them to obtain the best quality of life possible in the setting
of a serious illness. And it is absent from our American
healthcare system at this point.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you.
Dr. Marino, why is it so difficult to retain patients in
followup care for their congenital heart disease, and what does
H.R. 3952 do to help change that?
Dr. Marino. So one of the programs that I have been
spearheading at Northwestern is something called the
cardiovascular bridge programs. So typically in the U.S. today,
when you are 18 years and 364 days, your doctor will say: It
has been great taking care of you. Here is the name of a doctor
in the city. Have him call for the records. Good luck.
Only one out of four patients that need ongoing
cardiovascular care actually get that cardiovascular care. What
this bill is going to do is create awareness among patients and
parents that when your child has surgery as a baby, it is not
curative. There are ongoing specific cardiac issues. There are
developmental issues, kidney and liver issues, that have to be
dealt with as that child ages and then gets transitioned into
adulthood.
In our bridge programs at Northwestern, we literally have a
team of adult and pediatric providers, social workers, and
advanced practice nurses that basically work with patients 16
to 26 to allow these patients to have a graded transition
instead of an abrupt transition at 18 that will keep them in
care.
Beside the awareness, by having the cohort study that is
put in 3952, that the CDC would put together, we would know
much more specifically which patients are at the highest risk
for not following up, which patients are at the highest risk
for having complications. That will then tell us, of those
patients that we know we need to follow up, which are the most
critical to make sure they stay in care.
And then, lastly, with the NIH putting forth a status
report on the biomedical research, there is so much research
that still needs to be done on how best to care for these
patients, what interventional procedures might result in a
better quality of life as they transition from an adolescent to
an adult. By having that new research and that priority for
that research in place with NIH, we will be able to put new
care models in place and new treatment models that will help
these patients transition more effectively from adolescence
into adulthood.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
I now recognize Mr. Green 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Leffert, diabetes can be effectively managed through
evidence-based treatments, as well as through behavioral
changes, including changes in diet, increasing physical
activity. Some patients still experience devastating
complications from diabetes, including blindness, kidney
failure, and limb amputation. Why do these complications occur
in spite of the availability of the treatments we have?
Dr. Leffert. Representative Green, the issue really is that
we have a limited number of endocrinologists who are able to
take care of patients with diabetes. We have a primary care
base of physicians who take care of diabetes, but oftentimes,
they are not all given the tools or the experience to be able
to take care of these patients in the appropriate way. They
need a lot of help, and our commission bill would do that.
In addition, our patients need education. Education is the
key because this is a self-managed disease, and this bill would
also help that in relationship to many of the programs that are
currently being projected by the National Diabetes Education
Program, which gives patients education towards diabetes.
Mr. Green. Thank you. It sounds like this commission would
help us explaining to physicians how we can treat diabetes,
again, with medication. And I always tell people it is much
better to have prediabetes than diabetes so that you can manage
it much better. Thank you.
The STOP Act became law in 2006, and almost 30 percent of
the underage individuals who were alcohol users and 19 percent
were binge users that year. This legislation marked the first
national comprehensive effort to combat underage drinking. And,
again, I want to recognize my colleague and classmate,
Congresswoman Roybal-Allard, for her diligent effort. And like
I said--before you were here, Lucille--she has worried me about
this bill for a number of months.
General Dean, can you talk about the progress you have made
since 2006 and why reauthorization of these programs is so
important?
Mr. Dean. Thank you very much, Ranking Member Green, for
your interest, your leadership, and your support. We have made
tremendous progress. Monitoring the Future cites that underage
drinking percentages are down. They are the lowest they have
been for years, but we still need to continue to work
diligently. And what this reauthorization is going to do is not
only will we be able to provide enhancement grants to
community-based coalitions that have been trained and
understand how to tackle and resolve problems in their
communities, but it is also going to give them a few dollars,
allow them to work with higher education, colleges and
universities as well, where we know there is a serious problem
there too. And we think there are too many losses of life.
Certainly, we can prevent that. We also can continue to tackle
the violence and the unfortunate incidents that are taking
place on our universities as a result of drinking, so there is
still much work needed to be done, and we believe the
reauthorization and the way it has been restructured will allow
us to continue to make progress around this serious underage
drinking problem.
Mr. Green. Thank you. Thank you for your effort on that.
Palliative care is a critically important aspect of
healthcare system. It does not always garner the attention that
it warrants.
Dr. Morrison, can you help this committee understand that
palliative care, both from its impact on a patient's quality of
life and the workforce involved, and how does this legislation
improve the palliative care?
Dr. Morrison. Thank you for the question. Palliative care
is a relatively new specialty. It began in the 1990s when a
number of us said: Why do you have to be dying in order to have
a good quality of life? And back before palliative care, the
only real area that focused on improving patient's quality of
life was hospice. And as we all know, you have to have a
prognosis of 6 months or less to be able to access hospice in
this country.
So it is a relatively new specialty, and it is one of the
fastest growing specialties in the United States, but we still
have a workforce issue. We have one palliative medicine
physician for every 13,000 people with serious illness, and
this bill addresses this in three ways.
First of all, it does create a specialist workforce that
will provide the research, the teaching, and take care of the
most complex patients and families. But it also provides the
core knowledge and skills of palliative care to those in
training and those in practice. I spent 4 years at the
University of Chicago, 3 years at New York Hospital Cornell
Medical Center, another 3 years at Mount Sinai, and in that
entire 10 years of education, had a 30-minute lecture about
pain management that happened in my first year pharmacology
course. And it dealt with how drugs like morphine are broken
down in the liver and excreted in the kidneys. That was the
extent of my education in how to treat distressing symptoms,
and we have a generation of healthcare providers with that base
fund of knowledge.
So this bill will address that as well by training those
doctors, nurses, social workers, chaplains, who care for the
seriously ill in the core knowledge and skills of palliative
care: pain and symptom management, communication, care
coordination.
And, finally, it addresses the evidence gap. We have all
seen the problem in this country of inappropriate prescribing
of opioids because we have a generation of doctors who do not
know how to assess pain, how to manage pain, how to
appropriately use opioids, and how to identify the problems of
addiction. I have never had a patient come to me in serious
pain and say: I would like my pain treated and, oh, by the way,
I would like to be addicted to the medication afterwards. That
can be addressed through outreach, and it can be addressed
through appropriate knowledge and teaching. And that is what
this bill addresses as well.
Mr. Green. Mr. Chairman, thank you. And I have some
questions we will submit. But our committee and the
subcommittee has actually passed a number of opioid bills. And
I think you are correct. We need to have training for the
physicians who are actually prescribing, and hopefully, this
bill along with the package of bills we passed out.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
I now recognize the vice chair of the subcommittee, the
gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Guthrie, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you very. I am going to try to get as
many questions, so if answers could be kind of brief.
But first, Ms. Banks, I have a friend of mine whose son has
sickle cell. And I didn't really know that much about it. Dr.
Burgess has been helping me with it sitting here. But we hired
him so he would be gainfully employed. And just working with
his schedule was about my only experience with it.
So, with this bill, are there any other efforts existing
within the sickle cell community that would complement this
bill and allow it to be more expansive to the patient
population.
Ms. Banks. Absolutely. Currently, we are in the process--
and when I say ``we,'' I mean SCDAA and many office treatment
centers or hospitals--are working with community health
workers. So we have actually instituted what is called a
community health worker program. What we feel like in the
sickle cell community is it is going to take a concerted effort
throughout the community. So we are utilizing not only the
providers but also community-based organizations and utilizing
community health workers to actually go into the field, find
these patients, because a lot of our patients are lost, meaning
they haven't been to a physician in a year or so. And that is
not good for them and their health. And then not only are they
finding these individuals, but they are getting them into a
medical home. So the goal is that you find the patient, but
then you enroll the patient or you help that patient find
medical care.
In addition, SCDAA has launched a national patient
registry, which is the first ever of its kind. It is a patient-
powered registry. We know that it is long overdue in the sickle
cell community. We know that it is going to help us to collect
the data that we need. But also, along with collecting that
data, this is patient-powered. So it allows the patient to
communicate with the physicians. It allows the patient to
actually manage their care via technology. And also it allows
the patient to be up-to-date on treatments and research that is
going on in the community for sickle cell patients.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. Thank you very much.
Dr. Marino, great to see that Northwestern is doing good
work. I am moving my daughter there Monday. So she will be on
the Evanston campus. So, in your testimony, you mentioned the
use of Canadian data. What type of U.S. data do we have, and
why do have to use the Canadian data? I would just let you
expand on that.
Dr. Marino. Mr. Guthrie, first, congratulations to your
daughter. Northwestern is a very, very tough school to get
into. So congratulations to her.
There is no data in the U.S. What we have is single-center
data of very small numbers of individuals that we can't
extrapolate to national data. And because the data is collected
very differently at the different centers, with variable
definitions that don't match, you can't take 10 or 15 centers
and put the data together. Because the Canadians have a
national health system, they actually have a national data set
that allows them in a very specific way, like Denmark as well,
to gather this longitudinal date on the congenital heart
disease patients. So 3952 would specifically have the CDC
create a cohort study in the United States that would follow
this very high-risk complex CHD population over time to collect
that similar data. We don't know if what we have in the U.S. is
different than Canada or if it is the same. There is just no
data.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. Well, maybe on one of my visits over the
next little while, I will be able to see what you guys are
doing. That would be interesting to see.
So, General, I just want to ask you a question. And
congratulations on your service and obviously reaching one of
the top ranks in the military. That says a lot about your
ability. Why is training pediatric healthcare providers in
screening--let me start over. Why is training pediatric
healthcare providers in screening, brief intervention, and
referral to treatment important? And why is the provision on
this being added to the STOP Act? And can you discuss how this
new provision's authorization will work within the overall
authorization for the bill?
Mr. Dean. Thank you for your question. It is a very
important question. It is a, we believe, significant change in
the restructure of this reauthorization. And we are very
excited about the inclusion of--we call it SBIRT for pediatric
healthcare providers. It is a strong complement to the
universal prevention as it allows youth who have been misusing
substances to be identified more readily and to get effective
intervention in a larger number of community settings. We also
know it is effective. And a 6-month followup with SBIRT
participants found that heavy alcohol consumption was 39
percent lower among individuals who initially screened positive
for hazardous drugs and alcohol use. So screening early,
training pediatric providers to do this, we have found already
it is reducing the consumption by young people.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. Thank you.
And, Dr. Leffert, what are the expectations that the
clinical care commission can establish within the next 3 years?
I guess you have 3 seconds to tell me that. So I apologize.
Dr. Leffert. Well, as you know--thank you for the question,
Representative Guthrie. As you know, diabetes is a big issue,
and there are a lot of issues going along with it but. But we
would hope that the process would allow for federally funded
research initiatives from the bench to the bedside so that
patients could have access to 21st century cures and
innovations, and that these would become more coherent and
synergistic, and that there would be better communication and
coordination among the agencies, specifically NIH, FDA, and
CMS. The commission would also help focus the efforts of the
government research community toward improving clinical care
for people with diabetes and to slow the incremental rise in
diabetes and its associated complications.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you very much.
My time has expired, so I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
I now recognize the ranking member of the full committee,
Mr. Pallone, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to ask Dr. Morrison to focus on the palliative
care legislation, you know, both the access to treatment but
also the services available to those individuals to cope with
their conditions. First, from diagnosis, what is the most
common diagnosis for individuals who receive palliative care
services?
Dr. Morrison. The common diagnoses are what we consider to
be serious illness. So it is cancer, heart disease, advanced
lung disease, Alzheimer's disease and related dementias, and
neuromuscular diseases such as Lou Gehrig's disease or
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. In children, it is really two
large groups of diseases. One is obviously cancer, and the
other is congenital or genetic diseases. And because of
advances in pediatrics, we have a whole population now of kids
who are living long, long periods of time. And that is
wonderful. However, they are living with multiple symptoms and
high caregiver burden on their families.
Mr. Pallone. Well, you mention symptoms. What are the most
common symptoms that are treated with palliative care?
Dr. Morrison. They are what you would anticipate: pain,
breathlessness, fatigue, nausea, anxiety. In children, it is
primarily fatigue. And it is the one symptom for which we have
really no effective treatments as of yet because of the lack of
the evidence base and the lack of the research science.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Now, let me ask a couple questions
about access. Do most people battling serious health
conditions, such as cancer, have access to palliative care
services, and what are some of the consequences for individuals
with serious illness who don't have access?
Dr. Morrison. It is a very good question. What we know from
a study actually we did earlier this year was that now 97
percent of mid- to large-size hospitals in the United States
now have palliative care teams. And if we look at the Medicare
population, about 75 percent of all Medicare beneficiaries who
die live in an area where they could potentially access
palliative care. The problem is that those hospital teams are
relatively small and, because they are still understaffed, see
only a small proportion of the number of patients and families
who could truly benefit. What we have seen in the past 3 years
also, however, is the expansion of palliative care into the
community, particularly in Medicare Advantage plans and
commercial plans, which aren't limited by the fee-for-service
structure of the traditional Medicare program. So we are seeing
some very, very new and exciting models of care happening in
the community, particularly in Tennessee and Nashville, as was
said earlier.
Mr. Pallone. Well, in terms of increasing access to
important services, how can we increase it? How does this bill
help?
Dr. Morrison. I think it helps in three ways. The first is
that, because palliative care is a relatively new specialty,
most people don't know what it is. Again, a survey that we did
with the American Cancer Society several years ago showed that
about 80 percent of a national representative sample had never
heard of palliative care and didn't know what it was. And yet,
when we read a definition to them, over 90 percent said that
this is what they would want for themselves and their families.
Providers too don't understand palliative care and too often
confuse it with hospice and end-of-life care, when the reality
is palliative care is for everybody. It is not dependent on
prognosis. And in fact, we provide it to people we expect to be
cured. So there is an educational campaign awareness that needs
to happen.
And the second issue is we need to address the workforce
gap. Every single clinician in this country who cares for
somebody with serious illness needs to be able to treat pain
appropriately, manage breathlessness. Talk to them about how a
serious illness--I have probably as much training, sir, as you
in how to talk to somebody and break bad news that you have
cancer. When I finished medical school, we had the same amount
of training in terms of how to have that conversation. And we
need to address that through our medical schools and our
training programs and to physicians like me who are in
practice. This bill will do this as well.
Mr. Pallone. Well, thank you. I am just trying to get in
one question for General Dean about strategies for preventing
underage drinking. I just want to learn more about the methods
to prevent underage drinking. General Dean, what types of
strategies and programs work best to prevent underage drinking,
and what evidence is available to prove that these
interventions work?
Mr. Dean. OK. Thank you, Congressman. It is a great
question. We believe that by mobilizing the entire community--
what I mean by that is all of the sectors in the community:
parents, teachers, youth, the police, business providers, faith
community, civic business leaders all coming together. And we
have built over the last 25 years a strategy, an academy type
approach, to train the members of the community how to identify
their problems, how to address their problems, and how to
implement evidence-based strategies to reduce their problems.
There have been evaluations done by the Office of National Drug
Control Policy independent of CADCA that show that when these
communities have been trained, the results are significant. And
we have great examples. In the interest of time, I will not
cover them with you. But I do have several examples here where
communities have reduced their underage drinking by large
percentages, 20, 30, 40, 50 percent, using these methods.
Mr. Pallone. Well, through the chairman, if maybe we could
ask him in writing to follow up with and give us those
examples. Mr. Chairman, with your permission, he mentioned that
he doesn't have the time to give some examples. So, with your
permission, maybe we could have him follow up in writing and
give us that information.
Mr. Pitts. I am sorry. I was talking.
Mr. Pallone. No, I know. That is all right. He wanted to
give me some examples, but in the interest of time, he is not
doing it. I was going to ask if he could do it in writing.
Mr. Pitts. Yes. We will submit that to you in writing and
ask you to please respond.
Mr. Dean. I will be glad to. I have several examples of
communities that have made significant progress, some exceeding
50 percent reduction using these community-based strategies to
reduce underage drinking all across the country, both rural,
urban, as well as suburban.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. Very good. Thank you.
The chair now recognizes Dr. Burgess 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Burgess. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thanks to the panel for being here.
It has been a very interesting morning listening to you
all.
Ms. Banks, let me just ask you, and I was struck in your
testimony, both the written testimony and your testimony here
this morning, you say it has been decades since there has been
a new FDA-approved treatment for sickle cell. Is that correct?
Ms. Banks. Correct.
Mr. Burgess. So my recollection of Parkland Hospital in the
1970s is actually pretty much current therapy. Is that right?
Ms. Banks. Correct.
Mr. Burgess. I referenced this in my opening statement,
this committee has spent a lot of time on a bill, H.R. 6,
called Cures for the 21st Century. And although sickle cell--
and we tried not to have disease-specific parts of the bill, I
mean, this just strikes me as one of those areas where the type
of translational research that would go across the National
Institute of Health or would give the National Institute of
Health Director much more discretion as to what they researched
and what they funded, that this would be one of those areas.
And I just went on clinicaltrials.gov to look for the
current clinical trials in sickle cell, and there weren't as
many as I thought there ought to be for a disease of this
magnitude that is so pervasive in the community. I mean, is
that a reasonable assumption I have made looking at
clinicaltrials.gov?
Ms. Banks. Actually, you are correct. We are always wanting
more research for sickle cell disease. I will say this.
Mr. Pitts. Poke your microphone.
Ms. Banks. Oh, I am sorry. I will say this. About 7 years
ago, when I started the Sickle Cell Disease Association of
America, we literally had about two pharmaceutical companies in
the space for sickle cell disease, and today we with about 16.
So it is looking up for sickle cell disease. Of course, we
still have to get over that hurdle of getting individuals in
those trials and going through that. But it is hopeful.
But I totally agree with you. Sickle cell disease has long
been forgotten. And over 100 years--this is probably one of the
oldest diseases for its discovery out there--for there only to
be one drug for treatment--and by the way, that drug is
hydroxyurea. That drug was not approved for sickle cell
disease. It is an actual cancer drug. So, really, when you look
at those kinds of issues, it is long overdue in the sickle cell
community.
Mr. Burgess. Yes. And I appreciate your comments on that.
And it is something we will keep an eye on in this committee
because, of course, I am going to be optimistic that we are
going to get Cures for the 21st Century done in this Congress.
But there will also be an FDA reauthorization that takes place
in the next Congress. And that is another appropriate place to
focus on this.
General Dean, I want to ask you a question. It is probably
not fair because it is not on the bill that you came to testify
on. But in your role as the CEO of Community Anti-Drug
Coalitions of America, I got asked a question by a constituent,
and I didn't know the answer. And I was a little bit
embarrassed that I didn't know the answer. And if you don't
know the answer, it is OK. You don't need to be embarrassed.
Perhaps you can point me in the direction that I need to go.
There is a woman who came into my office. She had lost her son
in a--he was a pedestrian struck by a vehicle. He was in a
crosswalk. The individual who was driving the vehicle was not
issued a ticket or a citation. He did have alcohol in his
system, but it was under the .08 limit in the State of Texas.
But he also had a positive qualitative test for the active
ingredient in marijuana. OK. It seems to me that--and
obviously, this would be a state law, but does your group look
at, now that there are more and more states that are providing
a legal avenue for consumption of marijuana, does your group
look at the additive multiplicative effects of drugs and
alcohol? Do states need to perhaps reconsider what their limits
are? This just struck me--of course, it is a very tragic and
unfortunate case. But that just seemed like it was one of those
things that cried out for something in addition to be done.
Now, law enforcement made, their position was, as far as
laws of the State of Texas, we don't prosecute for having small
amounts of marijuana in your blood. And this was a qualitative
test, not a quantitative test, so we don't even know to what
degree of intoxication there might have occurred from that, but
from the alcohol standpoint, under the legal limit of
intoxication.
Mr. Dean. To answer your question, Congressman, we do care
about this issue very much. We do watch and observe what is
happening in states that have, first, through citizen votes
decreed that marijuana is medicine. It obviously has not gone
through the FDA process for that to be done. So we watch that
carefully. We also are watching the states where they have--
through citizens have passed it for recreational use. And we
have seen, looking at data coming out of States like Colorado,
Washington, and others, that there is a substantial increase in
citizens, both young and old, driving under the influence of
drugs versus alcohol. And in some cases, there are more
impaired drivers on the streets these days in those locations
from drugs than there are from alcohol.
So the law enforcement challenge is having the appropriate
instruments and tests to test for it. It is not as simple as it
is for alcohol. And, therefore, it becomes challenging for them
to do that. So the answer is we are seeing the results. We are
seeing the impact. We are concerned about it, and the law
enforcement community is extremely concerned about it.
Mr. Burgess. Well, I will have my office follow up with
you. We may have further discussion about this. But you are the
first person who has come to this committee who might know
something about this. And I do want to follow up with you. And
I would appreciate the opportunity to do so.
Mr. Dean. It would be our pleasure.
Mr. Burgess. And, Mr. Chairman, I also would ask unanimous
consent, I have a 2013 article, but it is the most recent one I
could find, ``Current Management of Sickle Cell Anemia,'' and I
would like to submit this for the record.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina,
Judge Butterfield, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Banks, I want to come back to you for just a couple of
minutes, if you don't mind. Ms. Banks, can you describe for me
how diminishing Federal funding, including lack of funding for
treatment centers, has made it more difficult for people with
sickle cell disease to get the care that they need?
Ms. Banks. Sure. Of course, with every disease, especially
with the complications in sickle cell disease, it is a
challenge when you do not have the funding in place.
Eventually, when the bill was first passed, because this is a
reauthorization, there was a place in the bill where it said 40
treatment centers. To my knowledge, sickle cell only received
10 of those treatment centers or 10 of those treatment centers
were funded. Because of that, our patients basically do not
have a medical home. That is the reason why a lot of them
frequent the emergency room. So, when you talk about
diminishing Federal funding, you are looking at, where do our
patients go for access to care? That is extremely, extremely
important.
In this bill, we ask for 25 treatment centers, because we
wanted to be very realistic in our ask and we wanted those 25
centers to be in areas where there are high populations of
individuals with sickle cell disease. We are hoping that that
would provide some coverage. We know it will not for 100,000
patients, but it would provide some coverage for our patients
and somewhere to go.
It is very interesting, in comparable diseases, for
instance, with cystic fibrosis, they have over 100 treatment
centers. With hemophilia, I think they have over 40, 42. So,
with sickle cell disease, only having 10 funded, you can see
with 100,000 patients where we are at a huge deficit.
Mr. Butterfield. Is it true that African American children
have higher rates of disease in trait? Is that an accurate
statement?
Ms. Banks. Say that again.
Mr. Butterfield. That black children, African American
children, have higher rates of disease.
Ms. Banks. Of sickle cell disease?
Mr. Butterfield. Yes, of sickle cell disease.
Ms. Banks. Yes.
Mr. Butterfield. Yes. And what proportion would you say of
African American babies are screened for this disease at birth?
Ms. Banks. Well, actually, it is mandatory in every state.
So, right now, every state screens for sickle cell disease when
you are born.
Mr. Butterfield. It is a Federal mandate or a state
mandate?
Ms. Banks. It is Federal.
Mr. Butterfield. Yes. All right. Are there any barriers
that prevent babies from being screened for sickle cell? Are
there any barriers that would prevent that from happening at
birth? Or is it completely uniform across the board?
Ms. Banks. To my knowledge, it is completely uniform across
the board.
Mr. Butterfield. All right.
Ms. Banks. Our issue, Congressman Butterfield, is that,
years ago, when sickle cell was very prevalent and people heard
about it, it was because babies were dying. And so, because of
treatments, because of the newborn screening, babies are living
well into adolescence. Our issue now is transition, and where
do you go after you are 14, 15 and you begin to transition into
young adult care? That is where we are having the shortage of
adult hematologists or adult primary care physicians for those
individuals. So now the challenge in sickle cell disease is
where our babies are getting better, they are living through
teens and young adult, and they don't have a place to go. So
when you go to college, when you get to that college age, where
do you start? I was talking to my chief medical officer, and it
is interesting because there are individuals 24 and 25 years of
age still going to pediatric physicians, a hematologist,
because they do not have an adult physician that would treat
their disease in a system in managing their disease.
Mr. Butterfield. Would you discuss the barriers, if any,
facing African Americans from being screened or receiving
treatment for sickle cell disease?
Ms. Banks. I think the barriers for African Americans,
particularly--or anyone with the disease pretty much is, again,
the lack of a medical home. Our patients have been stigmatized
mainly because the key issue is pain. And if you are
frequenting the emergency room for pain, what are you going to
be classified as? For most, our patients feel as if they are
ostracized because when they go in, they are going for drugs.
And it is because we do not have any drugs for treatment of the
disease that we are treating our patients with opioids. So that
is a huge barrier in the African American community. But it is
a huge barrier in the sickle cell community as a whole.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you. You are very kind.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
I now recognize the chair emeritus of the full committee,
Mr. Barton, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Barton. Mr. Chairman, I don't have any questions, and I
am late arriving. So I am going to yield to the members who
have been here.
Mr. Pitts. I recognize the gentleman from Florida. You are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate it. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Again, I want to thank Chairman Pitts and Ranking Member
Green for holding this very important hearing and including my
bill, the Congenital Heart Futures Reauthorization Act. I
appreciate it so very much. This legislation provided a 5-year
reauthorization to the underlying law that I coauthored back in
2009. The Congenital Heart Futures Reauthorization Act will
continue the CDC surveillance program, continue to provide NIH
grants for further congenital heart disease research, and
require NIH to report on their ongoing research efforts.
Congenital heart disease is the number one cause of birth
defects related deaths. Twenty-five percent of children born
with a congenital heart defect will need heart surgery or other
interventions to survive. An estimated 2 to 3 million people
are living with CHD. And individuals with CHD have an ER
visitation rate of three to four times higher than the general
population. The Congenital Heart Futures Reauthorization Act
will continue our commitment to monitoring and increasing the
available research and helping people born with a congenital
heart defect. I would like to ask unanimous consent, Mr.
Chairman, to introduce these letters of support: the Pediatric
Congenital Heart Association, a letter from the Adult
Congenital Heart Association, and a letter from the American
Society of Echocardiography. I would like to ask unanimous
consent.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you very much.
And I have a couple questions for Dr. Marino. Dr. Marino,
what are the biggest challenges facing children and adults with
CHDs as they age, and how will the Congenital Heart Futures
Reauthorization Act help meet these challenges?
Thank you again, sir, for testifying today.
Dr. Marino. Congressman, thank you very much. We greatly
appreciate your support.
It is a great question. Simply put, when you have your
surgery as a baby, you are not cured. And we know that these
patients have specific neurodevelopmental issues that come from
brain injury from when they had their surgery as a baby. We
know that they have specific cardiovascular complications. Many
of them go on to heart failure and need heart transplantation.
They might need a ventricular assist device, mechanical support
device. They often have abnormal heart rhythms. They often have
decreased exercise function. These patients will also--many of
them have kidney or liver injury from their original therapies
when they were a baby.
So, with this complex medical milieu of multisystem organ
failure, they then now need to transition from an adolescent
care model to an adult care model. You have heard from several
of the other witnesses who are testifying today that there is
lack of adult providers who can care for these types of
patients that survive the childhood illness and then now move
on to adult care. Adult congenital heart disease physicians are
in--we have the same dearth of care providers. You have heard
about palliative care and sickle cell disease. While there is
now an accreditation for adult congenital heart disease care,
there are still very few adult congenital heart disease care
certified individuals nationally.
And then probably the last part which we discussed a little
bit earlier was that, right now, there is no specific means by
which we transfer these high-risk complex patients into adult
care. And if you just hand off a patient at age 18, it is very
unlikely, actually, that they are going to get followup care.
And what we know--and I want to focus on cost for a second--if
you get patients into appropriate followup care and you
minimize secondary complications as adult congenital patients,
you will lower overall costs to the system. And given that more
than 50 percent of these patients will be cared for through
Medicaid as children and then Medicare as adults, if we can
find ways to transition them better, not lose three out of four
patients during that transition process, it will likely lower
the overall costs for these 2.4 million individuals nationally
who survive with adult congenital heart disease.
Mr. Bilirakis. A very good point. Thank you so much.
Next question, the Congenital Heart Futures Reauthorization
Act specifically calls for a cohort study. How does this differ
from current surveillance techniques being used to study CHD,
and why is this needed?
Dr. Marino. So, if you look over the last 20 years, there
are lots of individual center studies trying to benchmark how
these patients are doing. They don't talk to each other
relative to a data standpoint. When I was at Harvard, working
at Boston Children's Hospital or Children's Hospital
Philadelphia or Cincinnati Children's or now at Lurie
Children's during periods of my training and now my faculty
positions, the data that is collected for these individual
studies are all quite different. The definitions used to codify
the patients and codify the complications that we have talked
about are very, very different. So I can't take 10 different
studies from 10 different centers and pull them together into a
cohesive whole.
What 3952 will allow is for the CDC for the first time in
the United States--and by the way, this has been done in at
least a dozen other countries around the world--take the U.S.
population, start collecting data at dozens of centers with the
same variables, the same data set, and then follow them
longitudinally, not just over 2 years, hopefully over decades,
for us to get a much better sense for, what is the true
incidence and prevalence of these complications that I have
alluded to? What are the impacts of treatments that we then
bring into the care models for these patients nationally? And
then, more importantly, when it comes to transition, how do we
best predict who is not going to have effective transition, who
will, and then get the supports in place in adolescence to make
sure we don't lose three out of four of these patients. Because
I can tell you, in my work in Northwestern, there are literally
dozens and dozens of patients each year that walk into us at
Northwestern Memorial Hospital, who have been out of care,
cardiac care, for 5 years, 10 years, who literally are near
death. And I know for a fact if they had actually had
appropriate transition and actually stayed in care, they likely
would have survived multiple more decades with a great quality
of life.
Mr. Bilirakis. Well, thank you very much, doctor.
I want to thank the entire panel for their testimony.
And I yield back. I appreciate it.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
I now recognize the gentlelady from Illinois, Ms.
Schakowsky, 5 minutes for questions.
Ms. Schakowsky. Well, first, let me just apologize. It is
hard to be everywhere at once. I was looking forward to hearing
from you. And I want to thank you so much for being here, all
of you.
I want to say I am proud to see that Dr. Marino is here
from Lurie Children's Hospital, and I just want to acknowledge
the unparalleled care that you provide for not just the
children of Chicago but many who come to the hospital.
I have really focused for much of my public career, both in
the Illinois legislature and now here, on improving senior
citizens' access to health care. Along with my colleague Doris
Matsui, I have served as the co-chair of the House Seniors Task
Force. Given that 10,000 people turn 65 every day, it is
imperative that we really work to address the specific health
needs of seniors.
So, Dr. Morrison, let me focus on that. I am interested in
hearing how the aging of our population is going to affect the
need for palliative care services moving forward, and by the
way, you might want to distinguish between hospice and
palliative care as you talk. Specifically, I am interested in
hearing more about a statement you included in your written
testimony that says: ``Over the next decade, most healthcare
professionals will be caring for seriously ill older adults and
their families with multiple chronic conditions, multiyear
illnesses, and intermittent crises interspersed with periods of
relative stability.'' So how is this going to affect the need
for palliative care services among the population, this
population, as well as a workforce trained in palliative care?
Dr. Morrison. Thank you, Congresswoman.
And as a geriatrician, thank you so much for your work for
older adults in this country.
Let me take this in two ways. First, let me clearly
differentiate between hospice and palliative care. Hospice was
started in this country in the 1970s really as an alternative
to life-prolonging curative treatment when it was recognized
that many people near the end of life were experiencing
distressing symptoms and very high care needs. And it has been
a wonderful system of care since 1972, and even more so since
Medicare covered hospice in 1982.
The problem with hospice is that you have to be dying to
access it. And you to have a predictable prognosis of 6 months
or less. And for those of us who began in palliative care, the
question was, why should you be dying to have efforts focused
on enhancing your quality of life?
When we look at the aging of the population, as you pointed
out, it is the fastest growing segment in the United States.
And for most of us, the time after the age of 65 or 70 is going
to be many, many years of a very good quality of life. It will
be time to integrate our work and life experiences. It will be
time spent with our children and our grandchildren. But most of
us, those of us who aren't killed crossing the street or have a
sudden death, will develop a series of chronic ongoing
progressive illnesses: heart disease, lung disease, even
cancer, for which we have transitioned many cancers into
chronic illnesses. And as we age, we will have more and more of
those: diabetes, frailty, multiple chronic conditions. And the
data that we have now suggests that most of us will spend at
least 7 years of our life in that state. And the data that we
have nationally suggests that 70 percent of older Americans
with a serious illness have three or more distressing symptoms
on a daily basis. And we can do better.
The last years of our life, the last 5, 10 years, should
not mean living with daily symptoms. It should not mean
tremendous burdens on our children and our grandchildren to
care for us. And it should not mean bankrupting Medicare to
care for those. And palliative care, as a relatively new
specialty, has demonstrated that it meets all those needs.
First of all, we have a wealth of data that palliative care
teams improve symptoms. They make people feel better and their
quality of life better. Secondly, it improves caregiver well-
being and reduces burdens on caregivers. And, thirdly, by
really providing the right care to the right people at the
right time, it reduces costs largely by providing that added
layer of support in caring for people where they want to be
cared for, in the home. In New York City, if my 85-year-old
patient falls in the middle of the night and his wife can't get
him up and he is struggling to breathe because of heart
failure, right now, she calls a doctor's office. And when you
call the doctor's office in New York City, what do you get? If
this is a medical emergency, please call 911. And maybe you
will get a voice at the end of the phone. If you call our
palliative care team, you get a real person at the end of the
phone. You may get somebody to come into the home. And you will
have in place a plan to deal with predictable crises for older
adults. That is the added layer of support that palliative care
can provide to our healthcare system.
Ms. Schakowsky. Perfect. Thank you.
Dr. Morrison. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The gentlelady yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Long, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Dr. Morrison, how long has palliative care been
around?
Dr. Morrison. Palliative care really developed as a
specialty in about the mid-1990s, as I said, when we had this
lightbulb go off that said: You don't have to be dying to have
good quality of life.
But it only became a sub-specialty in 2008. So it has
really only been since 2008 that the American Board of Medical
Specialties has recognized palliative care as a specialty. And
so it is a very young field.
Mr. Long. My mom passed away in 2009. And I remember that
when they came in and said, ``We need to talk about palliative
care,'' that was the first that I had really heard about it.
My series of questions are for you, Dr. Morrison. They
focus on the care and support needs of individuals with
Alzheimer's disease and other dementias. Could you elaborate on
how palliative care could benefit people with Alzheimer's?
Dr. Morrison. Yes. Absolutely. As you know, the prevalence
of Alzheimer's disease is increasing rapidly in the United
States, largely as we have made tremendous progress in treating
other diseases. Alzheimer's disease fits in many respects
perfectly within the paradigm of palliative care. It is a
multiyear illness. Families, as cognitive status declines,
patients are more and more dependent upon their families. It is
a disease that is associated with a tremendous symptom burden.
All of the diseases that people had before Alzheimer's disease,
their osteoarthritis, their heart disease that causes
breathlessness, their lung disease, don't go away in the
setting of Alzheimer's disease. What happens, though, is people
can't tell you that they are breathless. They can't tell you
that they are in pain. They can't tell you that they are hungry
because of cognitive impairment. And so the suffering
continues, but the suffering continues silently.
It is also a disease that has periods of stability where
people will be the same for long periods of time and then there
will be a crisis, an infection, a pneumonia, a urinary
infection, a pressure ulcer. And so it doesn't fit well within
our current model of hospice because people with Alzheimer's
disease aren't dying quickly. They are actually living for a
long period of time. And what they do is they need support, and
they need then crisis intervention, which palliative care can
provide, and then ongoing support after that throughout the
course of that illness. And, as importantly, Alzheimer's
disease is not just a disease that affects the patient. All of
us who have had a loved one with dementia or know somebody know
that it extends to the family as well, and that the burden on
families is almost as great as the patient itself, and that, as
a specialty, palliative care focuses on both the patient and
the family as the unit of care.
Mr. Long. OK. Thank you. My aunt passed away from
Alzheimer's about 6 weeks ago. So I can relate to everything
you are saying there.
How easy is it for individuals to gain access to palliative
services today? Second part, are there enough providers
offering these services across different settings? And are
there enough new providers being trained in this space to meet
patient needs?
Dr. Morrison. Moderately easy, no, and no. And let me
elaborate.
Mr. Long. OK.
Dr. Morrison. The first is that we have built over the past
20 years, largely because of private sector philanthropy and
investment in infrastructure to support the development of
palliative care. So, right now, 95 percent of our mid- to
large-size hospitals have palliative care teams. And over two-
thirds of all American hospitals have that infrastructure in
place.
The issue is, as you pointed out, it is the workforce, that
we actually don't have enough providers to be able to provide
those services to everyone in need. And we really need two
things. First of all, we need a specialist workforce not to
take care of everybody with serious illness. That will never
happen, and that should not be our goal. We need specialists to
teach, to do the necessary research, and take care of the most
complex patients and their families. And that is what the
provisions of 3119 provide.
But, as importantly, we need to train every clinician who
cares with somebody with serious illness in the core knowledge
and skills of palliative care so that every doctor in this
country knows how to treat pain effectively, every nurse knows
how to communicate serious illness to somebody, and we have a
care system that can provide that added layer of support for
that very small but very expensive and very vulnerable patient
population.
Mr. Long. Lastly, I would like to know, how do the needs
differ of the older patients from the needs of younger patients
as relates to providing palliative services, and do current
training opportunities address these differences?
Dr. Morrison. It is a very good question. For most younger
adults, most younger adults are typically living with a single
illness. Is it cancer? Heart disease? For children, cystic
fibrosis. For older adults, it is much more complex, because
most of us, when we age, will develop multiple chronic
conditions that all intersect and all affect our quality of
life. So it is not just cancer. It is cancer. It is heart
disease. It is debilitating arthritis. It is diabetes. And it
is both cognitive impairment, Alzheimer's disease, and often
functional impairment, difficulty walking. So it is a much more
complex population in many respects. I think what we have done
very well within our field is the collaboration with
geriatrics. The recognition that we will never have enough
geriatricians, we will never have enough palliative care
physicians to treat the population, the older adult population
that need, and it requires a collaboration and for us to break
out beyond specialist-level care to think about population-
related care. And that is one of the reasons that 3119, the
bill before you, is modeled after the very successful Geriatric
Academic Career Awards. Because that was such a good model for
improving access to care for----
Mr. Long. Speaking of 3119, that is how many minutes I am
past time. So I yield back.
Dr. Morrison. I apologize, sir.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr. Cardenas, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And thank
you for having this important hearing. First, I would like to
recognize and thank my colleague Lucille Roybal-Allard for
championing the legislation H.R. 1717, which is part of this
hearing today, the Sober Truth in Preventing Underage Drinking
Reauthorization Act. It is unfortunate that, being on
Appropriations, you are not allowed to be on Energy and
Commerce.
But thank you, colleague Lucille Roybal-Allard, for being
here and for introducing that great bipartisan legislation.
My questions today are based on diabetes. And I would like
to ask some questions to Dr. Leffert. If you don't mind
explaining to us what prediabetes is and how it increases the
risk of an individual developing type 2 diabetes.
Dr. Leffert. Thank you, Congressman.
Prediabetes is the process of developing diabetes but
before that happens. So the genetic and environmental process
results in a situation where what we call glucose intolerance
or impaired fasting glucose. Both of those conditions are what
we now have termed prediabetes. The issue with prediabetes is
that prediabetes is a surrogate for cardiovascular disease. So,
in people who have prediabetes, the risk for cardiovascular
disease goes up, and then the disease process then may progress
on to type 2 diabetes. So it has both an effect in and of
itself and also as a progenitor towards type 2 diabetes. The
data, I think, is that about a third of the patients will go on
to type 2 diabetes, about a third of the patients will remain
prediabetic, and about a third of the patients will regress if
they start with diet and exercise. And so the main issue in
prediabetes for our population and why it is such a huge issue
is because of the fact that it is associated with obesity and
genetic factors, particularly among populations, like African
Americans and Hispanics, in our country.
Mr. Cardenas. And with proper education and cooperation
with their health providers, et cetera, a person can decrease
their chance of going from prediabetic to developing type 2
diabetes?
Dr. Leffert. That is absolutely correct. And I think that
should be a big push of what we are doing in our healthcare
prevention, meaning keeping people at the level of prediabetes
or moving backward would be the most important aspect of what
we do. And we can do that through a recognized approach toward
nutrition therapy, toward dietary therapy, toward exercise. And
there have been programs that have been done through the
diabetes prevention program that have been successful in doing
that particular thing itself.
Mr. Cardenas. OK. How can the commission improve our
ability to reduce the development of diabetes among individuals
with prediabetes?
Dr. Leffert. Well, I think, again, it is a coordination
issue. I think our Federal Government has a number of different
agencies that are all working somewhat in silos. And I think
our commission would allow us to have all of the organizations,
including the private sector, industry, and other organizations
together, to be able to coordinate that effort and prevent the
onset of diabetes if we have people who have prediabetes.
Mr. Cardenas. Now, obviously, there is a quality-of-life
issue for somebody to not develop into having type 2 diabetes.
But what quantifiable numbers when it comes to dollars would be
saved if we were more successful in our efforts and coordinated
better like you just described? Are we talking just a few
million dollars a year to our economy, or are we talking
billions of dollars?
Dr. Leffert. I think we are talking more like billions of
dollars because I think the issue, when we go from prediabetes
to diabetes and the hospitalizations that are associated with
diabetes, the complications of diabetes related to kidney
disease, heart disease, eye disease, is astronomical, and I
think we could save a large amount of money of our Federal
budget related to that.
Mr. Cardenas. So diabetes-related illnesses like you just
described I would imagine over lifetimes of tens and hundreds
and millions of people would actually cost us trillions of
dollars. Wouldn't it?
Dr. Leffert. Well, I think, right now, as Chairman Pitts
said in his opening statement, one in three dollars of the
Medicare budget is spent in diabetes.
Mr. Cardenas. So it is in the trillions.
Dr. Leffert. It is a very, very significant amount of money
that is being utilized in that regard.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
And I now recognize the gentlelady from Indiana, Mrs.
Brooks, 5 minutes for questions.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In my home State of Indiana, over 750,000 Hoosiers have
type 1 or type 2, and nearly 2 million of about 6 \1/2\ to 7
million Hoosiers have prediabetes. And so we know it is taking
an immense toll on our State and on the Nation's healthcare
system. But yet you talked about some innovations, continuing
glucose monitoring and artificial pancreases. Can you tell me,
Dr. Leffert, how the new treatments, new devices that are on
the horizon that can help bend the curve on both the incidence
and the cost of the disease and help patients better manage
their disease, how is this commission going to have a role in
expediting patient access to these innovations?
Dr. Leffert. So you told us about a very big problem. And
we talked about that already. I think the issue for us in terms
of getting the treatments to the patients is really one, to
some extent, of making sure that the cost is available, that we
have treatments that are cost-effective and not so expensive
that patients can afford them, but in addition, the commission
will allow us to utilize the resources of multiple different
agencies working together to be able to first move these new
technologies forward--the artificial pancreas being one of
them, particularly in type 1 diabetes--and then also help us
with prioritization of the ability to educate the physician
workforce.
We have 5,000 endocrinologists in the United States. That
is not nearly enough to take care of diabetes. We have to
educate and maintain that workforce at the primary care level
and with all clinicians who are taking care of people with
diabetes. So it is a tremendous opportunity here to utilize
this commission to then focus our efforts at the level of the
clinical physician and associated healthcare providers to be
able to give these patients the best care.
Mrs. Brooks. And is that being done? Because I am a huge
believer in public/private partnerships, especially when it
comes to commissions and government commission work, and so is
involving the private sector clinicians on the commission the
manner in which you are going to educate the agencies?
Dr. Leffert. To some extent I think that is exactly the
reason for our bill. This bill started within our organization
in being interested in trying to make sure that the flow of
dollars coming from the Federal Government was adequately being
utilized to take care of patients. Our organization, the
American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, are the
physicians on the ground who take care of patients on a daily
basis. We have the ability to see, though, not all of the
patients that have diabetes. We focus, to a large extent, our
efforts on complicated patients. And we want to be able to
translate our knowledge and information throughout the system.
And so that allows us to give primary care physicians the
information and education, and we need the Federal Government
to be able to push that through to the whole sector of
physicians who take care of patients.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you.
Dr. Morrison, in your opening statement you talked about
your concern, and there has been a lot of attention on opioids,
and we just passed and had signed into law a very significant
piece of opioid legislation. My involvement with that involved,
actually, a task force focused on the prescribing practices of
physicians. And can you please speak to the impact of that
legislation or what your concern is? And we did add pain
specialists to our task force because we want to ensure that
patients who need opioids get them. But can you talk about that
balance when we have an opioid epidemic happening in the
country?
Dr. Morrison. It is a challenge. And I recognize in many
respects and I am envious I am not in your position about how
to address it. But let me address a couple things.
First of all, there are really two populations of patients
to think about when we talk about pain. First, there are the
people who live with chronic pain and pain is their only
symptom. The much larger population, and the one that we are
focusing on here, is the patient population with serious
illness where pain is just one of a number of distressing
symptoms, so, for most people, pain, breathlessness, fatigue,
anxiety. And it is a constellation. And yet the prescribing
practices that we need to teach are very similar within both
populations. And I often hear about: Well, we are going to
carve out people with cancer or people at the end of life, and
they are not going to be part of the legislation. The reality
is, though, that that is only a small fragment of those with
serious illness, that people are going to live for many years
with pain, distressing symptoms, and they are not going to be
treated by specialists. They are going to be treated by primary
care physicians, cancer doctors.
And so what we need to do is we need an aggressive effort
that is going to focus on teaching appropriate opioid
prescribing. But, as importantly, it still strikes me as almost
unimaginable that the drug we have for pain has not changed
since the 1600s and that we need major investment in
alternatives to a drug that we know has not only significant
side effects but significant complications. So we need to teach
appropriate opioid prescribing, appropriate recognition of the
signs and symptoms of addiction, appropriate training into what
are opioid-responsive pain syndromes and what are not, and we
really need a critical investment in research to give us an
alternative to opioids to treat pain and other symptoms.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady and now
recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr. Engel, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Green, for
convening this morning hearing. I am so pleased to have an
opportunity to discuss H.R. 3119, the Palliative Care and
Hospice Education and Training Act, a bill that I introduced
with Congressman Tom Reed, my colleague from New York. Every
one of us has been touched by serious illness, whether we have
been affected personally or stood by a loved one grappling with
critical illness. We all know how physically and emotionally
trying situations can be for all those involved. Palliative
care aims to relieve these stresses.
And thank you, Dr. Morrison, for everything you have been
saying.
I am from New York City as well. Palliative care
complements efforts to treat or cure illness by focusing on
patients' quality of life. Palliative care is appropriate for
patients with serious illness, starting at the point of
diagnosis through treatment and onward through hospice and the
end of life. It involves capable communication with patients
and their families to coordinate care, determine preference,
and help with medical decisionmaking throughout the care
continuum. Despite the benefits of palliative care, many
Americans aren't aware of the supports available to them. In
addition, there is a shortage of educated providers who can
offer quality palliative care.
So my bill, H.R. 3119, aims to remedy these issues. My bill
would expand opportunities for training in palliative and
hospice care and offer incentives to attract and retain
providers. In addition, through existing programs, my bill
would create a national campaign to educate patients, families,
and health professionals about the benefits of palliative care.
And, finally, H.R. 3191 would expand critically needed research
on palliative care at the National Institutes of Health.
I want to thank Chairman Upton, Chairman Pitts, Ranking
Member Pallone, Ranking Member Green, for considering this
important bill. And I would also like to thank the 200 Members,
colleagues of House, who have cosponsored it, including several
members of this committee. And I hope today's discussion, as it
has been doing, will bring us one step closer to enacting this
legislation and extraordinarily improvingpatients' quality of
life.
So let me, Dr. Morrison, thank you again for being here
today. During your testimony, you noted that palliative care
has the potential to bring about long-term savings for the
healthcare system. Would you explain exactly how improved
access to palliative care and, specifically, this bill would
produce these savings? And have there been studies that
actually conclude that there are real savings?
Dr. Morrison. Before answering your question, Mr. Engel,
thank you, on behalf of the patients and families that I take
care of. I live just south of your district.
Mr. Engel. Move on up.
Dr. Morrison. Thank you for sponsoring this legislation.
The question is, will palliative care provide savings to the
healthcare system? And the answer is, yes, it will. When we
look at the population that palliative care provides for, it is
the 5 percent of Medicare beneficiaries that are accounting for
over 50 percent of spending. And what palliative care does is
it provides the added layer of support that reduces the
misutilization for that population. How does it do that? First
of all, it provides a safe environment at home, so in the
setting after crisis in the middle of the night, on a weekend,
or any time that is not Monday to Friday, 9 to 5, it provides
the added layer of support at home so that somebody doesn't
have to go to the emergency department for care. Our modern-day
hospitals are designed for the 95 percent of people who don't
need palliative care, and it is a mismatch, a tremendous
mismatch for somebody with multiple chronic conditions,
cognitive impairment, frailty, in our modern hospitals. And
what palliative care teams do is they provide that added layer
of support and make the hospitals friendly to people with
chronic illness. They address pain and other symptoms. They sit
with patients and families and identify: What are their values?
What are their goals for care? What are they hoping to
accomplish? And then we match treatments to meet those goals,
and in doing so, we reduce unnecessary and unwanted healthcare
utilization. And conversely to hospice, we do this at the same
time as all other appropriate life-prolonging treatments.
The question about cost and cost savings is an important
one. We now have studies in general hospitals within the
Medicaid population, within the Veterans Administration, all
that demonstrate that when palliative care is provided at the
same time as other appropriate treatments, costs are
dramatically reduced, and importantly, quality of life goes up,
and survival is exactly the same, if not longer.
Mr. Engel. I think the point about survival certainly the
same, if not longer, how do efforts to better patients' quality
of life simultaneously enhance patients' clinical outcomes, you
know, the tie-in between the two?
Dr. Morrison. How does palliative care enhance clinical
outcomes? We don't know for sure, but we have a very strong
hypothesis why. First of all, we know that people living in
pain, people who are depressed, people who are anxious, all
contribute to increased medical complications. Pain is
associated with delirium and confusion. Pain means that you
can't get out of bed and walk, so you lose muscle mass. Pain
prevents you from eating because you just don't feel hungry.
Nausea does the same. So palliative care, by specifically
focusing on distressing symptoms, allows people to get better.
The best example I can give is my 35-year-old who had a
very aggressive lymphoma but because of the palliative care she
received, she made every single one of her chemotherapy
appointments on time because she wasn't too nauseated, too
sick, too distressed, and subsequently, she made every single
radiotherapy on time and completed her treatment, so the
palliative care she provided allowed her to complete her
curative treatments.
Mr. Engel. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, can I please ask unanimous consent to enter
into the record statements in support of H.R. 3119 from the
Alzheimer's Association, the American Academy of Hospice and
Palliative Medicine, the National Hospice and Palliative Care
Organization, and the Oncology Nursing Society, as well as a
letter of support from the 45 organizations on record in
support of the bill?
And I want to thank Dr. Morrison for being the most
eloquent speaker on this that I have heard. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. That concludes
the questions of the members of the committee present. We will
have some followup questions, questions in writing. We will
provide those to you. We ask that you please respond promptly.
I remind members that they have 10 business days to submit
questions for the record, so members should submit their
questions by the close of business on Thursday, September 22.
Very interesting, very important, very informative hearing.
Thank you very much for your testimony.
And, with that, this hearing stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:05 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
