- CONTINUING CONCERNS WITH THE FEDERAL SELECT AGENT PROGRAM: DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE SHIPMENTS OF LIVE ANTHRAX

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CONTINUING CONCERNS WITH THE FEDERAL SELECT AGENT PROGRAM: DEPARTMENT
OF DEFENSE SHIPMENTS OF LIVE ANTHRAX

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 28, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-69

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

97-913 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

_____

Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania
Chairman
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          KATHY CASTOR, Florida
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
BILL FLORES, Texas                   YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma               Massachusetts
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       GENE GREEN, Texas
CHRIS COLLINS, New York              PETER WELCH, Vermont
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
JOE BARTON, Texas                        officio)
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Tim Murphy, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Diana DeGette, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Colorado, opening statement.................................     4
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................    97

Witnesses

D. Christian Hassell, Ph.D., Deputy Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Chemical and Biological Defense, Department of
Defense........................................................     8
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Answers to submitted questions...............................   114
Daniel M. Sosin, M.D., Deputy Director and Chief Medical Officer,
Office of Public Health Preparedness and Response, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Department of Health and Human
Services.......................................................    22
Prepared statement...........................................    24
Answers to submitted questions...............................   124
Gregory E. Demske, Chief Counsel to the Inspector General, Office
of Inspector General, Department of Health and Human Services..    37
Prepared statement...........................................    39
Answers to submitted questions...............................   132
Marcia Crosse, Ph.D., Director, Health Care, Government
Accountability Office..........................................    46
Prepared statement...........................................    48
Answers to submitted questions...............................   139

Submitted Material

Slide, ``Irradiation of  Bacillus anthracis Spores (Ames
Strain),'' submitted by Mr. Murphy.............................    67
Subcommittee memorandum..........................................    98
Article of July 27, 2015, ``CDC lacked key lab incident reporting
policy despite scrutiny, promises,'' by Alison Young, USA
Today, submitted by Mr. Murphy.................................   110

CONTINUING CONCERNS WITH THE FEDERAL SELECT AGENT PROGRAM: DEPARTMENT
OF DEFENSE SHIPMENTS OF LIVE ANTHRAX

----------

TUESDAY, JULY 28, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:04 a.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Tim Murphy
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Murphy, McKinley, Burgess,
Blackburn, Griffith, Bucshon, Flores, Brooks, Mullin, Hudson,
Collins, DeGette, Schakowsky, Castor, Tonko, Kennedy, Green,
Welch, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Noelle Clemente, Press Secretary; Jessica
Donlon, Counsel, Oversight and Investigations; Brittany Havens,
Oversight Associate, Oversight and Investigations; Alan
Slobodin, Deputy Chief Counsel, Oversight; Jessica Wilkerson,
Oversight Associate, Oversight and Investigations; Christine
Brennan, Democratic Press Secretary; Jeff Carroll, Democratic
Staff Director; Ryan Gottschall, Democratic GAO Detailee;
Christopher Knauer, Democratic Oversight Staff Director; Una
Lee, Democratic Chief Oversight Counsel; and Elizabeth Letter,
Democratic Professional Staff Member.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. TIM MURPHY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Murphy. Good morning. Welcome to our hearing once again
dealing with anthrax. The subcommittee today examines
continuing concerns over the Federal Select Agent Program. This
time our focus is on shipments of live anthrax from a
Department of Defense laboratory at the Dugway Proving Grounds
that occurred over a nearly 10-year period.
And as Yogi Berra said, it is like deja vu all over again.
Last year, we held a similar hearing on a CDC anthrax
incident that potentially exposed dozens of CDC researchers to
live anthrax, due to the fact that established safety
procedures were not followed. During the hearing CDC Director
Frieden testified, ``We will take every step possible to
prevent any future incident that could put our laboratory
scientists and the public at risk.'' Yet here we are again
today.
We also examined CDC's mistaken shipment of highly
pathogenic avian flu and the FDA's discovery of vials of
smallpox in an NIH building. Months after our hearing and after
a White House-ordered safety stand-down and a laboratory sweep
of all Federal labs, the CDC revealed there had been a transfer
of Ebola from a CDC Level 4 lab to a CDC Level 2 lab. This is
all deeply troubling. And despite the growing number of red
flags, these incidents keep happening.
Now we have learned that the Dugway Proving Grounds, an
Army lab in Utah, has inadvertently shipped live anthrax to
facilities across the globe. At last count, at least 192 labs
have received shipments of live anthrax. Apparently, Dugway's
process to inactivate anthrax spores was not fully effective.
And the sterility testing used to validate and ensure that the
anthrax spores were inactivated failed to detect the live
anthrax spores. What is most troubling, however, is that Dugway
used this potentially deadly process for years.
As I said at last year's hearing, this is completely
unacceptable. These dangerous safety lapses at our high-
containment labs are threatening our Nation's security and
public health. The committee hopes to learn today what is being
done this time to prevent future safety lapses. And will this
be any different?
Last week, the Department of Defense released a report
following its internal review of the circumstances surrounding
the live shipments of anthrax, and according to its report, the
DoD was unable to definitively determine the root causes for
how and why Dugway shipped live anthrax. Yet, in the report,
the Department acknowledged that all its labs ``routinely
operate outside validated experimental data for kill curves.''
So in other words, it seems that Department of Defense labs
have been irradiating larger numbers of spores than
recommended. And the labs should have known that they could not
guarantee inactivation of all the anthrax spores at those
numbers, especially at the dosage of radiation given.
This revelation begs a lot of questions, beginning with
why? And why for so long? Who was responsible for making the
decisions about which inactivation process to use, including
how many spores and at what levels of radiation? Are these
decisions evaluated and then ever re-evaluated? And what is the
CDC's role in developing and evaluating these processes?
According to a recent and all-too-familiar headline, CDC
has also announced that it will be conducting yet another
comprehensive review of how it regulates safety and security at
bioterror labs. I think it is important to review current
regulations to improve processes and procedures. But past
reviews have not brought about the change necessary to truly
improve safety and standardize processes and procedures.
Maybe--we hope--this review will actually bring about different
results.
As I said a year ago, what we have here is a pattern of
recurring issues, of complacency, and a lax culture of safety.
Last year, CDC Director Frieden stated that this was a wake-up
call. However, it appears that critical Government agencies
have hit the snooze button once again. What is it going to take
to change things this time, and when?
None of us want to be here again a year from now,
discussing another set of safety lapses, and heaven forbid, a
loss of life.
The U.S. Government Accountability Office has conducted
comprehensive work on the oversight of high-containment labs.
In fact, GAO has been issuing recommendations for years calling
for a Government-wide strategy for the requirements for high-
containment labs and the need for national standards for
designing, constructing, commissioning, and maintaining such
labs. Yet, these recommendations have not been implemented,
which is one of the reasons we are here again today discussing
another safety lapse that threatens national security and the
public health.
Today I would like to thank our witnesses for testifying
here. I look forward to hearing your testimony and learning
from you. Please be candid and straightforward with us as we
try to find ways to improve the safety and procedures in our
bioterrorism labs. This subcommittee will not relent in its
oversight of Federal laboratories' compliance with select agent
regulations, and will further explore the possibility of an
independent agency to oversee these labs.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Murphy follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Tim Murphy

The subcommittee today examines continuing concerns over
the Federal Select Agent Program. This time our focus is on
shipments of live anthrax from a Department of Defense
laboratory at the Dugway Proving Grounds that occurred over a
nearly 10-year period.
As Yogi Berra said, it's like deja vu all over again.
Last year, we held a similar hearing-on a CDC anthrax
incident that potentially exposed dozens of CDC researchers to
live anthrax, due to the fact that established safety
procedures were not followed. During the hearing CDC Director
Frieden testified, ``we will take every step possible to
prevent any future incident that could put our laboratory
scientists . . . and the public at risk.'' Yet here we are
again today. We also examined CDC's mistaken shipment of highly
pathogenic avian flu and the FDA's discovery of vials of
smallpox in an NIH building. Months after our hearing, and
after a White House-ordered safety standdown and laboratory
sweep of all Federal labs, the CDC revealed there had been a
transfer of Ebola from a CDC Level 4 lab to a CDC Level 2 lab.
This is deeply troubling.
And despite the growing number of red flags, these
incidents keep happening.
Now, we have learned that the Dugway Proving Grounds, an
Army lab in Utah, has ``inadvertently'' shipped live anthrax to
facilities across the globe. At last count, at least 192 labs
have received shipments of live anthrax. Apparently, Dugway's
process to inactivate anthrax spores was not fully effective.
And the sterility testing-used to validate and ensure that the
anthrax spores were inactivated-failed to detect the live
anthrax spores. What's most troubling, however, is that Dugway
used this potentially deadly process for years.
As I said at last year's hearing, this is completely
unacceptable. These dangerous safety lapses at our high-
containment labs are threatening our Nation's security and
public health. The committee hopes to learn today what is being
done this time to prevent future safety lapses. Will this time
be different? Last week, the Department of Defense released a
report following its internal review of the circumstances
surrounding the live shipments of anthrax. According to its
report, the DoD was unable to definitively determine the root
cause for how and why Dugway shipped live anthrax. Yet, in the
report, the Department acknowledged that all its labs
``routinely operate outside validated experimental data for
kill curves.'' So in other words, it seems that Defense
Department labs have been irradiating larger numbers of spores
than recommended. And the labs should have known that they
could not guarantee inactivation of all the anthrax spores at
those numbers, especially at the dosage of radiation given.
This revelation begs a lot of questions, beginning with
why? And why for so long? Who is responsible for making the
decisions about which inactivation process to use, including
how many spores and at what levels of radiation? Are these
decisions evaluated, and then, ever re-evaluated? And what is
CDC's role in developing and evaluating these processes?
According to a recent and all-too familiar headline, CDC
has also announced that it will be conducting yet another
comprehensive review of how it regulates safety and security at
bioterror labs. I think it is important to review current
regulations to improve processes and procedures. But past
reviews have not brought about the change necessary to truly
improve safety and standardize processes and procedures. Maybe
this review will actually bring about different results.
As I said a year ago, what we have here is a pattern of
recurring issues, of complacency, and a lax culture of safety.
Last year, CDC Director Frieden stated that this was a ``wake-
up'' call. However, it appears that critical Government
agencies have hit the snooze button. What is going to change
this time? And when? None of us want to be here again a year
from now, discussing another set of safety lapses, that may
have actually caused loss of life.
The U.S Government Accountability Office has conducted
comprehensive work on the oversight of high-containment labs.
In fact, GAO has been issuing recommendations for years calling
for a Government-wide strategy for the requirements for high-
containment labs and the need for national standards for
designing, constructing, commissioning, and maintaining such
labs. Yet, these recommendations have not been implemented,
which is one of the reasons we are here again today discussing
another safety lapse that threatens national security and the
public health.
I would like to thank the witnesses for testifying here
today, and I look forward to hearing your testimony about what
needs to be done to improve the safety, and procedures in our
bioterrorism labs. This subcommittee will not relent in its
oversight of Federal laboratories' compliance with select agent
regulations and will further explore the possibility of an
independent agency to oversee these labs.

Mr. Murphy. I now recognize the ranking member, Ms. DeGette
of Colorado, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DIANA DEGETTE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Ms. DeGette. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, you say
you don't want to be back here in a year like we were last
year, but we have been here in 2007, 2009, 2014, and now 2015.
So might as well mark your calendar now. And part of that is
because it is really important that the Federal Government work
on identifying and containing public health risks. But the work
itself inherently contains risk. And that is why we do have to
continue our oversight.
At last year's hearing on the anthrax transfer I talked
about the high-containment lab that we have in Fort Collins at
which some years ago we identified terrible lapses, and I was
able to work with my former Republican colleague, Bob Schaffer,
from that district to get a new lab built. I am proud of that
work, but we have to continue to be able to assure our
constituents that similar facilities across the country provide
no risk to workers or to the broader community.
Now Mr. Chairman, as you said, frankly the details of the
Dugway incident do not inspire confidence. We are talking about
a long-term series of inadvertent shipments of live anthrax
from the Dugway Proving Ground in Utah which is supposedly one
of the most sophisticated facilities in the world. This
incident only came to light in May because a private company
contacted CDC after discovering what it thought was inactivated
anthrax was actually live anthrax.
Since then we have learned that 86 laboratories in 20
States and the District of Columbia and seven foreign countries
received live anthrax spores from Dugway over the last 12
years. Those labs then transferred the live spores to an
additional 106 labs. So we are talking about almost 200 labs in
all 50 States accidentally receiving live anthrax for over a
decade. Miraculously, nobody seems to have fallen ill as a
result of this series of incidents. Still, like you, Mr.
Chairman, I am concerned that this activity was going on for so
long before one lab finally raised questions that spurred the
Department to action.
I am eager to hear answers from DoD about how this was
allowed to happen in the first place and what they are doing to
ensure it never happens again.
I understand that the Department's review of the Dugway
incident released last week found there is insufficient
scientific literature to develop effective protocols for the
inactivation of anthrax spores. The Dugway lab was therefore
relying on procedures that did not permanently or completely
sterilize the anthrax spores.
Now, this is not my area of expertise, but it seems
troubling on its face. How have we conducted research on this
dangerous pathogen for the past decade without thoroughly
understanding how to inactivate it? We need to conduct a
serious examination of whether we use similarly questionable
protocols for other select agents, and if so, I think we can
all agree that we should immediately cease those operations to
ensure we are not putting public health at risk.
For now, appropriately, DoD has issued a moratorium on
shipping inactivated anthrax from its labs. This seems like an
important first step, but I do want to know how that affects
the research the lab was doing. Furthermore, I want
clarification, as how do we have 200 separate labs all across
the country working with anthrax? Do we need to have 200 labs
working with anthrax or is it possible that we could limit the
number of labs and therefore limit the risk while still being
able to do this important research?
I also want to hear today about whether the breakdowns at
Dugway are indicative of broader problems at this site or even
across the high-containment lab system. The labs that handle
these pathogens must be held to the highest standards. Yet, the
incidents that we have seen recently raise questions about
whether we can trust high-containment labs to safely handle
select agents.
Now in the last year, we have seen an anthrax exposure
incident at CDC--this is what you said--improper shipments of
avian flu, and even a potential Ebola exposure at a CDC lab. I
feel really lucky that we haven't had anybody infected, but it
could happen and I think we have just been going on borrowed
time here.
So I hope all of you have answers today about what we are
really doing to make serious changes to the system and include
recommendations that GAO has made.
I also want to hear from our witnesses about the role
Congress should play in making sure the program operates
safely. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. Does anybody else on this side wish
to make any opening statement or comments? If not, I would
ask--and I don't know if you have seen this yet, Ms. DeGette
and Mr. Pallone. An article appeared in last night's USA Today.
I would like to have you look at it and see if you would have
unanimous consent to submit that to the record. With no
objection? This is titled, ``CDC lacked key lab incident
reporting policy despite scrutiny, promises,'' and I think it
is going to be relevant to today's hearing.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Murphy. I now recognize Mr. Pallone for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I hope today we can
get to the bottom of what happened at Dugway Proving Ground
that resulted in live anthrax being shipped to 192 labs in all
50 States and at least seven foreign countries.
Deputy Defense Secretary Robert Work described these lapses
as a ``massive institutional failure.'' I hope Dr. Hassell can
explain to us today how these failures could possibly have
occurred as well as what DoD is doing to strengthen and
standardize safety protocols across all DoD labs as we move
forward.
I am deeply relieved that no one has fallen ill as a result
of these lapses, and I am hopeful that this will remain the
case as DoD and CDC continue to track all the labs that receive
these samples and the personnel that handle them. But this
incident also raises broader questions about the safety of
high-containment laboratories across the country.
Every day hundreds of labs in the Federal Government as
well as academic institutions and private companies handle
dangerous pathogens and toxins under the Federal Select Agent
Program. Make no mistake, these labs perform important work.
High-containment labs play a critical role in biodefense by
conducting research to improve our defenses against biological
attacks and strengthening our public health response
capabilities.
Laboratories that handle select agents are required to
abide by a set of regulations commensurate with the risk that
these agents pose. They are required to restrict access to
select agents to individuals who have undergone a security risk
assessment by the FBI and implements physical security
safeguards, lab safety measure, and incident response plans.
They must also ensure that laboratory workers are properly
trained on biosafety and security measures.
Labs that participate in the program are also subject to
registration and inspections by the CDC's Division of Select
Agents and Toxins. There are civil penalties associated with
lapses in safety protocols. Unauthorized possession or misuse
of select agents is subject to severe criminal penalties.
However, incidents in the past year involving anthrax, Ebola,
and highly pathogenic avian flu raise questions about whether
we need to strengthen our Federal oversight of labs that are
working with dangerous pathogens. Is the current regulatory
framework sufficient? Do the enforcement agencies have
sufficient resources to ensure that oversight is robust? What
is CDC doing to improve the Federal Select Agent program and
prevent similar situations from occurring in the future?
I understand that CDC and DoD have conducted reviews of
these incidents and have promised several more. I look forward
to hearing about the findings and recommendations from those
reviews and how they can be used to enhance safety and security
at all of our Nation's high-containment laboratories. I also
want to note that GAO has an important body of work that can
inform this discussion. I look forward to hearing from GAO
about its recommendations to strengthen safety measures across
high-containment labs.
I am glad that nobody appears to have suffered any injuries
because of this latest incident out of Dugway. The next time,
however, the mishap may be from something more dangerous than
liquid anthrax such as a highly infectious pathogen. So I hope
we can all learn from this latest incident and will take
seriously the important recommendations made by recent and
ongoing investigations by GAO and others to make this program
safer. Obviously we look forward to a productive discussion
today on how we can improve oversight and what this committee
can do to facilitate that process and again thank our chairman
and our ranking member as we proceed. I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for convening this important
hearing. I hope today we can get to the bottom of what happened
at Dugway Proving Ground that resulted in live anthrax being
shipped to 192 labs in all 50 States and at least seven foreign
countries.
Deputy Defense Secretary Robert Work described these lapses
as a quote ``massive institutional failure.'' I hope Dr.
Hassell can explain to us today how these failures could
possibly have occurred, as well as what DoD is doing to
strengthen and standardize safety protocols across all DoD labs
moving forward.
I am deeply relieved that no one has fallen ill as a result
of these lapses, and I am hopeful that this will remain the
case as DoD and CDC continue to track all of the labs that
received these samples and the personnel that handled them. But
this incident also raises broader questions about the safety of
high-containment laboratories across the country.
Every day, hundreds of laboratories in the Federal
Government, as well as academic institutions and private
companies, handle dangerous pathogens and toxins under the
Federal Select Agent program.
Make no mistake, these laboratories perform important work.
High-containment laboratories play a critical role in
biodefense, by conducting research to improve our defenses
against biological attacks and strengthening our public health
response capabilities.
Laboratories that handle select agents are required to
abide by a set of regulations commensurate with the risk that
these agents pose. They are required to restrict access to
select agents to individuals who have undergone a security risk
assessment by the FBI, and implement physical security
safeguards, lab safety measures, and incident response plans.
They must also ensure that laboratory workers are properly
trained on biosafety and security measures.
Labs that participate in the program are also subject to
registration and inspections by the CDC's Division of Select
Agents and Toxins. There are civil penalties associated with
lapses in safety protocols. Unauthorized possession or misuse
of select agents is subject to severe criminal penalties.
However, incidents in the past year involving anthrax,
Ebola, and highly pathogenic avian flu raise questions about
whether we need to strengthen our Federal oversight of labs
that are working with dangerous pathogens. Is the current
regulatory framework sufficient? Do the enforcement agencies
have sufficient resources to ensure that oversight is robust?
What is CDC doing to improve the Federal Select Agent Program
and prevent similar situations from occurring in the future?
I understand CDC and DoD have conducted reviews of these
incidents and have promised several more. I look forward to
hearing about the findings and recommendations from those
reviews and how they can be used to enhance safety and security
at all of our Nation's high-containment laboratories.
I also want to note that GAO has an important body of work
that can inform this discussion. I look forward to hearing from
GAO about its recommendations to strengthen safety measures
across high-containment laboratories.
I am glad nobody appears to have suffered any injuries
because of this latest incident out of Dugway. Next time,
however, the mishap may be from something more dangerous than
liquid anthrax-such as a highly infectious pathogen. So, I hope
we can all learn from this latest incident and will take
seriously the important recommendations made by recent and
ongoing investigations by GAO and others to make this program
safer.
I look forward to a productive discussion today on how we
can improve oversight of these labs, and what this committee
can do to facilitate this process.
Thank you to all of our witnesses for your testimony.

Mr. Murphy. The gentleman yields back, and if no further
comments from here, then we are going to go to our witnesses.
So as you are aware, when the committee is holding an
investigative hearing, when doing so, it has had the practice
of taking testimony under oath. Do any of our witnesses today
have any objections to testifying under oath? Seeing no
objections, the Chair then advises you that under the rules of
the House and the rules of the committee, you are entitled to
be advised by counsel. Do any of you desire to be advised by
counsel today? No. No one is asking for that.
In that case, would you please rise, raise your right hand,
and I will swear you in?
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Murphy. All of our witnesses have answered in the
affirmative, and so now you are under oath and subject to the
penalties set forth in Title 18, Section 1001, of the United
States Code.
You may now each give a 5-minute summary of your written
statement. Please pay attention to the lights there, and we
will start with you, Dr. Hassell, 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF D. CHRISTIAN HASSELL,PH.D., DEPUTY ASSISTANT
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL DEFENSE,
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE; DANIEL M. SOSIN, M.D., DEPUTY DIRECTOR
AND CHIEF MEDICAL OFFICER, OFFICE OF PUBLIC HEALTH PREPAREDNESS
AND RESPONSE, CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION,
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES; GREGORY E. DEMSKE,
CHIEF COUNSEL TO THE INSPECTOR GENERAL, OFFICE OF INSPECTOR
GENERAL, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES; AND MARCIA
CROSSE, PH.D., DIRECTOR, HEALTH CARE, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY
OFFICE

STATEMENT OF D. CHRISTIAN HASSELL

Dr. Hassell. Chairman Murphy, Ranking Member DeGette, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, I appreciate the
opportunity to brief you today on the Department of Defense's
inadvertent shipments of samples containing live Bacillus
anthracis spores or anthrax. My name is David Hassell. I am the
Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Chemical and
Biological Defense.
The Use of inactivated or dead anthrax is an important
element of longstanding DoD programs to develop ways to protect
warfighters and the public from known biological threats, doing
this with the development and testing of detection systems,
protection equipment, diagnostics, and decontamination
capabilities.
We first learned of the incidents under consideration today
on May 22 of 2015 when the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention was alerted by a private company regarding the
growth of live anthrax in a sample that was inactivated by a
laboratory at the Army's Dugway Proving Ground in Utah. The CDC
immediately began an investigation, working with DoD
laboratories, State officials, and the FBI.
By May 25, all known laboratories that received inactivated
anthrax samples from that same batch had been notified and
instructed to stop working with the samples. Also on May 25th
the four DoD laboratories that produce inactivated anthrax were
directed to stop producing, shipping, and working with any
inactivated anthrax other than for purposes related to this
current matter.
Subsequent tests by Dugway identified other batches of
inactivated anthrax as containing live spores, and on June 2nd
the Department of Defense notified all known recipients of
inactivated anthrax from Dugway to stop working with the
material, whether it was confirmed to contain live anthrax or
not.
There's no known or suspected cases of anthrax infection
among workers at any of the laboratories that produced or
received inactivated anthrax, and there is no known risk to the
general health and very little risk to laboratory workers
themselves. However, as a precaution, 31 U.S. citizens, 8 non-
DoD, 23 DoD, were placed on postexposure prophylaxis treatment,
and this was completed yesterday.
Returning to the subject of the four DoD Laboratories that
produce inactivated anthrax, on May 29th the Deputy Secretary
directed that those four DoD laboratories test all previously
inactivated anthrax that was in their inventory to identify the
presence of any live spores. That testing is now complete, and
the results are as follows: Since 2003, the four DoD
laboratories irradiated a total of 149 batches of live anthrax
spores. Of the 96 samples that were available to test, 17
tested positive for the presence of live anthrax. All of these
originated from Dugway.
We now know that over the past 12 years, 86 laboratories in
20 States, DC, and seven foreign countries received directly
from Dugway inactivated samples that contained live spores. In
addition, the CDC has informed us that an additional 106 labs
received secondary transfers from some of the original 86
direct recipient labs. This brings the total to 192 labs in all
50 States, DC, and the three Territories of Guam, Puerto Rico,
the U.S. Virgin Islands.
A recently completed Comprehensive Review of the root
causes of the incident resulted in several key findings
including that the primary systemic issue is the lack of
specific validated standards to guide the development of
protocols, processes, and quality assurance measures, and the
resulting recommendations are grouped into three broad
categories being enhance quality control programs, establish
testing protocols that are based on relevant scientific data,
and improve program management.
The Department is committed to ensuring that this doesn't
occur again and will implement the recommendations that were in
the report and the further directives outlined by Deputy
Secretary Work on 23rd of July. In the interim, the
aforementioned moratorium will continue. Our top priority is
the safety of all involved, and we remain committed to complete
transparency of information as we go forward. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today, and I'll welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Hassell follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Dr. Hassell. Dr. Sosin, before you
speak, I just want to note that we haven't really had the
chance to review a lot of your testimony because it wasn't in
until 9:00 last night, and the committee rules, we ask for 48
hours. So we really didn't have time to review that. So when we
get the testimony at the last minute, it is difficult for us to
review it. I don't want to think that CDC is trying to
frustrate our purposes here, but I do want to indicate to you
and if you could pass the word onto CDC department that for
future testimony, we want that 48-hour limit adhered to.
So at this point, we would like to hear from you for 5
minutes. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF DANIEL M. SOSIN

Dr. Sosin. Thank you. Chairman Murphy, Ranking Member
DeGette, distinguished members of the subcommittee, I want to
thank you for this opportunity to testify before you today. I
would like to share with you what CDC has done to respond to
the inadvertent release of live Bacillus anthracis spores, or
anthrax, from Dugway Proving Ground and to provide perspective
on the Select Agent Program that CDC supports.
CDC works 24/7 to save lives and protect people. We
activated our emergency operation center in face of uncertainty
about the scope and severity of this release. We understand how
concerning this incident has been, and our primary focus
continues to be making certain people are safe and that anthrax
materials are secured and ultimately disposed of.
This incident raises serious and challenging issues. It is
important to note, however, that scientific research in
laboratories is a vital component of our Nation's defense
against naturally occurring diseases and bioterrorism. This
research is complex and sometimes dangerous. While it is not
possible to eliminate all risk, those of us working in this
field across the country and around the world must do all we
can to minimize risk.
Here's what we know about today about the Dugway incident.
There have been no suspected or confirmed cases of anthrax
infection associated with these samples. Persons that CDC has
assessed is at some risk and who have accepted treatment will
have completed antibiotic and vaccine prophylaxis yesterday,
and no complications have been reported.
The facilities that received these samples have
appropriately secured or destroyed them, and those needing
decontamination have completed the procedures or are well under
way.
Highlighting this positive news is not meant to downplay
the seriousness of the situation. On multiple occasions over
more than a decade the production methods at Dugway failed to
inactive anthrax spores. The failure of inactivation was
evident because growth was being detected on multiple
production runs. These runs were routinely sent back for
additional irradiation. This should have been seen for what it
was, an indication that the margin of safety with the method
was not sufficient. Additionally, sterility testing at Dugway
to confirm the inactivation was successful at killing the
organism failed to detect live spores.
We have looked and found no evidence of a similar problem
at other facilities that inactivate anthrax spores. The
existing rules and regulations on anthrax spore inactivation
are under review.
Here's what we don't know. The Federal Select Agent Program
relies primarily on sterility testing to assure that a select
agent can no longer grow. We remain unsure whether there was a
problem with the execution of this testing at Dugway or if the
biology of spores was not sufficiently understood to make the
procedure reliable.
And here's what we are doing moving forward. We are
maintaining a moratorium on the use and transfer of inactivated
anthrax spores until we have an acceptable and credible
approach to increasing safety and security. And we are
developing a research agenda on spore biology to answer
questions about inactivation and sterility, and we will help to
conduct some of that research.
At Dr. Frieden's direction, we are initiating a review of
the CDC Federal Select Agent Program. The review will
complement ongoing work to improve laboratory safety at CDC
this past year. The time is right with new leadership over the
CDC Federal Select Agent Program for a thorough review of our
program to ensure it's meeting its mandate, especially in light
of recent lab incidents.
The world benefits from discoveries made working with
dangerous pathogens, and the scientists who work with these
organisms also have a commitment to protecting public health
and safety. We must achieve a balance to protect workers and
the communities around them while encouraging and supporting
scientific advancement. But safety comes first.
One characteristic of CDC's stewardship of the Federal
Select Agent Program is a commitment to improvement. The
regulations have been refined with advice from many including
numerous Federal advisory and review bodies and the public.
This input has led to revisions to the select agent regulations
concerning personnel reliability, incident reporting,
coordination of inspections with Federal partners, and tracking
shipments of select agents.
Although much work has been done to enhance the
effectiveness of CDC's regulatory oversight of select agents
and toxins, more work remains to be done. Where improvements
can be made to better the program, we will make them. Whether
there is disagreement on the best path forward, we will
contribute our scientific and programmatic expertise to the
debate. We will work diligently and thoughtfully with anyone
sharing our commitment to protect Americans from biological
threats. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sosin follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Murphy. Thank you. Dr. Demske, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF GREGORY E. DEMSKE

Mr. Demske. Good morning, Chairman Murphy, Ranking Member
DeGette, members of the subcommittee, I'm Greg Demske, Chief
Counsel to the Inspector General at the Department of Health
and Human Services. I appreciate the opportunity to appear
before you today to discuss the Federal Select Agent Program.
While CDC administers the Select Agent Program with the
Department of Agriculture, OIG is authorized to impose civil
money penalties for violations of the regulations. We also
audit, evaluate, and offer suggestions for program improvement.
CDC reviews all potential select agent violations and
immediately refers urgent or criminal matters to the FBI. In
other matters, CDC further investigates and determines whether
to exercise its authority to suspend or revoke registration or
require remedial actions. If CDC concludes a civil violation
may have occurred, it refers the case for OIG for potential
enforcement.
OIG carefully evaluates every referral and decides whether
to pursue the case and what penalty to seek based on the facts
and circumstances of the particular case. In our experience,
violations of the regulations pose varying risks to public
health and safety. To date, OIG has imposed 20 CMPs totaling
$2.4 million for select agent violations. Two of our cases have
involved Dugway.
In April 2007, Dugway shipped anthrax to a research
facility. The shipment included a certification that the
anthrax was non-viable. The research facility tested the
material and found the presence of a low concentration of
viable anthrax. We found that Dugway ignored the results of its
postinactivation viability test which showed viable anthrax was
present. Later, in November 2010, a Government laboratory
received a shipment from Dugway that included a vial of
Botulinum neurotoxin. Small amounts of this select agent are
exempt from the regulations. The packing slip indicated that
the vial contained an exempt amount, but in fact, the shipment
included a regulated amount. Dugway then self-reported two
other unauthorized shipments of this select agent.
As a Federal entity, Dugway presents an enforcement
challenge for OIG. Any CMP on a Federal entity would simply
shift money within the Government at a net cost to taxpayers
and may not promote better compliance. Consistent with our
approach to date with other Federal entities, OIG issued Notice
of Violation letters to Dugway for both cases. Both letters
stated that OIG had determined Dugway had violated the select
agent regulations and it should examine its current policies
and practices, take corrective action, and monitor its
safeguards on an ongoing basis. Yesterday OIG received another
referral from CDC on Dugway. We are reviewing the matter now.
Over the years OIG has audited Government and private
entities for select agent compliance. For example, OIG audited
six Federal laboratories and provided audit results to the
heads of the relevant Federal agencies, putting them on notice
of deficiencies. OIG is expanding our audits and evaluations of
select agent management. We will focus on CDC's oversight of
the Select Agent Program and on the operation of HHS
laboratories that handle select agents.
Through our enforcement work, OIG has also identified
several opportunities to improve program compliance, oversight,
and enforcement. As reflected in my written testimony, these
opportunities focus on enhanced documentation requirements and
increased authority for CDC inspectors. We stand ready to work
with CDC and others in HHS to continue to improve the Select
Agent Program and use our enforcement tools to promote
compliance with these regulations that protect the health and
safety of the American people.
Thank you again for inviting me to speak. I'd be happy to
answer questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Demske follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Demske. Dr. Crosse, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARCIA CROSSE

Dr. Crosse. Chairman Murphy, Ranking Member DeGette, and
members of the subcommittee, I'm pleased to be here today to
discuss GAO's work on high-containment laboratories. The
biosafety and biosecurity practices in these laboratories are
intended to reduce the exposure to biological agents and
prevent their loss, theft, or misuse.
The recent shipments of live anthrax bacteria from DoD to
U.S. and international laboratories, similar to last year's
potential exposures of CDC personnel to live anthrax bacteria,
shows multiple breakdowns in compliance with established
policies and inadequate oversight of Federal high-containment
laboratories. This is another example in an ongoing series of
safety lapses which continue to occur, often with the same root
cause as for prior incidents.
We've been lucky so far. Researchers in these labs work
with high-risk biological agents that may result in serious or
lethal infections and, in some instances, have the potential to
be used in biological weapons. These labs do important work
with pathogens to develop vaccines and countermeasures and to
understand emerging infectious diseases. However, the pathogens
handled by these laboratories also have the potential for high-
consequence accidents. If the types of mistakes we've seen were
to occur with a particularly transmissible pathogen like
certain strains of influenza, not only would the laboratory
workers or their close contacts be at risk but an epidemic
could be triggered with consequences far beyond what we've seen
to date.
GAO is currently conducting work for this committee to
examine these issues, and the preliminary findings from our
work show that DoD and CDC have begun to address weaknesses in
the management of their high-containment laboratories but have
not yet fully implemented these activities. The steps these
agencies are taking are intended to address fundamental flaws
in the oversight structure, reporting, and tracking of
biosafety and biosecurity incidents after they have occurred.
For example, DoD officials said that the Dugway incident is the
first incident that DoD has tracked at the senior department
level. Since 2012 DoD has been revising its policies and
procedures including reporting requirements and expects to
finalize these changes by this fall. But these changes will
only cover a subset of DoD's high-containment laboratories.
Our ongoing work will also examine if DoD is implementing
steps intended to improve the culture of safety at its
laboratories so that future events are reduced or prevented.
Similarly, CDC began taking steps to address weaknesses
identified in assessments of the June 2014 anthrax incident and
other safety incidents in its own laboratories, but the agency
has not yet completed implementing recommendations intended to
improve its laboratory oversight. For example, an internal work
group recommended that CDC develop agency-wide policies to
provide clear and consistent requirements for biosafety for all
agency laboratories. In response, CDC developed a Specimen
Transport Policy but has not developed other agency-wide
policies, such as requirements for laboratory documentation and
emergency protocols.
As I stated at the outset, the incidents you are examining
today are part of a long series of safety lapses. Since 2007,
GAO has reported on these issues and has made multiple
recommendations to improve Federal oversight of high-
containment laboratories. The Federal departments agreed with
our recommendations and have conducted some activities to
respond but have not implemented our key recommendation to
establish a single Federal entity with responsibility for
oversight of all high-containment laboratories.
We recommended the establishment of a single Federal entity
to, one, conduct Government-wide strategic planning for
requirements for high-containment laboratories, including
assessments of their risks; and two, develop national standards
for designing, constructing, commissioning, operating, and
maintaining such laboratories.
We continue to believe that such an entity or some other
mechanism to ensure higher-level oversight is needed in the
face of the continuing proliferation of high-containment
laboratories and the ongoing failures by agencies to fix their
problems on their own.
In closing, the lapses we've seen are indicative of
failures in a system that is supposed to have multiple levels
of control, including cross-checks, inspections, training,
procedures, and validated protocols that should prevent such
accidents from occurring and certainly should prevent such
incidents from recurring.
Mr. Chairman, this completes my remarks. I'd be happy to
answer questions you or other members of the subcommittee may
have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Crosse follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Doctor. I will now recognize myself
for 5 minutes of questioning of the witnesses. Dr. Sosin, at
the end of your testimony you said we will work diligently and
thoughtfully with all of our Federal partners and anyone
sharing our commitment to protect Americans from biological
threats. Please let the CDC know, I don't believe them anymore.
The USA Today article I referenced earlier said that the
CDC refused to actually produce a policy to USA Today regarding
the lab incident reports in this newly required lab safety
office. When was that report actually written? Do you have any
idea?
Dr. Sosin. Thank you, Chairman. I was asked to appear here
today, and I apologize for the lateness of testimony. I
apologize that----
Mr. Murphy. But do you know anything about this report that
they are referring to in USA Today?
Dr. Sosin. I know that an article came out last night. I
did not know about that report and----
Mr. Murphy. OK.
Dr. Sosin [continuing]. And if----
Mr. Murphy. Well, could you----
Dr. Sosin. We would be happy to assure that after this
hearing we provide you answers to----
Mr. Murphy. Well, this committee would like that report. I
would like to know when it was written. If we could have that,
that would be valuable. Thank you.
Dr. Hassell, I am trying to dumb this down. Now, if I put a
cup of coffee in a microwave oven and turn it on, it gets hot
in a certain amount of time. If I put a dozen cups of coffee in
that same microwave, same amount of time, they are not going to
all be heated, right? OK. Because we know that about radiation
and mass, some physics principles.
[Slide follows.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

When I look here, and I believe this is from a report here,
and it is on the graph there as well, is that--on the screen--
that on the very upper left dot where it says the Dugway
irradiation levels here, it is saying it is operating way out
of the realm of the acceptable processes here. And the report
states that the DoD routinely operates outside of validated
experimental data for kill curves.
So based upon that finding, it sounds like validated
experimental data does exist and all the DoD labs whose mission
involved inactivation of anthrax were operating outside of it.
Is that correct?
Dr. Hassell. Yes, sir.
Mr. Murphy. So is there--who is responsible for setting the
number of spores and dosage of radiation? And are the protocols
reevaluated routinely to determine that?
Dr. Hassell. That is one of the next steps we are looking
into. This original review was mainly focused on compliance to
make sure that people were following the protocols they had and
not shown there was the willful disregard for the protocols or
nefarious intent.
Mr. Murphy. You said it was willful?
Dr. Hassell. It was not willful, nor was it nefarious. But
what the graph shows, though, is they were working outside of
that gray box that sort of shows experimental parameters that
should have been the foundation for this work.
The next step in this is we are looking at the very
accountability issue. How was that decision made to move
outside of that realm? And as you noted, it wasn't just Dugway.
All the labs were outside of that area.
Mr. Murphy. Because somebody did make the decision. That is
something that is important. We need to know because we like to
think that there is a scientific rule set up that they are
following and that all the labs are following that, too. So let
me ask Dr. Hassell and Dr. Sosin: In response to these most
recent shipments of live anthrax, have either of your agencies
made any personnel changes or refer to anyone for their civil
penalties or criminal prosecutions for these actions? Have
either one of your agencies done that?
Dr. Hassell. For DoD, that is that second part of the
investigation that will kick off now looking at the
accountability issue to determine that. And if I may, one of
the issues is not only the individual that made that decision,
if that was an individual that made that decision, but what was
the process? Was there an overall systemic process that led
people to perhaps gradually get outside of that experimental
box? We are looking at both of those, but the accountability is
taken very seriously by all seniors in the Department.
Mr. Murphy. Dr. Sosin?
Dr. Sosin. I would also like to acknowledge that we
understand your concern and take it seriously. No disciplinary
actions have been taken at CDC with respect to the DoD sample
incident. In fact, CDC staff responded in a remarkable way to
assure that all these samples were secured and destroyed and
that the people that might have been exposed were protected.
Regarding the Select Agent Program, we continue to consider
and take advice and input on how to change the nature of the
program----
Mr. Murphy. Do you work with the DoD? I mean, does the CDC
work with other labs in terms of setting and reviewing
standards on any regular basis or at all?
Dr. Sosin. CDC works with DoD in a variety of ways.
Mr. Murphy. With regard to this? So I am trying to find
out--
Dr. Sosin. Not with respect to setting standards----
Mr. Murphy. OK.
Dr. Sosin [continuing]. On anthrax.
Mr. Murphy. And the reason is this: When we had our
hearings for General Motors and someone made the decision of
either making a spring this big or this big, and it cost a
number of lives. And they refer to that as the GM shrug. People
said, ``Eh. Well, some engineer decided, on we go.'' And it is
that area when we know when people adhere to scientific
standards, I have the highest respect for them. When things
begin to slip out--and I would agree, we are not looking at
something nefarious or deliberate here, but to let anything
slip by over time, that is the problem. And as Mr. Pallone
pointed out, luckily no one has died yet from this, but we
really have dodged the bullet for a long time.
But I see I am out of time. I recognize Ms. DeGette for 5
minutes.
Ms. DeGette. Now Dr. Crosse, you talked in your testimony
about how people could be infected and even some kind of
epidemic could be started if you got a particularly virulent
agent that got released, correct?
Dr. Crosse. Correct.
Ms. DeGette. In addition, we have got national security
implications relating to the mishandling of these agents. Is
that also correct?
Dr. Crosse. That is also a concern.
Ms. DeGette. And that is if these agents, these active
agents got into the wrong hands, right?
Dr. Crosse. That is right.
Ms. DeGette. Now, you had a lot of recommendations that
have not been fully implemented yet, is that right?
Dr. Crosse. Yes, although--I mean, many of the
recommendations they have taken at least some actions. The
primary one where there has been no movement is to have some
type of more centralized oversight.
Ms. DeGette. So to have a single Federal entity that could
set the standards for all of the agencies, is that right?
Dr. Crosse. That is right.
Ms. DeGette. Now Dr. Hassell, what is your agency's opinion
about that recommendation of a single Federal entity?
Dr. Hassell. It makes sense in many ways. I will say that
within the Department itself, we are going to do that
internally because it is so----
Ms. DeGette. OK. So if it makes sense in many ways, why
haven't we done that? Why haven't you guys implemented that in
cooperation with your fellow agencies?
Dr. Hassell. Like I said, we are going to do that
internally. We are in discussions now on these issues.
Ms. DeGette. But you don't disagree with the idea?
Dr. Hassell. No, ma'am.
Ms. DeGette. And what about you, Dr. Sosin? What is your
agency's view of this?
Dr. Sosin. CDC works with APHIS at USDA as if we are one
program. We work very closely. We do joint inspections on
overlap agents. Whenever a change is proposed or considered in
one program, it is discussed with the other program.
Ms. DeGette. Well, that is nice, but what about DoD?
Dr. Sosin. So the oversight function of the lab--I am
trying to understand your question. I believe----
Ms. DeGette. Well, OK.
Dr. Sosin [continuing]. It is about oversight function,
correct?
Ms. DeGette. What Dr. Crosse's agency is recommending is
one single oversight agency that would set forth the protocols
for the dispensing of these agents. And so I am asking each of
your agencies if you would object to that kind of--it would
make sense to me to get one protocol no matter which lab is
dispensing it or whatever. What is your view on that?
Dr. Sosin. Thank you. My view is that it is a complex
decision, that there are constraints to having one standard for
all procedures. Anthrax for example----
Ms. DeGette. What constraints would those be?
Dr. Sosin. For example, with anthrax, there are many
different uses of the products, DNA preps for developing
vaccines----
Ms. DeGette. But in any case if you are sending it around,
you don't want it to be live.
Dr. Sosin. That is absolutely----
Ms. DeGette. That is not something that is--
Dr. Sosin. No question.
Ms. DeGette [continuing]. Subject to debate. So if you can
have one agency that could come up with the protocols about
oversight on how you are going to make that not be live and how
you are going to dispense it, you wouldn't object to that,
would you?
Dr. Sosin. We wouldn't object, and we believe that the
Select Agent Program, the Federal Select Agent Program, would
be the appropriate body to do that. It will take----
Ms. DeGette. OK. Could that have oversight over the DoD,
too?
Dr. Sosin. Absolutely.
Ms. DeGette. So do you think that you might cooperate to
make that happen?
Dr. Sosin. We will cooperate in any way to----
Ms. DeGette. OK. Let us know what we can do to help you
because it seems to me that is an excellent recommendation, OK?
And you are nodding, Dr. Hassell. Can you work with Dr. Sosin
on that and his other colleagues?
Dr. Hassell. Yes, ma'am, and that was----
Ms. DeGette. Thank you.
Dr. Hassell [continuing]. Stated in the statement. We
definitely are working together.
Ms. DeGette. OK. Now here is something else, having been on
this committee for a long time. I have noticed this at all the
Federal labs, not just the ones dealing with anthrax and other
select agents but also our nuclear labs have the same problem
of a culture of safety, and we have really struggled in this
committee to get people to understand how important it is to
have a culture of safety. So Dr. Hassell, can you think of
anything we can do to systematize some kind of culture of
safety?
Dr. Hassell. That is a question I have myself, ma'am. I
have spent 10 years at the DuPont Company, which goes back 200
years making gunpowder for Thomas Jefferson. And that safety
culture is there. So one of the things I plan to do is go out
and see those industry best practices for doing this that the
Government----
Ms. DeGette. How long----
Ms. Hassell [continuing]. Perhaps could adopt.
Ms. DeGette. How long have you been there?
Dr. Hassell. At the----
Ms. DeGette. At DoD.
Dr. Hassell. Just about a year today.
Ms. DeGette. OK. And Dr. Sosin, do you have some ideas
about how we can increase the culture of safety at these labs?
Dr. Sosin. I personally do not. I know that the CDC and
CDC's Director take this issue incredibly seriously and have
developed a series of ideas that will evolve.
Ms. DeGette. OK. I think we need you guys to supplement
your testimony about this because this is really important. And
I have one other question. I don't have time, but I would like
a written answer for this. I would like to know why all of the
problems in this particular incident seem to have come out of
this one lab. Was it a problem with how they were handling this
anthrax, how they were trying to treat it or is it a problem
with the procedure itself? And maybe that is what you are
investigating right now, but that seems like the crux of the
problem.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Murphy. The gentlelady's time has expired. I will now
recognize the vice chairman of the subcommittee, Mr. McKinley,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is a subject I
acknowledge is foreign to me. So I was delighted to try to hear
and learn from some of your testimony on this. But I am just
curious before I have got a list of six questions. I am trying
to go back to the fundamentals. Why would we ship inactive
cells to laboratories? What would you gain by shipping
something that is dead?
Dr. Hassell. Maybe we could----
Mr. McKinley. You have to use the microphone.
Dr. Hassell. So one of the aspects of this inactivated
anthrax is that it maintains the shell that is around the
original live spore. The physical structure is still there.
That is important because that is the basis for the detection
systems and the diagnostic systems that are developed.
Mr. McKinley. OK. That----
Dr. Hassell. So the closer we can get to that the better we
are.
Mr. McKinley. That helps a little bit to explain. Let's go
back to something that the gentlelady from Colorado mentioned
earlier that I didn't pick up in the reading. We are doing this
in 200 laboratories around the country? Is that an accurate
statement? We are studying that in 200 laboratories? We have
live anthrax in 200 laboratories?
Dr. Sosin. The statement there, though, is 192 labs that
receive this material were not intended to receive live
anthrax. There are 181 registered entities within the Federal
Select Agent Program registered to possess, use, or transfer
Bacillus anthracis.
Mr. McKinley. OK. So apparently there is some--I would
struggle with that to understand why we have to have 300 or 200
looking at some of--I would really, especially given the
circumstances of this. Dr. Crosse, before I get to--again, I am
going to run out of time here I think--how would you grade the
DoD's handling of this matter? Would you give them an A on how
they handled it? An F? Give me a----
Dr. Crosse. Well, since the incident was reported, they
have moved pretty quickly to identify where the samples were
sent, although that was still developing over the last few days
and they have----
Mr. McKinley. How would you grade it? Would you grade it
passing? Acceptable? A B? A C?
Dr. Crosse. I think their response, once it was discovered,
has probably been a B. I think the activities leading up to it
and the fact that this went on for so long is definitely a
failure.
Mr. McKinley. Well, I understand it has been going on for
10 years?
Dr. Crosse. Yes. That is a failure and the fact that they
have four different laboratories inactivating anthrax with four
different methods and with four different chains of command
that don't talk to one another.
Mr. McKinley. Go back to Dr. Hassell. Since anthrax is
probably the most dangerous agent that we can handle, I suppose
it is more dangerous than Ebola. But getting it, getting that,
is probably the biggest threat that we have in national
security that someone doesn't get this agent. So in this case,
has anyone tried to grow this live anthrax after they have
received these products, with 200 laboratories? Have they tried
to reactivate it?
Dr. Hassell. It was grown to show the presence of the live
spores. I may not be understanding your question. I apologize.
Mr. McKinley. OK. Well, let me move on because I only have
1 minute left. And so is this the same type of anthrax that was
used in 2001?
Dr. Sosin. This is absolutely not the same type of anthrax
used in 2001. This is a wild type anthrax. It was in a liquid
formulation with extremely small numbers of spores in a 1 Ml
sample. Very different situation, nonetheless, taken extremely
serious.
Mr. McKinley. So this is something that different--do you
feel that our national security is more at risk because of the
process we have been handling this for the last 10 years?
Dr. Sosin. The CDC----
Mr. McKinley. It is a yes or a no, isn't it?
Dr. Sosin. I don't believe that these samples created such
a risk. I believe that they were secured quickly and destroyed,
that there are very small numbers of spores in this material
and that it is naturally occurring type of anthrax.
Mr. McKinley. Let me ask in the last--well, my thought
process initially--why we were shipping this to seven foreign
nations? Does someone have a written authorization? Is there
one of those proverbial emails that someone was requesting
this? And then who authorizes the shipment of that and under
what process do they explain how they want to get it? Why would
we ship to seven foreign nations?
Dr. Hassell. So in several cases, those were actually DoD
facilities that were located in those foreign nations, and
other cases they were allies that----
Mr. McKinley. We don't have enough DoD facilities in
America that we have to go overseas? I am running out of time.
Mr. Murphy. OK. I now recognize Mr. Green for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Unfortunately, the
incident that led to today's hearing is not the first instance
of issues of handling and shipment of bioagents at Dugway
Proving Grounds. CDC and the Office of Inspector General
examined safety lapses at Dugway in 2007. The result? The same
kinds of problems we are hearing about today, failing to
properly inactivate anthrax specimens. Is that correct, Dr.
Hassell?
Dr. Hassell. Yes, sir.
Mr. Green. Based on the previous problem, should Dugway
have made a better effort to check its procedures and double-
check the samples to see if the process worked?
Dr. Hassell. That is my initial impression. We are going to
be looking at that much more because there were some serious
implications there, and we are going to be following up on that
much more. So we can report back.
Mr. Green. Similarly when the CDC announced last year that
it had inadvertently transferred live anthrax, did DoD as a
precautionary measure direct its lab to check their own
processes for ensuring that anthrax was inactivated properly?
Dr. Hassell. No, sir.
Mr. Green. Why not?
Dr. Hassell. I am not sure. That is a good question. We are
going back and trying to figure out what were the steps leading
up to this. It should have been better indicators that we could
have taken action and detected this earlier.
Mr. Green. Well, again, I think the reason for the hearing
is it seems kind of strange that, you know, CDC made a mistake
and we had a problem with a DoD facility, and somebody in
management authority didn't say let's check to make sure the
DoD is doing it right because of what happened at the CDC,
particularly because of the problem at Dugway. Nobody decided
to do that?
Dr. Hassell. It doesn't appear so, sir.
Mr. Green. Beyond the particulars of this anthrax incident,
it is a fact that such shipments of live anthrax can
accidentally occur raises serious questions about the handling
of select agents at both Dugway and other DoD labs.
Dr. Hassell, based on the continuing problems we did find
at Dugway, what assurance can you give the subcommittee that
there is no long-standing safety problems at Dugway or at other
DoD facilities that handle high-risk biological agents?
Dr. Hassell. So that is a good question. We are trying to
look and see if there are some general lessons we can learn
from this and use it to ask some of the questions such as your
previous question. Just internally, are there indicators here
that would indicate we need to be asking other questions about
other operations across the whole complex.
Mr. Green. What is DoD doing to look across all of its
facilities and check their biosafety and biosecurity policies
and procedure are adequate?
Dr. Hassell. We are undertaking an effort now to look at
that, as was pointed out earlier, the chain of command is
disparate right now. So we are trying to tighten that up. We
are going to make sure that the standards, for example, for the
inactivated anthrax, we will ensure internally that that's
standardized across all the laboratories. And then we can use
that as the basis and see if there are other operations that we
need to take some more actions on.
All four of those facilities do different activities.
Dugway is largely a production facility. The other ones are
more research facilities. So one size may not fit all, but
there are definite lessons we could learn from this, and
whenever possible, we will standardize.
Mr. Green. How is DoD ensuring a serious issue such as
potential exposures or concerns about misuse are communicated
from the laboratories to the senior leadership?
Dr. Hassell. Some of the recommendations have been made
previously we are going to be more vigorous on. The DoD
instruction that was mentioned earlier that has been in
process, that will include aspects that will bring all of the
reporting forward to a higher level. So for example, the 2007
incident, that will not just remain--if that had happened
today, that wouldn't just remain at Dugway or that immediate
command. It would come all the way up to a central office
within the Department. We would review all of those. We're in
the process now of pulling in all of the Inspector General
reports, CDC reports from all of the laboratories up to my
office, and we're reviewing all of those to see if there are
indicators and lessons to be learned.
Mr. Green. Well, following my colleague from West Virginia,
so far we have been extremely fortunate these incidents at
Dugway have not led to broader public health or security
problems, and I hope today's hearing and other ongoing
oversight of this incident serves as a call to action to
tighten up these processes, not just for anthrax and at Dugway
but other select agents and at all facilities. We don't want to
have to have somebody here again, and I hope the Armed Services
Committee is also looking at it and seeing that the issues are
being corrected.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back my time.
Mr. Murphy. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize Dr.
Burgess for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to our
witnesses for being here today.
Dr. Sosin, let me just ask you a couple of questions
basically about what we are doing to harden our public health
infrastructure in locations where these agents may be under
study because we have heard sort of a recurrent theme. I
certainly appreciate what Ranking Member DeGette has said
earlier. I mean, I have been on this committee for a number of
years as well, and it seems like there is a recurrent theme
here. We want everything to be perfect, but there are human
beings involved and sometimes they aren't perfect. So I
remember reading--I was just a regular guy in private practice
when the anthrax attack happened in 2001. I remember reading
with just absolute horror what happened when those five
individuals were infected and subsequently died, reading about
their emergency room doctor's experience that here was a guy
that didn't look that sick. He looked like the last 700 people
that just walked in the door, but as we found out with anthrax,
you can be a lot sicker than what you look. And by the time
clinical deterioration begins, you are almost too late on the
curve to rescue someone, although rescue is possible if you
start early. Because unlike Ebola, anthrax is treatable with
relatively common antibiotics.
So bearing in mind that Ebola experience from not quite a
year ago, CDC was telling us last July, August, September, we
got everybody up to speed about Ebola. We don't have to worry
about Ebola coming to this country. The President made a
statement that we don't have to worry about Ebola coming to
this country. The CDC has done what it needs to do to get
everybody prepared. And then it didn't happen.
So this is not quite the same thing, but you know you have
got sites where this is under study. You know that
unfortunately lapses can occur. So do you have like a 35- or
50-mile radius around these sites where you are at least
notifying the people on the front lines, the emergency rooms,
the emergency room doctors, that ``this is something we are
working on in your community''?
Dr. Sosin. Thank you for that question. First with respect
to hardening infrastructure, yes, there are support programs at
the State and local level to address anthrax and other
bioterrorism threats. As you pointed out, there are not only
the routine treatments, there are some advanced medical
countermeasures that have been developed such as antitoxin to
help treat later stages of anthrax and vaccine. Those were
actually brought to bear, the vaccine and antibiotics and
prophylaxis in this incident.
The State authorities are informed of the institutions and
their jurisdiction and the agents that are there as a part of
their public health preparedness programs. There is no active
outreach to the medical community in the absence of an
incident, but we are quick to respond as we did in this
instance with the information about how to diagnose, how to
watch for, monitor, and how to treat.
Mr. Burgess. Let me just interrupt you because my time is
going to drift away from me. Could you provide the committee
those materials that you provided----
Dr. Sosin. Absolutely.
Mr. Burgess [continuing]. To the emergency rooms and what
radius around where the breach occurred, what the geographic
radius was?
Dr. Sosin. I will say that these materials were not sent to
emergency departments, although we did consider it. We were
monitoring the workers in the laboratories closely, and these
materials were sent to the laboratories and to the State health
departments.
Mr. Burgess. But Dr. Sosin, that is the point.
Dr. Sosin. Yes.
Mr. Burgess. These people thought they were getting
inactivated strains, and they were active. So somebody leaves
work for a weekend and Sunday afternoon has got a low-grade
temperature, just doesn't feel right. A family member says go
down to the Care Now facility, and again, they will look well
until they get deathly ill.
Dr. Sosin. Absolutely.
Mr. Burgess. That is the problem.
Dr. Sosin. That is why these were isolated to laboratories,
and we were working directly with the laboratories, the
workers, and the health departments to monitor them.
Mr. Burgess. Well, forgive me if I am unmollified, but the
problem was you didn't know what you didn't know at that point.
And certainly the people in the community who may have been the
doctors and nurses and the caregivers who were seeing patients
wouldn't have known that this was what they were up against.
I guess my concern is how do we get that information out
there? How do we make people aware? Once you know that anthrax
is in the consideration, OK. Fair enough. But before you know
it, they look like the last 1,500 patients that have come
through the door with a viral syndrome.
I do have a question that I need to ask Mr. Demske, and if
we don't have time to get through all of it, maybe you can
provide me an answer in writing. But when you look at the
referrals for violations of the Federal Select Agent Program,
CDC, NIH, United States Army Medical Research Institute of
Infectious Diseases seem to be the top three. So you have an
enforcement policy where you can actually fine, but you don't
fine Federal agencies. Is that correct?
Mr. Demske. To date we have not fined any Federal agencies.
That's correct.
Mr. Burgess. But that seemed--you know, that is what Willie
Sutton would say. You robbed banks because that is where the
money is. Right now, the violations, the multiple violators
seem to be coming from those three groups. So can you get back
to me in writing and discuss what you are doing to consider
providing the same civil money penalties at any other lab, any
other lab in the country would have to face if they had breach
of these agents.
Mr. Demske. Just to be clear, most of the referrals and
most of the labs, incidents that have been referred to us, have
not involved Federal entities but certainly there have been
repeat instances at Federal entities, and we would be happy to
provide you an answer.
Mr. Burgess. The multiple offenders at CDC, NIH, and the
United States Military. That is the problem.
Mr. Murphy. It is the civil penalties and other penalties
we need to know about from there. Thank you.
Mr. Tonko, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. We have heard about the
importance of keeping labs safe and secure. Thus I would like
to explore how labs both private and public that fail to meet
critical safety standards and regulations are held accountable.
Both CDC and HHS, through their Offices of Inspector General
have roles and enforcement. CDC's division of select agents and
toxins can refer entities, the Office of Inspector, for civil
money penalties or certainly notices of violation. CDC could
deny, revoke, or suspend a lab's registration or require a lab
to enter into a performance improvement plan. Criminal charges
can also be made in cases of misuse, unauthorized possession,
or unauthorized transfer. So Dr. Sosin and Mr. Demske, could
you briefly walk us through the different enforcement options
and how you determine the appropriate response for a given
violation?
Dr. Sosin. Thank you for your question. You have correctly
pointed out options, the administrative options the CDC has to
suspend, deny, or revoke registration. The registration process
itself is intended to screen and assure that there is good
laboratory practice, good laboratory leadership and an
appropriate use for the select agent materials.
So that process and a variety of other steps in the program
are intended to assure that the entity itself is taking the
appropriate steps that it needs to take. The decision to
suspend or revoke is one taken very seriously on the importance
of balance, particularly for facilities of the nature that you
all are talking about here. These are important biodefense
facilities doing important work, and the history of the program
has been to work collaboratively with these programs to
identify the specific problems and address them. But those are
options, and the referral to FBI if there is a concern about
suspicious activity or referral to OIG.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. Mr. Demske?
Mr. Demske. Yes. When we receive a referral from the CDC,
one of our attorneys or multiple attorneys will review the
allegations and the findings of the CDC, will often consult
with the scientists and expert at CDC so that we make sure we
understand those facts. If we believe that there has been a
violation, it is our policy to them contact the entity that is
the subject of the matter and give them the opportunity to
provide us with information or arguments about why the penalty
would not be appropriate. We take that into account, often
again in consultation with CDC and decide whether to go forward
with the case and we use our--looking across the experience of
the cases that we have had, make a judgment about what we think
the case should be valued at if we do seek a civil money
penalty.
Mr. Tonko. Now, do your offices routinely work together to
take action against those who are in violation?
Mr. Demske. We certainly communicate and work together from
our perspective to make sure that we understand the facts and
the science in these matters for us to determine whether to go
forward.
Mr. Tonko. And Dr. Sosin, what types of violations would
result in a lab losing its registration?
Dr. Sosin. I can tell you that the process of revoking a
registration is one that is undertaken through careful efforts
to help the laboratory address the concerns and improve its
practices and that revocation would come only after the
inability of that facility to make those changes or their
decision to no longer be interested in doing that work. I can
get further clarification of the specific measures if you'd
like.
Mr. Tonko. And in your opinion, how often has that
happened?
Dr. Sosin. I believe that it has happened two times. I can
get you the exact number.
Mr. Tonko. OK. I would also like to get a sense of the
frequency of violations and actions to address them. Dr. Sosin,
are you seeing any trends at the CDC in terms of enforcement
actions, any trends in referrals to the Office of Inspector
General for instance or performance improvement plans or lab
registration actions?
Dr. Sosin. The Federal Select Agent Program is constantly
evolving in its approaches and tools such as the corrective
action plan process are relatively new and evolving. So trends
are hard to evaluate in that context. I know that at the
request of this subcommittee, specific enforcement actions have
been laid out in a response and should have the kind of
information you would be looking for.
Mr. Tonko. OK, and I am out of time, but if Mr. Demske, if
you could perhaps feed the panel with that same trend that you
cite, any trends that you cite, that would be helpful.
Mr. Demske. Yes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. I now recognize Mrs. Blackburn for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
our witnesses for your patience. We appreciate this. As you
know, we have got another hearing going on this morning.
Dr. Sosin, I want to come to you if I may. I have got a
copy of Dr. Frieden's testimony from this committee last year,
and he was testifying about the June 2014 anthrax incident. He
said, and I am going to read from the testimony, and I am
quoting. ``These incidents should never have happened. The lack
of adequate procedures and oversight that allowed them to
happen was totally unacceptable. We will explore the broader
implications of these incidents and incorporate the lessons
learned from them to proactively prevent future incidents at
laboratories across the Nation that work with pathogens.''
So I want to know, can you explain why we didn't seem to
learn the lessons? Can you talk about why there is another
comprehensive review of safety and security of the bioterror
labs? Why was not Congress notified? Why is another review
necessary? Were the problems at the CDC not corrected? And then
who is going to conduct the new review? And ultimately, who do
we hold responsible for this?
Dr. Sosin. Thank you for your questions. Pardon me if I
need refreshing on some of them.
Mrs. Blackburn. I will be happy to refresh.
Dr. Sosin. I am sure you will. I think it is important to
recognize that the oversight program is not a CDC laboratory
itself. It functions separately. Nonetheless, in hindsight,
there has been reason to look more closely at anthrax
inactivation. There is no question that that is necessary, and
before a moratorium on the use and transfer of these materials
will be lifted, we will have a policy about how to validate----
Mrs. Blackburn. Whoa, whoa, whoa. Wait a minute. That was
supposed to be done. So why was it not done? Who is responsible
that it did not get tended to last year?
Dr. Sosin. The work of a complex laboratory,
microbiological laboratory, has thousands of procedures and
potential vulnerabilities.
Mrs. Blackburn. So you are saying no one person is in
charge, that it is done by committee?
Dr. Sosin. No. I am saying that the nature, the current
nature of the Federal Select Agent Program is one of setting
broad standards to achieve high laboratory performance but does
not review each individual specific procedure at each entity.
There will need to be----
Mrs. Blackburn. Well, did the procedures call for notifying
Congress?
Dr. Sosin. I am sorry?
Mrs. Blackburn. Did the procedures call for notifying
Congress if you need to do a review, if you have another
incident?
Dr. Sosin. So----
Mrs. Blackburn. So that is not a part of your best business
processes?
Dr. Sosin. I apologize if Congress was not notified
regarding the review that Dr. Frieden requested we take
internally of the Federal Select Agent Program at CDC. That
review is not a review of CDC labs and procedures. That is a
review of what opportunities we have----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Well, let me ask you this----
Dr. Sosin [continuing]. To improve the oversight program.
Mrs. Blackburn [continuing]. This way. Going back to his
testimony where he says that it never should have happened,
lack of adequate procedures, totally unacceptable, going to put
the processes in place, and incorporate the lessons learned.
Was this not done last year?
Dr. Sosin. Many things were done. This was not addressed.
Mrs. Blackburn. So, OK. So it was not addressed? That is
the answer that I wanted a yes or no. Either it was done or it
was not done, and that is what we want to know.
And see this is what is part of is so frustrating to the
taxpayers who are footing the bill for this because you all
feel like you have immunity if you will, and you don't have to
move forward and do the job because you have a continuing
appropriation. You just don't do the job until it is
convenient.
Dr. Sosin. Congressman, I don't believe that----
Mrs. Blackburn. So you mess up once. You mess up twice. You
mess up 86 times, and it is no skin off your back because
nobody is responsible, because you operate by committee,
because we ask you to do something and report back to us. What
do you do, sit around and go, well, we will get around to it
later? Maybe we need to give you around to it and have you go
get the job done.
Dr. Sosin. Perhaps I am misunderstanding----
Mrs. Blackburn. The fact that we are having to have another
hearing and look at this is something that is frustrating. You
should realize that there was a mistake and immediately move
forward to correct the procedures and the policies and then
should change the way that things are done. And I know I am
running out of time, and I will yield back the balance of my
time.
Dr. Sosin. I do think it is important to clarify that the
CDC error with anthrax was addressed. It was a different
situation. What I did acknowledge is that as the Federal Select
Agent Program, with anthrax, with inactivation, in hindsight we
should have and we will address inactivation procedures before
that is used again.
Mr. Murphy. I am sure you can understand----
Dr. Sosin. Absolutely.
Mr. Murphy [continuing]. We have heard that before.
Dr. Sosin. I understand.
Mr. Murphy. Ms. Castor, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Regarding the DoD
review of the Dugway incident and the science surrounding
inactivation protocols, the DoD review concluded that one of
the root causes of the Dugway incident was scientific
uncertainty about the process of inactivating anthrax spores.
The review stated that this uncertainty led to the creation of
protocols that do not completely or permanently inactivate
anthrax spores. And although this instance only recently raised
questions about the inadequacy of these procedures, the
Department knew of this uncertainty for quite a while.
So Dr. Hassell, if the Department was aware of the
potential inadequacy of the inactivation process using gamma
irradiation, why didn't the Department have better verification
procedures to ensure the spores were properly inactivated
before shipping them?
Dr. Hassell. So that is a good question because it really
separates there were two issues involved. One was the
inactivation was ineffective, and then the other one was that
the viability testing didn't catch the fact that the first was
not 100 percent effective.
Regarding the inactivation, there are several scientific
publications and, you know, peer-reviewed journals in the
scientific literature that have shown different what we call
death curves for killing anthrax. What we need to do now is to
try to pull all those together, get a consensus view of those,
work with a body of subject matter experts, work in consensus
with CDC and try to figure out what----
Ms. Castor. Well, why didn't you do that before if the
Department knew of this uncertainty for a while?
Dr. Hassell. It appears that that was somewhat localized,
that it wasn't universally acknowledged.
Ms. Castor. What does that mean?
Dr. Hassell. Well, each individual laboratory set its own
standards. And so this wasn't raised up to a central body----
Ms. Castor. And you are acknowledging now that was not
acceptable. Those standards were not acceptable.
Dr. Hassell. Was not acceptable and going forward, it will
have to be done in concert so the----
Ms. Castor. So is the DoD reviewing all of its protocols
and procedures to ensure that there are not similar gaps in the
scientific literature for the inactivation of other dangerous
toxins and pathogens?
Dr. Hassell. We will be doing that, definitely. We are
going to take a----
Ms. Castor. So you are doing that for anthrax and for other
toxins?
Dr. Hassell. Right. We are going to see if there are any
lessons learned from that that we can then apply across the
board.
Ms. Castor. How confident are you that people are going to
take that seriously? There are gaps in science. There are
discrepancies. How will you come to reconcile? Certainly you
would err on the side of safety?
Dr. Hassell. Yes, ma'am, absolutely.
Ms. Castor. But take us through what is going to happen
specifically in that review.
Dr. Hassell. Well, anthrax is particularly hard to kill. So
we are taking on the biggest challenge up front. So that should
give us our biggest challenges, both in the activation and on
this viability testing afterwards. Things that we learn from
both of those we will then take forward and apply them.
Ms. Castor. And when there is a difference of opinion, who
is going to be the responsible party where we can go back and
say, wow. We had this hearing. The DoD said, another agency
said we will address these gaps. If and when we have to have
another hearing, who is it that we will identify? Or if you
could provide that to the committee because there is this
problem with no personal accountability, don't you agree?
Dr. Hassell. Yes, ma'am, and the second part of this
investigation we will be looking at the accountability. We will
have some of those people identified, and we will certainly
provide that to the committee.
Ms. Castor. Thank you. I would like to turn to Dr. Sosin to
ask some questions about the CDC's role in overseeing the
Select Agent Program. Dr. Sosin, why is there such variation
across labs as to how they inactivate anthrax?
Dr. Sosin. Thank you for your question. As mentioned
earlier, there are a variety of needs for materials that come
from dead anthrax, and the laboratories, some research, some
production for proficiency testing of labs, et cetera, have
different roles and purposes as well. So CDC historically has
required a validated procedure, either published and followed
or validated within that laboratory and proof of sterility
testing. I think to your earlier question about accountability,
the exemption of a select agent, anthrax becoming now exempt
because it is dead, is a requirement of the Federal Select
Agent Program. And until we have a procedure that increases
confidence that we can safely do that----
Ms. Castor. Because----
Dr. Sosin [continuing]. We will not lift that moratorium.
Ms. Castor. Well, I appreciate that, but you can see that
we are very concerned.
Dr. Sosin. Absolutely.
Ms. Castor. Are we to expect similar variations in
inactivation protocols for other select agents and toxins? And
how do we address that?
Dr. Sosin. As Dr. Hassell pointed out, the nature of a
spore being extremely hearty and difficult to kill, plus the
fact in this instance we were, or the Department of Defense was
trying to kill the organisms without disrupting the organism
creates a challenge in safety. The attempt now is to set an
appropriately wide margin. If you go back to the chairman's
figure that he showed, the DoD shows the dosing and a gap
between the kill curve and the dosing. That gap wasn't
happening here. Clearly there were production runs that were
growing anthrax and should have highlighted that the procedure
was not adequate.
Going forward we will make sure that there is a safety
margin and achieve consensus with the broad input that we have
opportunity to get to assure that we are taking the right
margin.
Ms. Castor. I am out of time. Thank you.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. Now I recognize Mr. Griffith for 5
minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Dr.
Hassell, if you could, we have got folks out there receiving
this. You answered a previous question related to the foreign
nations and said some of those were DoD facilities. Were they
all DoD facilities? And if not DoD facilities, were all the
facilities that were completely controlled by the United States
Government? Yes or no.
Dr. Hassell. No.
Mr. Griffith. So some of these would have gone to
facilities not controlled by the United States Government. How
certain can we be that these folks who were receiving live
samples, and I believe it was over the course we now know of
like 10 years, didn't discover this before they necessarily
told us and have been out there growing some of their own
samples and siphoning off some? So when we are told that you
all hunted it down and you have killed or acquired all of the
live anthrax, how certain of that can we be? Because it doesn't
sound like to me we can be very certain if somebody was taking
some of that anthrax and skimming off some of the live for use
in other ways.
Dr. Hassell. So the non-DoD facilities that you refer to,
those are some of our most trusted allies. We do many things
with these allies across the board, not just for chembio----
Mr. Griffith. They are trusted, but if they wanted to do
research on biological weapons, this would have given them an
opportunity to acquire that or at least to acquire the base
material to start the cultures with. Isn't that true? Yes or
no.
Dr. Hassell. It is true, but they were already doing most
of that work. They just--we were trying to use a common
material across the board so everyone was testing on the same
material so that we could compare the results that we have.
Mr. Griffith. And how----
Dr. Hassell. But they do have those programs already.
Mr. Griffith. How comfortable are you that those facilities
had better protocols than we do in that we don't have some
worker who might have taken what was supposed to be some dead
cells, generated the live cells, and gone out with a sample
that he might have then got, he or she may have then given to a
foreign agent?
Dr. Hassell. In some of those cases, they already have the
material now. Like I say this was soon-to-be dead material, and
we do have records that that's all been destroyed.
Mr. Griffith. What you found has all been destroyed but
since it was live, there could be more than what you knew
about. Yes or no. Yes, the answer is yes. All right. Let's move
on.
Dr. Sosin, you said that the CDC acted reasonably in
tracking down the live anthrax and then securing or killing it.
Dr. Crosse, you indicated that you would give them a B once it
was discovered, but Mr. Demske, you didn't get notified until
yesterday to investigate the problem that was discovered in
May. Isn't that correct?
Mr. Demske. That is correct, yes.
Mr. Griffith. So we have got at least 60 days since the
problem was discovered before you were notified. Isn't that
true?
Mr. Demske. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. I don't consider that a B or acting
reasonably. Do you?
Mr. Demske. Well, we are not the front lines of an emergent
situation. That would have to go to the FDA and with the
scientists and the CDC. So it is normal for CDC to do
investigative work on its own before it would refer a matter to
us, and that actually helps us because the evidence is more
developed when we receive it.
Mr. Griffith. So you think 60 days is reasonable before
you're notified to do your investigation?
Mr. Demske. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. OK. And as a part of that, they are doing
their investigations and so forth. But don't you think it is
kind of interesting that you got notified yesterday? Do you
think that our hearing might have sped that time up a little
bit?
Mr. Demske. I have no information about that.
Mr. Griffith. But when you filed your testimony, you said
to date OIG has not received a referral for any more recent
potential violations involving Dugway which was in reference to
the 2008 and 2010 incidents.
Mr. Demske. That is right. We submitted the testimony on
Friday. At that time we had not received it. I would say--my
opinion is that oversight by this committee is a very effective
way at spurring attention to this matter within the Government.
Mr. Griffith. I just wish we didn't have to do it so often.
Dr. Sosin, you are the acting director of National Center for
Injury Prevention and Control. I noticed in the report referred
to by the chairman earlier that Stephen Moore is the Acting
Director of his department. What is the relationship between
your two areas and why is everybody over there acting and
nobody is permanent?
Dr. Sosin. I am sorry. The information you have about my
acting director role is old. I was previously for nine months
acting director there. I have been for nearly or over a decade
actually the Deputy Director for the Office of Public Health
Preparedness and Response. Dr. Monroe I think you are referring
to is the Acting Associate Director for Laboratory Science and
Safety, is an outstanding laboratory scientist who comes from
the Center of Emerging Infections.
Mr. Griffith. And he is----
Dr. Sosin. And he is in an acting role because we are
trying to hire a top-notch laboratory scientist to lead the
Laboratory Safety and Science effort.
Mr. Griffith. And do you answer to him or do you just work
with him?
Dr. Sosin. I work with him.
Mr. Griffith. I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Murphy. Mr. Pallone, you are now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you. As the investigation into the
Dugway incident continues, we are learning that more and more
labs received these lives anthrax shipments in addition to the
86 labs to which DoD directly sent shipments. There had been
additional 106 labs that received secondary transfers. So we
are now talking about nearly 200 labs. And as more labs are
involved, the opportunities for error only increase.
So I do want to understand whether it is necessary to have
so many different labs involved with dangerous biological
agents. I know Ms. DeGette mentioned this in her opening
statement. So Dr. Crosse, do you have an opinion on the number
of labs that are working with anthrax?
Dr. Crosse. Well, I don't think we know the number of labs
that are working with anthrax. I think that is one of the
issues. Well, we have information of where the--are you talking
about the----
Dr. Sosin. I just heard entities.
Dr. Crosse. Yes.
Dr. Sosin. Anthrax is a select agent.
Dr. Crosse. That is right. I am sorry. Anthrax we do know.
We do not know all of the high-containment laboratories that
exist. We have controls for a subset of dangerous pathogens.
There are other highly infectious pathogens that require a
biosafety level three laboratory, and they do not all have to
be registered with the Select Agent Program. We do know for
anthrax. My apologies.
Mr. Pallone. So Dr. Crosse, GAO has recommended the
establishment of the single Federal entity to conduct
Government-wide strategic planning and oversight for high-
containment labs. This would include developing national
standards for designing, constructing, operating, and
maintaining such labs. Can you elaborate on this
recommendation?
Dr. Crosse. Yes. We think it is important that there be a
more comprehensive set of plans for how many labs are needed.
You know, there have been a great increase in the number of
labs over the last decade. Since the anthrax attacks in 2001, a
number of different Federal agencies have expanded the number
of labs that they have. Academic institutions have built labs.
Some States have built labs. And a lot of private entities have
built labs. And they are very expensive. We don't know what
really is needed.
As we have heard today, they are developing their own
validation procedures. And there's not necessarily an assurance
of consistency. And so while inspections can be performed at
that these laboratories, the kinds of reportings of problems
have only typically been going to a level above the laboratory,
too. So they are not going up to the top of departments or to
organizations.
And so I think that we are concerned that there hasn't been
kind of a consistent set of standards in place, a consistent
understanding of what the needs are, a consistent plan
developed for where these laboratories ought to be built and
maintained, and what the costs are going to be over the long
term for maintaining this kind of infrastructure and whether it
is in line with the needs.
Mr. Pallone. Well, have you gotten feedback from the
Federal Government agencies that operate these high-containment
labs with regard to this recommendation to establish a single
Federal entity? I know you mentioned some obstacles to that,
but what other obstacles would there be to implement it?
Dr. Crosse. Well, you know, I think that it is not clear
where that organization should be located. As we've heard
today, it is difficult to retrofit this kind of control on top
of an existing enterprise. Different departments want to have
control over what their own needs are. Different companies want
to be able to compete for contracts from the Federal
Government. And so going back and retrofitting them kind of
control is complicated. We have not gotten traction on the
concept of moving forward to try to centralize this control.
Mr. Pallone. Let me just then ask again, do you believe
that the establishment of these national standards and
oversight might address some of the gaps that led to the recent
incidents at DoD and CDC? And how could Congress help in
establishing uniform standards and procedures?
Dr. Crosse. We do believe that having more consistent lines
of authority would be helpful. DoD I think in its report on the
Dugway incidents has pointed out that the different
laboratories handling anthrax were in different chains of
command and never came together, that there wasn't a sharing of
information, and they didn't have top-level knowledge of what
was going on in these laboratories and how the procedures were
being conducted. That is the type of thing we think would be
helpful, and we would be happy with you and members of the
committee to try to develop some kind of proposals.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. I now recognize Dr. Bucshon for 5
minutes.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I mean, to me this
hearing is astounding, honestly. And I hate to admit but in the
4 \1/2\ years that I have been here, this is not the only
Government agencies that we are hearing, testifying in front of
a Congress saying they are establishing new policies. Sorry we
messed up. Sorry we did this. Sorry we did that. And you know
why? Because there is no accountability. There is no
accountability across the Federal Government in my view. No one
is responsible. People are in their jobs for short periods of
time. Dr. Hassell, you have been on your job for a year. If we
really pressed you, you would say, well, I don't know. I have
only been in my job for a year, so I don't know what they did
before me. I mean, this is a decade-long process, and I
personally get tired of hearing about how we are establishing
new policies in this. This is anthrax. We should have had
policies for decades. It is ridiculous.
And you know, that is the problem. There is almost contempt
against congressional oversight. Every hearing I go to--and it
is almost people walk out of the room and they go, well, they
didn't get us this time and they can't get us. There's nothing
they can do to us. That is what--I mean, this is just
ridiculous.
So Dr. Hassell, how can there not be standardize protocols
for this in the Federal Government after decades and decades of
this? How can that not happen? I mean, that is just the
question I have. Dr. Hassell, how could--you made the
statement, you know, ``We are standardizing how we deal with
this.'' How can it not be standardized?
Dr. Hassell. I could answer for DoD. Part of it was, as
noted earlier, that the different chains of command have been
one of the fundamental problems here because each laboratory
reports up to a different chain. They meet too high up in the
organization. So yes, I have been in place for a year, but I
take this very personally.
Mr. Bucshon. I am not criticizing you.
Dr. Hassell. Right. No, no----
Mr. Bucshon. I am just saying----
Dr. Hassell. No, no, but I am saying I take----
Mr. Bucshon. In fairness, you have only been there a year.
You are right. You can't be accountable for what happened 10
years ago. I agree with you.
Dr. Hassell. But I own it now, so I take personal
responsibility to work with other people in the department to
make sure these things are standardized, and I will not
recommend to the Undersecretary that we lift the moratorium
until I am confident that we have the proper scientific basis
for our operations and that we have received, we have achieved
the right level of standardization----
Mr. Bucshon. I appreciate that. The reality is that, if
people were losing their jobs, this would be standardized. And
Dr. Sosin, I mean, you said--they asked, how do you solve this
problem? You said, well, I don't know how we solve the problem
essentially is what you said in your earlier testimony.
I mean, I know how to solve it. How many people across the
Government have been fired over this problem? Who has lost
their job at CDC, at DoD? Or who is still doing the same thing,
even though they literally sent a national security risk,
anthrax, around the world? And as Mr. Griffith found out, non-
DoD properties. I don't care if they are allies. That doesn't
matter.
And not to mention the fact how many people are protected
from being fired because they are part of a Federal Government
union that does not allow them to be held accountable.
Dr. Sosin. Congressman----
Mr. Bucshon. I want to know answers.
Dr. Sosin. I would love to have you come visit CDC and see
how accountable the scientists and professional staff are at
CDC. We take this incredibly seriously. There are----
Mr. Bucshon. I am not saying that you don't----
Dr. Sosin. There are regulations and rules----
Mr. Bucshon [continuing]. But who has lost their jobs? Who
lost their job?
Dr. Sosin. There are regulations and rules around the use
and transfer of anthrax, live anthrax. This particular incident
was about an exempted material, which was not considered a
select agent. And new actions will be taken to address it.
Mr. Bucshon. What, you are going to put in some more
policies? By action, what do you mean?
Dr. Sosin. For example----
Mr. Bucshon. Well, for me it means the people responsible
for doing this lose their job.
Dr. Sosin. For example, before a material can be considered
killed, we need to have a validated procedure within the lab
experience.
Mr. Bucshon. But how--to my question, how come you haven't
had that?
Dr. Sosin. Hindsight----
Mr. Bucshon. This is for decades.
Dr. Sosin [continuing]. We should have had it. We have
already--I have acknowledged that in hindsight, with this
organism and the vulnerability here, we should have done this
before.
Mr. Bucshon. I mean, the reality----
Dr. Sosin. And we are going to do it now.
Mr. Bucshon. I mean, the Federal Government hasn't known
what constitutes dead anthrax until this came up? I mean, I
just don't----
Dr. Sosin. The reliance is----
Mr. Bucshon. Failing to find why there is a problem----
Dr. Sosin [continuing]. Testing, testing the material in
the laboratory to see if there is growth. And that process in
this instance failed.
Mr. Bucshon. OK. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. I now recognize Mr. Flores for 5
minutes.
Mr. Flores. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is unfortunate
that we have to have another hearing, another oversight hearing
like this. You know, continuing along the theme that Dr.
Bucshon raised, there was a quote in USA Today in the article
that came out yesterday that says the root cause of all this is
a lack of accountability. Incidents don't get reported, and
consequences don't occur. And I think many of us have expressed
our frustration, not only in the agencies represented here, the
two agencies that are the subject of the problems, but across
the Government and the VA, for instance. It has allowed for
cover-ups on waiting lists, and only three people have been
fired at the VA. Three hundred thousand people in the VA and
only three have been fired. And it gets back to one of the root
causes: It is too hard to fire a Federal union employee.
So Dr. Hassell, of the individuals at the Dugway Proving
Ground, what are the percentages of uniformed versus civilian
at that facility?
Dr. Hassell. I don't have that information, sir. I can get
it to you. It is mostly civilian.
Mr. Flores. And of the civilian, what percentage are
unionized?
Dr. Hassell. I am not sure.
Mr. Flores. I would appreciate if you could get us
responses from both of those.
Dr. Hassell. Yes.
Mr. Flores. And if that is the case, have you taken action
against any of those employees, any civilian employee or any
uniformed employee?
Dr. Hassell. To date, no.
Mr. Flores. OK.
Dr. Hassell. There is an investigation that's starting to
look into this. If we do take action, we want to make sure that
it is taken at the right place, to make sure that the person
who is truly accountable is held accountable.
Mr. Flores. Well, that is all real nice, but how many
mistakes are happening right now because there is no
accountability? I mean, do you know today that we are not
shipping other live agents around right now? Do you know that?
How can you know?
Dr. Hassell. As we pointed out, just because the anthrax
itself is so hard to kill and presents such a challenge, that
has been stopped. So that I can assure you is not happening.
Mr. Flores. OK. Anything else? What is the next one,
though? Where are the other vulnerabilities? I mean, we had
Ebola last year, not from you but from the CDC. I mean, Dr.
Sosin, how can you be sure that we don't have any other
incidents like this going out right today.
Dr. Sosin. Certainty is hard to provide. As we understand
the organism and the process of assuring its sterility. There
is no evidence that these materials that are presumed
inactivated are not inactivated. We have seen no evidence of a
signal event, growth or disease or injury. That doesn't mean we
don't take this seriously, and we don't consider whether
additional procedures need to be implemented on inactivation of
select agents. This is certainly going on now with respect to
anthrax and we'll apply what we would consider in a broader
context for other selected agents.
Mr. Flores. Just for the committee's sake, walk through the
ownership of the different elements of the Federal Select Agent
process as respects your two agencies. Can you tell me who owns
what part? And I have just got a minute so can you--just give
me the highlights, Dr. Sosin.
Dr. Sosin. Well, I can tell you----
Mr. Flores. What parts do you own and then where do you
hand off to?
Dr. Sosin. The Federal Select Agent Program is an oversight
program so the main activities that are involved and the main
improvements that have been made through the execution of this
program over the last 12 years includes screening and assessing
facilities and staff for their suitability to work with
anthrax. That means that the facility is an appropriate
facility, has good laboratory practice, and has appropriate
role to work with that material. It also includes the FBI's
review of personnel reliability, of all of those who will be
using it, includes a set of requirements to elevate biosafety
and biosecurity, inventory management, access controls, those
kinds of measures. And it includes a process and an ability to
detect and respond including the notification of jurisdictions
that have these facilities in site including what we did here
with the anthrax response, being able to go in, investigate,
identify whether people are at risk, secure the samples and
look into what caused them.
Mr. Flores. OK. Now this process involves not only private-
sector institutions as well as public-sector institutions, is
that correct?
Dr. Sosin. That is correct, for the select agents.
Mr. Flores. So where are you finding the best practices
coming from today? I mean, Dr. Hassell was talking about going
to the private sector to find best practices. So Dr. Hassell,
where are we finding the best practices today? Private sector
or public sector?
Dr. Hassell. It is a combination of both. I am just saying
we are going to go look at the private sector. That often
doesn't happen in Government as the first reaction. The
Department of Defense----
Mr. Flores. You need to look at both.
Dr. Sosin. The Department of Defense, the Centers for
Disease Control, the NIH, these are outstanding facilities.
They are doing cutting-edge, critical work which has some risk.
These are places where best practices and not-best practices
will occur because of the broad range of practices that do
occur.
Mr. Flores. OK. I have additional questions. I will submit
them for the record later on. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. McKinley [presiding]. Thank you. And the gentleman from
Oklahoma, Mr. Mullin, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you guys
being here. I am sure you are having a blast and enjoying your
time here, but it is very frustrating for me to see what has
taken place and to hear you guys say you have protocols,
protocols. You are looking into it. You are looking into it.
How long does it take to look into this? It is really hard for
me to follow this. Dr. Hassell, is it the practice of the DoD,
the labs, to send out a death certificate with select agents
when they leave, is that correct?
Dr. Hassell. It has been, yes.
Mr. Mullin. It has been? How long has that been going on?
Dr. Hassell. I believe--I apologize. I am not sure when the
death--I think the information----
Mr. Mullin. What kind of information is on that death
certificate, the one that is similar to this one right here?
Dr. Hassell. I am not sure how long that has been part of
the process. We have been looking at just the overall
inactivation. We have been looking at that back 12 years. I am
not sure at what point the death certificate was initiated. I
can--I will find out.
Mr. Mullin. Well, this dates back to 5 years ago. So we
know it has been going on for at least 5 years, right?
Dr. Hassell. Right.
Mr. Mullin. Then why is it that the private lab that found
the active anthrax, why didn't it have a death certificate with
it?
Dr. Hassell. Because when it was originally tested they
didn't see growth. One of the things we are looking into----
Mr. Mullin. But if it shipped out--you just said it is the
practice of DoD with any shipment that is leaving to have a
death certificate. Why wasn't there one that was shipped to a
private lab?
Dr. Hassell. Oh, I am sorry. So for that particular
operation, we were setting out blind tests. People were seeing
whether or not----
Mr. Mullin. With active anthrax in it?
Dr. Hassell. It was a suit to see if people could detect
the presence of these. This was to identify some new
performers.
Mr. Mullin. So we knowingly shipped live anthrax.
Dr. Hassell. I am sorry, say again?
Mr. Mullin. Well, you said you were shipping it to him to
see if they could find it. It didn't have a death certificate,
so I am assuming you knowingly shipped live anthrax to this
private lab because it didn't have a death certificate. I
forget what that----
Dr. Hassell. No, it just--we did not provide the shipping
because of what the agent was? We did not knowingly ship live
agent, absolutely not.
Mr. Mullin. Did the shipment then have----
Dr. Hassell. We just did not include their----
Mr. Mullin [continuing]. At your place or some other place
a death certificate?
Dr. Hassell. Yes.
Mr. Mullin. Who produced a death certificate?
Dr. Hassell. The originator at Dugway.
Mr. Mullin. And what was the test that was performed to
show that it was dead? And what is the difference between the
tests that the private lab showed that it was live?
Dr. Hassell. They were very similar and----
Mr. Mullin. Well, they couldn't have because one showed it
dead, one showed it live.
Dr. Hassell. Well, that is what we are looking at because
one of the key differentiators for what Dugway did----
Mr. Mullin. So who is responsible for that? Is that Dr.
Sosin? Is that his group? Who is responsible for showing the
procedures to find out that it is dead?
Dr. Hassell. Going forward we are going to adopt the CDC's
procedure.
Mr. Mullin. No, no, no. Who is responsible for it at that
time, not going forward? Who is responsible for it at the time?
If it wasn't your group, Dr. Hassell----
Dr. Hassell. It was Dugway.
Mr. Mullin [continuing]. Whose group was it?
Dr. Hassell. It was Dugway. They developed----
Mr. Mullin. And who is over Dugway?
Dr. Hassell [continuing]. The testing.
Mr. Mullin. Who do they fall underneath? Do they fall
underneath Dr. Hassell, Dr. Sosin, Dr. Demske? Who oversees
Dugway?
Dr. Hassell. The Army.
Mr. Mullin. OK.
Dr. Hassell. That is why----
Mr. Mullin. Narrow it down for me here. Help me figure out
who is responsible. Who is the chain of command that is
responsible for the death certificate for the procedures to
show that the agent leaving is truly dead?
Dr. Hassell. Are you talking about the chain of command at
the laboratory or just for the certificate?
Mr. Mullin. I am talking about the chain of command to find
out that the anthrax is shipping out. This isn't a hard
question. Who is finding out for sure the procedures to find
that the agent is dead?
Dr. Hassell. It would be the----
Mr. Mullin. You don't know?
Dr. Hassell. It would be the scientist that----
Mr. Mullin. You don't know. Dr. Sosin, can you answer that
question?
Dr. Sosin. I can't answer----
Mr. Mullin. Dr. Demske, can you answer that that question?
Mr. Demske. Not specifically. I----
Mr. Mullin. OK. Then this brings in my last question
because as I was going through the background information to
prepare for this hearing, I couldn't figure it out, either.
There are so many different people that touched this. There is
no clear line of chain of command. As a business owner, you
have got to have someone responsible for something. This goes
back to a line of questions that was already asked. No one can
be fired because no one takes responsibility for it because no
one has responsibility for it. We just assume that everybody is
doing their job, and yet we are shipping out live anthrax and
no one takes responsibility for it.
Dr. Hassell, you said that you were going to leave it
locked down where they couldn't be shipped, for nothing to be
shipped until you declared a line of command and procedures,
right? How long is that going to take?
Dr. Hassell. It is going to take a minimum of 6 months we
believe.
Mr. Mullin. A minimum? If you could just find out all the
players in it, you ought to be able to lay it out and put
somebody in charge to oversee it.
Dr. Hassell. I am sorry. I was referring more just to put
the procedures--the scientific studies that need to identify
the gaps but the----
Mr. Mullin. My point that I am getting to is we had live
anthrax shipped out. No one takes responsibility for it. When I
asked a question to find out who is responsible for it, no one
can answer it. I think we have identified the problem. It is
time for someone to take responsibility. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, and we have Collins from New York
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and maybe I should
maybe help us all step back a second. Clearly a bacteria-grown
agent such as anthrax or C. diff with spores, completely
different than a virus, right? Easy to kill a virus. So part of
the concern I have heard as one of the last questioners is we
know there is a lot of biological agents, a lot of potential
weapon issues going on. And I think the concern of the
committee is if we have this with anthrax, might we have it
with something else like SARS, like smallpox, like whatever.
But that is where maybe--not to give you suggestions in your
testimony. You might want to help the committee differentiate
bacteria from virus, just to give them the confidence level.
There is a different ball game going on.
Now you use radiation because you are trying to penetrate
the spore, correct? For your--you want to penetrate the spore,
which is very hard. So the way that you prove it is dead, the
death certificate, is you take a sample and put it in culture
and try to grow it. Correct? You tell me--and you really didn't
make that real clear here. I am guessing the problem is they
put it in culture for a month, and it should have been in
culture for 6 months. Is it safe to assume that they just
didn't run the culture test long enough?
Dr. Sosin. We can't identify for certain whether that was
an issue, but it is a possibility. Anthrax grows in culture
within 2 days generally. So it is----
Mr. Collins. No, it can, but it can last 6 months. And this
is where you take something like anthrax or C. diff which is a
spore, it can pop up in 5 months' time.
Dr. Sosin. It can survive as a spore, yes.
Mr. Collins. That is correct. So if it is surviving as a
spore for 5 months and somebody is creating a death certificate
after 2 months, they are saying it is dead----
Dr. Sosin. I am sorry, Congressman. When you put a spore in
a fertile environment, it germinates and grows----
Mr. Collins. Right.
Dr. Sosin [continuing]. And that, with anthrax, happens
within 48 hours, generally within 24 hours. So in a fertile
environment, you would expect to see that growth.
Mr. Collins. I can beg to differ with you. I have some
experience in this. I have seen it where it doesn't grow in a
month. It doesn't grow in 2 months. And then all of a sudden in
5 months, it shows up. I would suggest respectfully that I
believe the big issue here was it wasn't radiated with enough
intensity, so it wasn't killed. But to validate it was dead,
they put it in culture to see if it would grow. And if it was
in culture for 48 hours and it didn't grow and they gave it a
death certificate, then I can tell you what your problem is
right now. You didn't put it in the culture long enough. I
think in best practices in industry, in industry best
practices, you are going to see that batch sit in the
refrigerator or sit in the freezer for 6 months, and you are
going to have that culture, that spore in culture for 6 months,
not for 48 hours. And I think you would have to agree, if it is
in that culture for 6 months, it is deader than a doornail and
you will have more assurance than if it is only in culture for
48 hours. And again, this is different than a virus. So I just
think some of that confusion is going on here as to when is--
because you do the death certificate at the lab after it has
been radiated and held in isolation until the culture test is
run. And then you say ``OK, I didn't see anything. So it is
dead.'' Now that entire batch is good to go as dead virus,
hence exempt, et cetera, et cetera. And that is what happened.
It was then shipped out exempt because it had the death
certificate.
But I guess the issue would be--I am assuming that is up to
the lab to decide how long they are going to grow it in
culture, is that correct? That is a lab procedure, not a CDC
or----
Dr. Sosin. At this point in time, the sterility testing,
viability testing is a laboratory procedure, but there will be
additional requirements as a result of this incident.
Mr. Collins. And I do think--and that is what I would
encourage you to do. That is why I think it falls apart. You do
trust these labs to all be at the top of their game. But in
best practices, and this one an example, I can assure you best
practice in private industry on anthrax and on C. diff is 6
months. It is 6 months of testing so you know it is dead. It is
not 48 hours. That is best practice coming out of private
industry. I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you. And we now recognize the
congresswoman from Indiana, Mrs. Brooks, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this important hearing. And I have to say in my prior
role before joining the committee, I was chair on the
Subcommittee on Emergency Preparedness, Response, and
Communications for Homeland Security, and it really opened my
eyes to the vital need to better protect the American people
and our country from bio attacks and from biodefense incidents.
And I will say that at that time I learned that this
administration did away with a position that had been in place
under the Clinton administration, under the Bush
administration, called the Special Assistant to the President
for Biodefense. And I think we learned about that position
being eliminated when the Ebola attack, when Ebola hit this
country, and I think it kind of goes to the point of I think
what Dr. Crosse is talking about is that as a Government, we
are not--there is no central line of authority. There is no
central entity. There is no person who all of these issues
bubble up to that as a Government we have a massive enterprise
with so many different well-intentioned, hard-working
scientists and Government workers. But yet, there is--when it
comes to biodefense for this country, it is not organized and
we are not doing a good enough job.
I have to tell you that later this week we are going to be
introducing legislation that addresses the need to strengthen
and streamline the existing biodefense initiatives BARDA and
the CDC. And so Dr. Sosin, I have a question. If lab workers or
other medical professionals had been exposed to live anthrax
samples, are you confident as to whether or not we would have
had proper vaccines and therapeutics in place to save lives?
Dr. Sosin. Yes, I am confident we do.
Mrs. Brooks. Are you confident, Dr. Hassell?
Dr. Hassell. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Brooks. OK. Mr. Demske and Dr. Crosse, are you
confident that we have enough proper vaccines and therapeutics
in place to save lives?
Mr. Demske. I don't have sufficient information to answer
that question.
Dr. Crosse. Nor do I.
Mrs. Brooks. Dr. Sosin, would that be for the workers that
are being exposed or how about with respect to the community,
building on Congressman Burgess' question about one of these
individuals, if they had been exposed and presented to an ER.
Can you, you know, explain to me what your view is if you have
one about our national strategic stockpile and the coordination
within the Government enterprise with respect to the national
stockpile.
Dr. Sosin. Thank you for that question. The strategic
national stockpile actually did provide vaccine for the States
that had workers who were receiving prophylaxis. So I am
confident that we have the ability to do it. We have a vast
supply of countermeasures for anthrax. The nature of the event
that you might be trying to prepare for always determines
whether you have enough. But there have been a variety of
processes and procedures to review the requirements that have
been set by the Federal Government for this threat, and we meet
those current requirements.
Mrs. Brooks. Dr. Hassell, any comments on our stockpile and
how we can ensure that we have the medical countermeasures in
place across the board for incidents?
Dr. Hassell. No, ma'am. That is really my colleagues'
purview.
Mrs. Brooks. Dr. Crosse and Mr. Demske, what I think this
event, going back to what this event shows us, is that while we
are trying to respond at a managerial level. Are you familiar
with the private sector's involvement with the medical
countermeasures, development, and procurement? Are either of
you involved in that at all.
Dr. Crosse. I have done some past work looking at, for
example, how the Federal Government has built flexible
manufacturing facilities to be able to respond, and those are
private sector entities. Mr. Demske?
Mr. Demske. I am sorry. I have nothing to add.
Mrs. Brooks. OK. I would like to go back to, and I guess if
I could actually--I might have a little bit of time with
respect to the death certificate.
Building on the congressman's question about the death
certificate, could both of you please explain with a little bit
more detail how that process works, what is required to be
placed on the death certificate, and if you are sending these
spores to another lab, what is it that the one lab should have
that the other lab then--what is common in looking at the death
certificate. Is the organism required to be listed or it is not
listed when you do this sample blind test? Can you please go
into a bit more detail? I am sorry my time is up, but I would
ask if we might have just a couple of more minutes?
Mr. McKinley. One more.
Mrs. Brooks. One more minute?
Mr. McKinley. You will have to yield.
Mrs. Brooks. And then if you could please submit any
further explanation in writing?
Dr. Hassell. So it might be, if I may, we can submit a more
full explanation of how that is used. I will say, though, we
are considering not using a death certificate in our current
operation. At least we are reevaluating that because it may
send the wrong message. So that is one thing when I worked more
with my colleagues about that very issue because we have
concerns about what message that sends.
Mrs. Brooks. Dr. Sosin?
Dr. Sosin. The laboratory itself makes the determination
about death certificates and the sending process. That is not a
select agent regulation or requirement.
Mrs. Brooks. OK. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you.
Ms. DeGette. Chairman, I would like to strike the last
word.
Mr. McKinley. We have one more----
Ms. DeGette. Oh, OK.
Mr. McKinley. We have one more on this. The Chair now
recognizes the Congressman from North Carolina, Mr. Hudson.
Ms. DeGette. Sorry.
Mr. Hudson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to the
panel for bearing with us here until the end. Would you like to
expand on that answer at all, my colleague's question about the
death certificates and the practice? Were you able to fully
answer that?
Dr. Hassell. For myself, I need to get some more detail on
that and give a better answer to that for all three of you that
were interested in that issue.
Mr. Hudson. OK. I offer you some time if you got anything
else you want to say.
Dr. Sosin. No. I know that CDC does issue a death
certificate with materials, inactivated materials that it sends
out on the occasions when it needs to. I do not know the
particular details of that death certificate.
Mr. Hudson. Well, I would appreciate it if you all would
follow up with that because my understanding is DoD in
particular, it is common practice to send the death
certificate, even when you are doing this sort of blind sample.
And in this case, it wasn't sent until much later. So I would
love to see a little more thorough answer on that. So thank you
for that.
Overall, if anyone on the panel wants to, I am trying to
grasp the mission of the Federal Select Agent Program, your
understanding of the mission of the program, and do you think
it is being fulfilled? I would open that up to anybody.
Dr. Sosin. Well, clearly the incidents that you have seen
are serious, are the kinds of indicators that we need to do
more, and I think the important message from us is that over
the history of this program, since the regulations, the
authorization in 2002 and the new regs in 2003, this program
has continued to receive input and advice from a broad spectrum
which is needed, advice from Congress, advice from the public,
advice from Federal and non-Federal entities to improve the
program. And the program has changed and improved over time.
That said, this incident and these incidents have elevated
the importance of some procedures requiring more direct
oversight and review, and we will address that.
So there is a broad question, and many of those questions
about BSL-3 that are not select agent, questions about how many
labs. These are important, critical policy questions. Congress
has an important role to play in them. The Federal interagency
has an important role to play in them. CDC will contribute to
the debate about the pros and cons of the different approaches.
But when consensus is achieved or direction is given, we will
follow those directions.
Mr. Hudson. So in your opinion, the mission is worthy and
salvageable I guess to try and use laymen's terms?
Dr. Sosin. Absolutely.
Mr. Hudson. OK.
Dr. Sosin. We are committed to this work.
Mr. Hudson. Dr. Hassell, you know, the Dugway has had
problems in the past, continues to have problems, you know. It
has been referenced plenty of times here today. Just in
summation, how does this continue to keep happening and how do
you see us getting out of this cycle?
Dr. Hassell. So I mentioned earlier that this falls under
the Army. So speaking on their behalf, I can tell you that the
Army takes this very seriously, at the highest level. Now that
is something that sounds easy to say, but I can assure you, in
my interactions with them, this is taken very personally and
very seriously at the highest level. So the Secretary of the
Army on down is taking action on this. They are going to look
at issues specific to Dugway but not limiting it to that,
looking at the chain of command across the board. And it is not
just so that this could be a better reporting chain up. There
may be opportunities that arise from this for better
interaction across from them. The laboratory at USAMRIID for
example may have some capabilities. Perhaps the organizational
structure was preventing them, their free flow of information.
I am not sure that is the case, but I am hoping that is some of
the outfall from this. But you know, just getting all the
laboratories working better together, standardizing where it is
appropriate, and then moving forward.
Mr. Hudson. Well, I appreciate that. I guess I would offer
this up to the GAO or the OIG. What existing tools does CDC
have that it is currently not using that would allow it to
better oversee and take corrective actions against labs that
commit violations? Either one of you.
Dr. Crosse. Well, we have a concern that the reporting when
incidents occur is really just to one level up from the
laboratory and that more senior management in an organization
is not necessarily informed, that the Select Agent Program is
really focused, you know, within that laboratory but not
necessarily ensuring that accountability up the chain of
command over that laboratory is occurring. You know, we also
are just undertaking work at the request of this committee to
look at inactivation procedures and the extent to which there
are scientific questions for how that should be done, where
there are best practices, what types of methods are being used,
how that information is shared, you know, what the current
scientific issues are, and how the methods are validated and
whether that information is being shared across this
enterprise. And that is a concern that clearly labs have been
operating on their own, and the information has not been being
shared across the enterprise.
Mr. Hudson. I appreciate that. Mr. Chairman, I am out of
time. If you wouldn't mind maybe answering in writing if you
have just a summary of some of the tools, I would appreciate
your testimony as well. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you. And before we conclude, I think
Ranking Member DeGette, you had a question?
Ms. DeGette. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just wanted to
thank the witnesses for coming and also relay a conversation I
had with Chairman Murphy, which is I am really urging him to
have a hearing later this fall, towards the end of the year,
after you all have figured out what your improvements in the
standardization and the oversight are going to be. What I have
found during my many years on this committee is when we have
some crisis like this, the witnesses come in. They say we need
to do better. OIG and GAO come in and say there are things that
can be done, and then another year goes by and we have another
breach. So I have urged the chairman and I think he is in
agreement to really hold your feet to the fire to make sure
that these improvements, these gaps that you have identified
are filled, that the standards and the coordination, the plans
are completed. And I believe he will have that hearing, and on
both sides of the aisle, we would agree that needs to be done.
Thank you very much.
Mr. McKinley. And I would also ask hopefully, when we talk
to them, that we also have some accountability. You have heard
several of the questions have been about how many people are
going to lose their job over every fail over the last 10 years
on this. So I think that is something that we are going to be
looking for, is to see how many people have lost their job as a
result of this unaccountability.
So with that, in conclusion, I would like to thank all the
witnesses and the members that participated in today's hearing.
I remind members that they have 10 business days to submit
questions for the record, and I ask that all witnesses all
agree to respond promptly to those questions. And with that,
the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:09 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

One year ago, we held a hearing to review an incident
involving the handling of anthrax in Ziploc bags at the CDC--a
troubling instance where safety practices were ignored despite
the potential for lethal consequences. That should have been a
wake up call, yet here we are a year later, examining yet
another anthrax incident. This time it's the ``inadvertent''
shipment of live anthrax from a Defense Department lab in
Dugway, an Army facility in Utah. These shipments went across
our country and around the world. How? Dugway failed to
inactivate anthrax and then failed to detect that the anthrax
was still alive.
According to the Defense Department's most recent figures,
live anthrax was shipped to at least 192 commercial companies,
academic institutions, and Federal labs. Since this anthrax was
supposed to be ``inactivated,'' the controls over who received
the shipments weren't as stringent as they might have been if
it was known the anthrax was live. This is not just a public
health concern, it is also a very real national security
concern.
Just last week the Defense Department issued a report
detailing its review of the events surrounding the shipments of
live anthrax. The report acknowledged a lack of specific,
validated standards to guide the development of protocols,
processes, and quality assurance measures. In fact, in most
cases, the Defense Department observed that each of its
laboratories followed its own procedures and protocols.
We are reminded today, this is not an isolated incident.
The Government Accountability Office, the nonpartisan
Government watchdog, highlights in written testimony that these
``recent safety lapses have illustrated multiple breakdowns in
compliance with established policies and inadequate
oversight.'' The committee remains concerned that oversight is
fragmented because no single entity is in charge of overseeing
high-containment laboratories that handle select agents.
We need to find out why these events keep happening and
what the Federal Government plans to do to stop this troubling
pattern of safety lapses at our bioterrorism labs. These
blunders need to stop now. We need to learn from the mistakes
of the past and stop repeating them once and for all. Otherwise
I am afraid we'll be right back here next summer discussing the
latest security lapse.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
