- FEDERAL EFFORTS ON MENTAL HEALTH: WHY GREATER HHS LEADERSHIP IS NEEDED

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FEDERAL EFFORTS ON MENTAL HEALTH: WHY
GREATER HHS LEADERSHIP IS NEEDED

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 11, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-8

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

_____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
95-097                        WASHINGTON : 2015

_________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                     Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania
Chairman
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          KATHY CASTOR, Florida
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
BILL FLORES, Texas                   YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma               Massachusetts
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       GENE GREEN, Texas
CHRIS COLLINS, New York              PETER WELCH, Vermont
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
JOE BARTON, Texas                        officio)
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Tim Murphy, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Diana DeGette, a Representative in Congress from the state
of Colorado, opening statement.................................     5
Hon. Marsha Blackburn, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Tennessee, opening statement..........................     7
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     8
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the state of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................    76

Witnesses

Linda T. Kohn, Ph.D., Director, Health Care, U.S. Government
Accountability Office..........................................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    13
Richard G. Frank, Ph.D., Assistant Secretary for Planning and
Evaluation, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.......    23
Prepared statement...........................................    27
Answers to submitted questions...............................    80
Pamela S. Hyde, J.D., Administrator, Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration.................................    24
Prepared statement...........................................    27
Answers to submitted questions...............................    87

Submitted Material

Subcommittee memorandum..........................................    77

FEDERAL EFFORTS ON MENTAL HEALTH: WHY GREATER HHS LEADERSHIP IS NEEDED

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 11, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Tim Murphy
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Murphy, McKinley, Burgess,
Blackburn, Griffith, Bucshon, Flores, Brooks, Mullin, Hudson,
Collins, Cramer, DeGette, Schakowsky, Tonko, Yarmuth, Clarke,
Kennedy, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Gary Andres, Staff Director; Sean Bonyun,
Communications Director; Karen Christian, General Counsel;
Noelle Clemente, Press Secretary; Brad Grantz, Policy
Coordinator, Oversight and Investigations; Brittany Havens,
Legislative Clerk; Charles Ingebretson, Chief Counsel,
Oversight and Investigations; Peter Kielty, Deputy General
Counsel; Alan Slobodin, Deputy Chief Counsel, Oversight; Sam
Spector, Counsel, Oversight; Peter Bodner, Democratic Counsel;
Hannah Green, Democratic Policy Analyst; Tiffany Guarascio,
Democratic Deputy Staff Director and Chief Health Advisor;
Elizabeth Letter, Democratic Professional Staff Member; and
Nick Richter, Democratic Staff Assistant.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. TIM MURPHY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Murphy. Good morning. I now convene this morning's
hearing entitled, ``Federal Efforts on Mental Health: Why
Greater HHS Leadership is Needed.''
In December 2013, Laura Pogliano of Maryland sent to me a
poem she wrote about what it is like to raise a child with
schizophrenia, as opposed to other life-threatening conditions.
Here is an excerpt: ``Your child's illness is afforded the
cooperation of caregivers and parents to attend to it. My
child's illness is left to the right to refuse care laws,
leaving him to get as sick as he can possibly be, and choose
suicide, death, starvation, and continued illness with severe
brain damage. Your child is never arrested or jailed because he
is sick. My child is almost always arrested at some point. Your
child can have any bed in any hospital in the country across
the board. My child can only have a psychiatric bed. And there
is an estimated deficit of 100,000 beds in this country, and
the wait for one can take 6 months or longer in some places.
Your child can tell people if he is sick. My child cannot, or
he won't get a job or a date or an apartment. Your child can
get a fun trip sponsored by an organization that assists sick
children. My child can't go on any trips usually, and neither
can his family.''
Despite her struggles getting Zac into care, Laura
considered herself lucky, telling USA Today in November that,
even though her son's mental illness has driven her to
bankruptcy, sidetracked her career, and left her clinically
depressed, she called herself lucky, though Zac was in and out
of a hospital 13 times in 6 years. She said, even though he has
fantasies that he is rich, hallucinations that he is being
followed, and delusions that his mother is a robot, even though
he has slept with a butcher knife under his pillow, Laura
considered herself lucky that Zac wasn't in jail or homeless.
Last month, Zac was found dead in his apartment. He was 23
years old.
Laura had dreams for her son, Zac, just like every parent
does. For countless parents, those dreams are tragically cut
short. She searched for help and faced barriers to care.
Federal laws, HIPAA laws, state laws. We have criminalized
mental illness so you can't get help unless you are homicidal,
suicidal, or you are well enough to understand you have
problems and ask for help.
This has been a growing problem since states closed down
their old asylums, as they should have, but what did the
Federal Government do here to take care of this problem, to
meet the needs of millions of Americans with serious mental
illness and their families?
Today, we will hear how our mental health system is an
abject failure for those families. Its failure is not a
Democrat or Republican issue; it knows no party label, and to
be honest, this spans multiple administrations, but the cost is
enormous for the 10 million Americans with serious mental
illness. Those with schizophrenia die 25 years earlier than the
rest of the population. Forty thousand people in this country
died last year from suicide, while another million attempted it
in the last year. And that is a trend that is getting worse.
Rates of homelessness, incarceration, unemployment, substance
abuse, violence, victimization, and suicide among those with
serious mental illness continue to soar. These are the very
human, very tragic, and very deadly results of a very, very bad
report card.
Today, thanks to a diligent year-long review of Federal
efforts related to severe mental illness conducted at the
bipartisan request of this committee, the Government
Accountability Office has produced unassailable evidence that
our mental health system is dysfunctional, disjointed, and a
disaster.
No Federal agency has had a more central role in the
disaster than the Department of Health and Human Services. HHS
is charged with leading the Federal Government's public health
efforts related to mental health, and the Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration, otherwise known as
SAMHSA, is required to promote coordination of programs related
to mental illness throughout the Federal Government. At the
onset of our investigation 2 years ago, we found it troubling
that no one in the Federal Government kept track of all the
Federal programs serving individuals with severe mental
illness. My colleague and I, Representative Diana DeGette,
asked GAO to take on this task. Following a detailed survey of
eight Federal departments, including the Department of Defense,
Veterans Affairs, and HHS, the GAO identified at least 112
separate Federal programs supporting individuals with severe
mental illness. But most damning in this GAO report were these
two principal findings. One, interagency coordination for
programs supporting individuals with serious mental illness, a
key function of SAMHSA, is lacking. And number two, to see
whether programs specifically targeted at individuals with
serious mental illness are working, agencies evaluated fewer
than \1/3\ of them.
Now, you can't manage what you don't measure. For families
who want and need treatment, HHS has given families
bureaucracy, burdens and barriers instead.
We spend a lot of money in this country on mental illness,
and the term evidence is thrown around like candy to prevent
people from asking where is the real proof that this works. GAO
offered two recommendations to correct these failings. HHS
rejected them both. In each instance, HHS dismissed GAO's
concerns rather than presenting evidence to dispute GAO's
conclusions or volunteering improvements, or having the
humility to say maybe we ought to do something about this.
When you have a mental health system that is as broken as
the one we face today, with a report card so tragic, you would
think that the Federal agency charged with coordinating a
myriad of activities supporting individuals with severe mental
illness would be open to recommendations from an experienced,
nonpartisan authority, steeped in the practices of good
government. HHS, in rejecting both of GAO's recommendations,
and failing to identify any aspect of either recommendation
worth working with or leaning from, is essentially saying there
is no room for improvement, and that the agency is doing
everything right at present. This is unbelievable.
The hubris shown by HHS is downright insulting and callous
to the millions of families and individuals suffering under
this broken system. This is a clear example of unaccountable
government; one that refuses to recognize its failings even
when it is presented with constructive recommendations for
improvement.
We want to help in this committee, this Congress wants to
help, but we can't help you if you are not even willing to
admit there is a problem. We are not talking simply about
wasted dollars or lost program efficiencies. We are talking
about lives ruined, about dreams that are shattered, we are
talking about preventable tragedies and lives lost.
I have spoken before about individuals with schizophrenia
and bipolar disorders who aren't just in denial, but have the
very real medical pathology that they cannot recognize they
have an illness. It is called anosognosia, and it is a symptom
found in stroke victims, Alzheimer patients, and persons with
schizophrenia. HHS and SAMHSA are similarly in denial. You are
so out of touch with understanding their own failures that it
causes greater pain to millions of American families.
Meanwhile, the lives of individuals with severe mental illness
and their families remain in the balance.
This morning, we will hear from the author of the GAO
report, as well as representatives from HHS. These include Dr.
Linda Kohn, Director of Health Care at GAO; Dr. Richard Frank,
Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation at HHS; and
Pamela Hyde, Esquire, the Administrator of SAMHSA. I thank them
all for joining us this morning, and I would like to give the
ranking member an opportunity to deliver remarks of her own.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Murphy follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Tim Murphy

In December 2013, Laura Pogliano of Maryland sent to me a
poem she wrote about the what it's like to raise a child with
schizophrenia as opposed to other life-threatening conditions.
Here's an excerpt:
Your child's illness is afforded the cooperation of
caregivers and parents to attend to it.
My child's illness is left to the Right to Refuse Care
Laws, leaving him to get as sick as he can possibly be, and
choose suicide, death, starvation, continued illness with
severe brain damage.
Your child is never arrested or jailed because he's sick.
My child is almost always arrested at some point.
Your child can have any bed in any hospital in the country,
across the board.
My child can ONLY have a psychiatric bed, and there's an
estimated deficit of 100,000 beds in this country, and the wait
for one can take 6 months or longer in some places.
Your child can tell people he's sick. My child cannot, or
he won't get a job, or a date, or an apartment.
Your child can get a fun trip sponsored by an organization
that assists sick children.
My child can't go on any trips, usually, and neither can
his family...
Despite her struggles getting Zac into care, Laura
considered herself lucky, telling USA Today in November that
``even though her son's mental illness has driven her to
bankruptcy, sidetracked her career and left her clinically
depressed.''
She called herself ``lucky'' even though Zac was in and out
of the hospital 13 times in 6 years.
``Even though he has fantasies (he's rich), hallucinations
(he's being followed) and delusions (Mom is a robot). Even
though he's slept with a butcher knife under his pillow.''
Laura considered herself lucky that Zac wasn't in jail or
homeless.
Last month, Zac was found dead in his apartment. He was 23.
Laura had dreams for her son Zac just like every parent
does.
For countless parents, those dreams are tragically cut
short.
She searched for help and to face barriers to care--federal
laws, HIPAA laws, state laws. We've criminalized mental illness
so you get help unless you are homicidal, suicidal, or well
enough to understand you have a problem.
This has been a growing problem since states closed down
their old asylums--as they should have. But what did the
federal government do here?
Today, we'll hear how our mental health system is an abject
failure for those families. Its failure is not a Republican or
Democrat issue. It knows no party label and spans multiple
Administrations.
The cost is enormous for the ten million Americans with
serious mental illness.
Those with schizophrenia die 25 years earlier than the rest
of the population.
40,000 die from suicide while another million will have
attempted it in the last year alone, a trend that's getting
worse
Rates of homelessness, incarceration, unemployment,
substance abuse, violence, victimization, and suicide amongst
those with serious mental illness continue to soar.
These are the very human, very tragic, and very deadly
results of a very, very bad report card.
Today, thanks to a diligent year-long review of federal
efforts related to severe mental illness conducted at the
bipartisan request of this Subcommittee, the Government
Accountability Office (GAO) has produced unassailable evidence
that our mental health system is dysfunctional, disjointed, and
a disaster.
No federal agency has had a more central role in the
disaster than the Department of Health and Human Services
(HHS). HHS is charged with leading the federal government's
public health efforts related to mental health, and the
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA) is required to promote coordination of programs
relating to mental illness throughout the federal government.
At the onset of our investigation two years ago, we found
it troubling that no one in the federal government kept track
of all of the federal programs serving individuals with severe
mental illness. My colleague Diana DeGette and I asked GAO to
take on this task. Following a survey of eight federal
agencies, including the Departments of Defense, Veterans
Affairs, and HHS, GAO identified at least 112 separate federal
programs supporting individuals with severe mental illness.
Most damning in the GAO report were these two principle
findings:
(1) interagency coordination for programs supporting
individuals with serious mental illness, a key function of
SAMHSA, is lacking
(2) to see whether programs specifically targeting
individuals with serious mental illness are working, agencies
evaluated fewer than one-third of them.
You can't manage what you don't measure, which is why HHS
has given families and individuals who want and need treatment
bureaucracy, burdens, and barriers instead.
We spend a lot of money and the term ``evidence'' is thrown
around like candy--to prevent people from asking where the true
proof that it really works.
GAO offered two recommendations to correct these failings;
HHS rejected them both, in each instance dismissing GAO's
concerns rather than presenting evidence to dispute GAO's
conclusions orvolunteering improvements.
When you have a mental health system as broken as the one
we face today with a report card so tragic, you would think
that the federal agency charged with coordinating the myriad of
activities supporting individuals with severe mental illness
would be open to recommendations from an experienced,
nonpartisan authority steeped in the practices of good
government. HHS, in rejecting both of GAO's recommendations--
and failing to identify any aspect of either recommendation
worth working with or learning from--is essentially saying
there is no room for improvement, and that the agency is doing
everything right at present. It's unbelievable.
The hubris shown by HHS is downright insulting to the
millions of families and individuals suffering under this
broken system.
This is a clear example of unaccountable government--one
that refuses to recognize its failings, even when it is
presented with constructive recommendations for improvement. We
are not talking simply about wasted dollars or lost program
efficiencies. We are talking about lives ruined, dreams
shattered, and preventable tragedies.
I've spoken before about individuals with schizophrenia and
bipolar disorder who aren't just in denial but who have the
very real medical pathology that they cannot recognize they
have an illness. It's called anosognosia, and it's a symptom
found in stroke victims and persons with schizophrenia.
HHS and SAMHSA are similarly in denial. They are so out of
touch with understanding their own failures that is tgreater
pain to millions of American families. Meanwhile, the lives of
individuals with severe mental illness, and their families,
remain in the balance.
This morning, we will hear from the author of the GAO
report, as well as representatives of HHS. These include:

Linda T. Kohn, PhD, Director, Health Care at GAO;

Richard G. Frank, PhD. Assistant Secretary for
Planning and Evaluation at HHS; and

Pamela S. Hyde, Esquire, Administrator of SAMHSA.
I thank them all for joining us this morning.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DIANA DEGETTE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Ms. DeGette. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This is an issue that is important to both of us, and so I
am really glad that you have convened this hearing as part of
our continuing oversight of the Federal Government's mental
health programs.
This hearing, as the chairman mentioned, follows a report
by the GAO released last week, which raises questions about the
more than 100 programs that generally support individuals with
serious mental illness, and 30 programs that specifically
target those individuals.
In particular, the GAO report raises questions about the
coordination and evaluation of mental health programs, and
offers recommendations to help us improve the mental health
system.
I look forward to hearing our witnesses' testimony today
because they are very familiar with the report and the issues
that it raises, and I know that we will all be able to see
further insights and context for our understanding of the
Federal role in mental health care.
The report provides us with an importance chance to assess
current Federal efforts to address mental health, and to see
where there is room for improvement in our system. And I know
we can all agree there is ample room for improvement. I want to
hear about how we can ensure that Federal programs actually
assist people who need them, and I also think we need to talk
about how to assess the efficacy and cost of those programs.
While it is important to talk about providing services and
support to those with serious mental illnesses, I think we also
need to have a broader conversation about mental health in this
country. According to the National Institute of Mental Health,
we have nearly 44 million individuals, almost 19 percent of all
U.S. adults, living with mental illness every year. And, Mr.
Chairman, as we have discussed, sometimes if we can help folks
in the early stages of mental illness, then that helps us begin
to prevent the disintegration into very, very serious mental
illness and worse.
So we have spent a lot of time on this subcommittee looking
at mental health issues. We have learned about the need to
appropriately target mental health funding, and the need to
adequately fund mental health research. We have learned about
the importance of health insurance that provides coverage for
those with mental illnesses. I know, Mr. Chairman, that you
want to pass mental health legislation that will make a real
difference. I do too. I hope there are ways that we can work
through these issues and concerns on a bipartisan basis, with
the focus group that we have put together over the last year. I
think we should work together to put the lessons learned in
these Oversight hearings into practice.
I want to thank all of the witnesses for being here today.
It is important to hear from all of you. I know we can agree
there is always room for improvement, and we look forward to
hearing from you about how we can do that.
With that, I will yield the balance of my time to
Representative Kennedy.
Mr. Kennedy. I want to thank the ranking member, and I
thank the chairman for calling this important hearing. I thank
the witnesses for their testimony today, and for your work on
an extraordinarily important issue.
This report outlines alarming lapses in coordination at the
Federal level. It raises questions about how Federal funds are
being spent, and points a finger at our Nation's patchwork
mental health system for failing to meet the needs of millions
of Americans.
Back home, I see communities on the frontlines of a growing
crisis, looking for the Federal Government for support. From
substance abuse to at-risk youth, our failure to delivery
dependable, affordable, and accessible mental health care is
costing lives back at home.
So instead of throwing in the towel, we should see this
report as a rallying cry. We must do better, devote more
resources to mental illness, invest in our efforts at improving
coordination, evaluation, and delivery of care. But for that to
work, we need to know the scope of the problem and the range of
our response. We must have the commitment of our Federal
partners to take on a growing problem. Lasting mental health
reforms are long overdue, and I look forward to working with
all of you. And I want to thank again the chairman and ranking
member for calling this important hearing.
I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Yields back. Thank you.
I now recognize the vice chair of the full committee, Mrs.
Blackburn of Tennessee, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to
welcome our witnesses, and highlight a couple of things that
have already been said that I think are important to all of us
on the panel.
As the chairman mentioned, 10 million adults in the U.S.
had a serious mental illness during 2013. That should not be
lost on us. And we also were very concerned about coordination
of care, and we are going to have some questions about that. I
have discussed this with some of the mental health
professionals in my district who are involved in this
coordination of care. And Ms. DeGette's comments are so on
point with so much of what we are going to look at, the money
that is spent. Your budget is a hefty budget for substance
abuse and mental illness, but the lack of coordination of care,
the lack of the resources meeting the needs at the local and
state agencies, how this feeds through, this is something that
does cause us concern. We are pleased to hear from the GAO
today, and we want to look at where the recommendations the GAO
has, how they have fallen on deaf ears at HHS and SAMHSA, and
we are concerned about the delivery of parity, if you will, in
mental illness and addressing those needs, and we are concerned
with what appears to be a great deal of indifference when it
comes to just spending money but not getting results.
So I will yield back my time, Mr. Chairman, or yield to
whomever would like to have the time. And we look forward to
hearing from our witnesses.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
Does anybody on this side wish to make any comments? If
not, then we will proceed. Thank you.
Mr. Pallone. I am sorry, Mr. Pallone is here now. Mr.
Pallone is recognized for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
convening the hearing today. And I am glad we are taking this
opportunity to examine how the Federal Government supports
individuals with serious mental illness, but also looking into
how we can strengthen our mental health system for the future.
We all agree that there are ways we can do better.
The GAO report we are talking about today calls for
improved coordination and evaluation of Federal programs that
help those with serious mental illness. And these are valuable
goals, but I want to make sure we don't discount the work HHS,
SAMHSA, and other Federal agencies are already doing in these
areas.
The GAO report identified 112 programs across the Federal
Government that support those with serious mental illness. Now,
within that group, there are 30 programs that specifically
focus on individuals with serious mental illness. GAO, however,
did not review the merits or quality of these programs, so we
should hear from HHS and SAMHSA about the work they are doing,
how these programs help individuals with a variety of needs,
and how these agencies plan to build upon these programs moving
forward.
It is also important to emphasize that HHS, SAMHSA, and
their partners across the Federal Government do coordinate on
mental health programming. The GAO report notes that, and I
quote, ``Staff from 90 percent of the programs targeted serious
mental illness reported coordinating with their counterparts
and other programs.''
HHS coordinates with a number of departments and agencies,
including the Department of Defense, the Department of Veterans
Affairs, the Department of Education, to carry out critical
programs for individuals with serious mental illness. SAMHSA
also co-chairs the HHS Behavioral Health Coordinating Council,
which includes a Subcommittee on Serious Mental Illness.
The GAO report also noted that SAMHSA had completed, or was
in the process of completing, nine program evaluations in the
past several years, and I look forward to hearing from SAMHSA
about the results of these evaluations, and how they have
improved program efficiency and effectiveness, as well as how
SAMHSA utilizes other monitoring and evaluation tools. Notably,
the GAO report did not review the programs that provide
reimbursement of insured services for individuals with serious
mental illness, including Medicare and Medicaid. These programs
are a huge part of the work HHS does to support early diagnosis
and treatment of mental illness.
And lastly, Mr. Chairman, I want to highlight the role of
the Affordable Care Act in guaranteeing coverage of mental
health services. Continuing implementation of the ACA will go a
long way in ensuring that people with serious mental illness
have access to the treatments they need. In fact, we should
support programs that focus on prevention and early diagnosis
of mental illness. We can more effectively support individuals
with serious mental illness by treating them early in the
course of their illnesses, and altering the trajectory of their
condition.
So again, I want to thank our witnesses. And I would like
to yield my remaining time to the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Tonko.
Mr. Tonko. I thank the ranking member of our Energy and
Commerce Committee for yielding. And I thank you, Mr. Chair,
and, Ranking Member DeGette, for holding this hearing on such a
critically important topic.
As I travel around my congressional district in the capital
region of New York, I hear stories daily from individuals and
families as they struggle with the ravages of mental illness.
Their pain is indeed real, and we must commit this Congress to
doing everything within its power to ease their burdens.
In that vein, I welcome today's hearing, and the underlying
GAO report that we are here to discuss as it advances the
conversation on some basic good governance questions on how the
Federal Government should approach programs aimed at helping
individuals with serious mental illness. And while I concur
with the report's conclusion that high-level coordination can
be essential to identifying gaps in services and evaluating
overall efforts, it is important to keep in mind that
coordination is not an end unto itself. Where additional
interagency coordination, whether at the programmatic or
department level, can be an effective use of the Federal
Government's time and money, and more importantly, is
beneficial to individuals with serious mental illness, we
should welcome it. Where it does not meet that test, we should
not be adding additional layers of bureaucracy that divert time
and resources from the people that need it the most.
As such, I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today
on where coordination efforts can be built upon so that we can
have an improved outcome for those living with mental illness.
And I thank you and yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Murphy. The gentleman yields back.
So at this point, we will proceed with testimony of our
witnesses. I would now like to introduce the panel.
First, we have Dr. Linda Kohn, who is Director with the
Health Care Team at the U.S. Government Accountability Office,
where she works on issues related to public health, health
information technology, and medical research programs. Welcome.
Dr. Richard Frank is the Assistant Secretary for Planning and
Evaluation at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
In this role, he advises the Secretary on development of health
and disability, human services data, and science policy, and
provides advice and analysis on economic policy. Welcome here.
And the Honorable Pamela Hyde is accompanying Dr. Frank. Ms.
Hyde is the Administrator of the Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration, otherwise known as SAMHSA. Ms.
Hyde has more than 35 years of experience in management and
consulting for public health care and human service agencies.
I will now swear in our witnesses.
You are all aware that the committee is holding an
investigative hearing, and when doing so, has the practice of
taking testimony under oath. Do any of you have any objections
to testifying under oath? Seeing that no one has an objection,
the chair then advises you that under the rules of the House
and the rules of the committee, you are entitled to be advised
by counsel. Do any of you desire to be advised by counsel
during testimony today? And all the witnesses decline. In that
case, would you all please rise and raise your right hand, and
I will swear you in?
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Murphy. You are now under oath and subject to the
penalties set forth in Title XVIII, section 1001 of the United
States Code.
You may now each give a 5-minute summary of your written
statement. Please make sure the microphone is turned on and
close to your face.
Dr. Kohn, you may begin. Make sure the microphone is on and
pulled close.
Ms. Kohn. Is it on? Got it. OK.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.

STATEMENTS OF LINDA T. KOHN, PH.D., DIRECTOR, HEALTH CARE, U.S.
GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE; RICHARD G. FRANK, PH.D.,
ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR PLANNING AND EVALUATION, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES; ACCOMPANIED BY PAMELA
S. HYDE, J.D., ADMINISTRATOR, SUBSTANCE ABUSE AND MENTAL HEALTH
SERVICES ADMINISTRATION

STATEMENT OF LINDA T. KOHN, PH.D.

Ms. Kohn. Thank you, Chairman Murphy, Ranking Member
DeGette, and members of the subcommittee. I am pleased to be
here today to talk about GAO's recent report on Federal
programs related to serious mental illness. Our report calls
for leadership from HHS to coordinate Federal efforts in
addressing the needs of this very vulnerable population.
Our report has three major findings, and I will touch
briefly on each. First, we found 112 programs across eight
different agencies that serve the needs of people with serious
mental illness, and 30 of these programs target or specifically
focus on people with serious mental illness. We believe it is
unlikely that all the programs were identified because agencies
had difficulty identifying them, not because they weren't
willing to, that was not an issue, but the agencies didn't
always have information on the extent to which a program was
serving the seriously mentally ill, although they knew that
their programs were serving that population; for example, a
program related to homelessness.
The list we think is also incomplete because agencies
varied in how they decided which programs to include in their
responses to us. So, for example, DoD identified all of their
suicide prevention programs in their list of programs for the
seriously mentally ill, but SAMHSA initially did not because
they saw the program as serving a broader population.
Subsequently, SAMHSA added these programs to the list.
There was another example, HUD and VA jointly administer a
housing program for disabled veterans. VA put it on the list of
programs, HUD didn't put it on the list of programs. So there
are a number of examples like that, and it is that kind of
variation that can limit comparability among similar programs.
So this list is a starting point, not an ending point.
Our second objective related to coordination, and we found
that while the staff involved in implementing these programs
reported taking steps to coordinate activities with staff in
other agencies, we were unable to identify any formal mechanism
to support interagency coordination at a higher level. And such
coordination, GAO believes, could help comprehensively identify
the programs, resources, and potential gaps or duplication in
Federal efforts that support the seriously mentally ill.
In the past, HHS has led the Federal Executive Steering
Committee for Mental Health with members from across the
Federal Government, but that group hasn't met since 2009. HHS
told us that another group, the Behavioral Health Coordinating
Council, performed some of the activities previously done by
the Steering Committee, but that council is limited to HHS and
doesn't have members from across the Federal Government.
We identified examples of other interagency committees, but
they tended to be broader in scope, such as the focus on
homelessness or focused on a specific population such as
veterans. It is important to emphasize, and has been noted,
that the staff that carry out the programs reported to us that
they were working with colleagues in different agencies, and
trying to coordinate their efforts. That is a very positive
thing in place, however, staff at the program level are not
necessarily in the right position to identify possible gaps,
potential duplication, whether Federal resources are being
spent wisely. Getting that kind of an overarching perspective
requires some higher level, interagency coordination, and we
called on HHS to establish a mechanism for that. HHS did not
agree because they said that coordination is already occurring
at the programmatic level, but for the reasons I noted, we
continue to believe that action is necessary.
Our third recommendation related to evaluation, and we
found that as of September 2014, across the 30 programs that
specifically target the seriously mentally ill, fewer than \1/
2\ had evaluations that were done in the last 5 years or were
underway. Of the completed evaluations, SAMHSA had evaluated
the greatest proportion of their programs, seven of the 13
programs they listed, and had two evaluations underway. And
there were a couple of other evaluations that were done at DoD.
We recognize program evaluations can be costly and very
time-consuming, and that the agencies need to prioritize those
efforts. Our report also notes that the agencies reported to us
that they do other program monitoring activities. They look at
data performance measures, they stay on top of the literature
to understand how to improve programs and identify
improvements, and again, that is a very important component,
but we don't believe that performance monitoring takes the
place of formal program evaluations that can examine the
overall effectiveness of a program.
We called on four agencies that sponsor programs that
target the seriously mentally ill; specifically, DoD, Justice,
HHS, and VA, to document which of their programs should be
evaluated and how often. DoD, Justice, and VA agreed with our
recommendation; HHS did not agree, and suggested our report
overemphasized the role of evaluations, but again, we continue
to believe that action is needed.
That concludes my prepared remarks. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Kohn follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Dr. Kohn.
Dr. Frank, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD G. FRANK, PH.D.

Mr. Frank. Good morning, Chairman Murphy, Ranking Member
DeGette, and members of the subcommittee. My name is Richard
Frank, and I am the Assistant Secretary for Planning and
Evaluation. I am pleased to be here to discuss coordination of
care for people with serious mental illness. I have dedicated
much of my career to studying mental health care and mental
health policies, so it is gratifying to participate in a
serious conversation on this issue.
The occasion that brings us here is the release of GAO's
report on efforts to coordinate care for people with serious
mental illness. Past GAO reports on serious mental illness have
had profound effects on this Nation's mental health policy. I
think of the 1977 report, Returning the Mentally Disabled to
the Community, Government Needs to Do More, as having set the
standard. The GAO showed how government could best support
people with serious mental illness by improving the care they
receive from community providers.
Today's report falls short of that earlier effort. It
doesn't adequately make the connection between government
activities and meeting the complex needs of people with serious
mental illness.
In the time I have with you, I aim to make some of those
connections; one, by offering a more complete view of HHS
programs that serve people with serious mental illnesses; two,
by describing the investments that we are making to coordinate
services for this population; and three, to explain our
evaluation efforts.
Serious mental illnesses are not a diagnosis. Serious
mental illness is how we talk about a collection of conditions
and impairments that disrupt peoples' lives, much as the
chairman mentioned. Therefore, serious mental illness does not
fall easily into quantified categories of programs, peoples,
and dollars.
Let me begin first by outlining the role of the Federal
Government in serving people with serious mental illnesses, and
putting that into context.
Medicare and Medicaid Supplemental Security Income and
Social Security Disability Insurance are the largest sources of
public support for people with serious mental illnesses. With
regard to HHS programs that pay for and deliver mental health
services, Medicare and Medicaid account for 40 percent of
national spending on mental health care, and an even larger
share of care for people with serious mental illnesses. All
other Federal programs, including SAMHSA's programs, account
for 5 percent of spending. The remaining 55 percent is made up
of spending by private insurance, state and local government
expenditures, and out-of-pocket payments by households. By
focusing on the 5 percent, the GAO report overlooks much of HHS
activities regarding caregiving and support for people with
serious mental illnesses. HHS leadership recognizes the need to
coordinate services for this population. Coordination can be
thought of in a number of ways. It can occur at the level of
formal coordination across large Federal agencies, at the
program level, at the provider level, or at the level of the
individual beneficiaries where providers, programs, and people
interact.
People do not live their lives according to program
boundaries, and we have learned not to run our programs as if
they do. As a result, we have been making substantial
investments in new organizations and institutions that
coordinate public services at the level of the individual
beneficiary. A few important examples include SAMHSA's Primary
Behavioral Health Care Integration, or PBHCI, Program, Medicaid
Health Homes, and the Integrated Care demonstration for
beneficiaries that are dually eligible for Medicare and
Medicaid.
The GAO report also raised the issue of evaluation to
develop evidence to guide program design and funding decisions.
We have, and are conducting a variety of important and rigorous
evaluations of programs that coordinate care for people with
serious mental illnesses. They include evaluations of programs
run by SAMHSA, CMS, Social Security, HUD, and by states using
Federal program funds. The results of evaluations have shaped
legislation, program design and regulations.
I will highlight two to give you a flavor of our efforts.
First, ASPE has worked with SAMHSA to evaluate primary
behavioral health care integration programs, showing how
coordination across providers affects health and mental health
of people with serious mental illnesses. Second, we will be
evaluating early intervention programs for serious mental
illnesses, in conjunction with the Social Security
Administration and in relation to SAMHSA's block grant set
aside. In addition, SAMHSA, ASPE, and CMS are jointly
developing new performance and quality measures that are
essential to conducting evaluations and monitoring progress.
This Administration has shown a deep commitment to
addressing mental health care, and support for serious mental
illnesses, specifically. It is that commitment that was an
important factor in my returning to work here at HHS. I am
proud of the record to date, but I know we can do more. More
needs to be done, and I hope to join you in doing just that.
Thank you.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
Ms. Hyde, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PAMELA S. HYDE, J.D.

Ms. Hyde. Good morning, Chairman Murphy, Ranking Member
DeGette, and members of the subcommittee. My name is Pamela
Hyde and I am the Administrator of the Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration.
In 2014, over \3/4\ of SAMHSA's mental health funding was
targeted toward improving the lives of persons with serious
mental illness, or SMI. Individuals with SMI in their families,
like those I have met, served, and advocated for over 4
decades, are the reason we are, at SAMHSA, working so hard to
coordinate critical Federal programs to maximize the impact on
the ground for those who need it the most. For example, SAMHSA
and other HHS agencies work with the U.S. Interagency Council
on Homelessness, the Departments of Veterans Affairs and
Housing and Urban Development, to prioritize the needs of
veterans and individuals experiencing chronic homelessness;
many of whom have serious mental illnesses. Because of these
joint efforts, 25,000 fewer people experienced chronic
homelessness in 2014 than in 2013, and the number of homeless
veterans has declined 33 percent.
I also represent Secretary Burwell as co-chair of the
President's Interagency Task Force on Military and Veterans
Mental Health. Through this effort, SAMHSA is working with the
Department of Defense, VA, and the White House to address the
mental health needs of military families. SAMHSA also leads the
Interdepartmental Federal Working Group on suicide prevention,
and helps fund and support the Federal and private sector
collaboration that developed, and is beginning to implement the
Surgeon General's national strategy on suicide prevention.
In 2014, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline, funded
by SAMHSA, and coordinated with the VA, served over 1.3 million
Americans.
SAMHSA's Children's Mental Health Initiative coordinates
mental health, education, juvenile justice, and human services
structures that serve young people with serious emotional
disturbances. Evaluations of this program have demonstrated
impressive results in improving functioning, reducing arrests,
suicidal thoughts, and days spent in inpatient care, and
increasing family satisfaction with services.
Along with the Assistant Secretary for Health, I co-chair
the Secretary's Behavioral Health Coordinating Council, which
includes a new subcommittee focused on the needs of persons
with SMI, and other subcommittees that address issues affecting
SMI individuals and their families across multiple programs.
SAMHSA also coordinates Federal efforts informally. For
example, SAMHSA worked with the Departments of Labor and
Education to develop and disseminate a toolkit about supported
employment for persons with SMI. In 2014, SAMHSA implemented a
new grant program to test how to help states take this
evidence-based practice to scale.
In 2014, SAMHSA also implemented new congressional language
requiring that at least 5 percent of each state's mental health
block grant funds be used to provide treatment and services for
individuals with first-episode serious mental illness. SAMHSA
is coordinating with the National Institute of Mental Health to
provide guidance and technical assistance to help states
implement evidence-based interventions to prevent the
disability often associated with early onset SMI.
Also new in 2014 is the President's Now is The Time plan,
which grew out of the tragedy in Newtown, Connecticut, and
received broad bipartisan support by Congress. This series of
programs allows us to increase the behavioral health workforce,
train and support school personnel, and assist youth and young
adults, especially those with serious emotional disturbances,
to be identified and receive the treatment they need for
emerging mental health and substance use problems as they
transition to adulthood. These new programs necessitate robust
interdepartmental coordination with other HHS agencies. The
Departments of Education and Justice, and state education and
behavioral health entities, as well as students, families, and
community responders.
And in collaboration with the Departments of Treasury and
Labor, SAMHSA and other HHS agencies have coordinated efforts
to help individuals with significant behavioral health needs
enroll in newly available affordable care coverage, and to help
plans and consumers know about their obligations and rights
under National parity legislation.
Even though much has been accomplished, we recognize the
need to do more. The President's 2016 budget proposes a new
SAMHSA Crisis Services Program to bring together multiple
state, Federal, and community funding streams, and service
deliver infrastructures so that emergency rooms, inpatient
residential and treatment facilities, and jail cells will not
be the only options for SMI individuals in crisis and their
families.
SAMHSA works every day to coordinate and collaborate within
the Federal Government and across the country to assure
evidence-based treatment is available and delivered so
individuals with SMI and their families can live satisfying and
productive lives. We appreciate Congress' continuing
partnership in these efforts.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Frank and Ms. Hyde follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Murphy. Thank you. I thank the witnesses for their
testimony.
I am now going to recognize myself for 5 minutes. Just for
the record, I just want to make it clear, Dr. Kohn, you have
never treated a patient with mental illness, correct?
Ms. Kohn. No, I have not.
Mr. Murphy. Dr. Frank, you never have? You have never
treated anybody with mental illness, right? That is not your
field, correct? And, Ms. Hyde, you have never treated anybody
in the service for mental illness, correct?
Ms. Hyde. Right.
Mr. Murphy. I just want to be on the record. That way--yes.
So, Dr. Kohn, despite HHS's disagreement with your
recommendations, does GAO stand by its report and its
recommendations?
Ms. Kohn. We do. We continue to believe that action is
needed in both areas. We think there can be greater
coordination to provide that overarching perspective. It is not
that we didn't acknowledge a number of----
Mr. Murphy. OK, I just need to have that yes or no. I----
Ms. Kohn. Yes.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. Dr. Frank, in this 2006 book that
you wrote, Better But Not Well, you wrote that individuals with
a mental illness have flexible entitlements to an array of
largely uncoordinated programs and resources. The resources
flow from a dizzying range of Federal, state, and private
organizations. Do you still believe that?
Mr. Frank. I believe that continues to be the case.
Mr. Murphy. I want to post these two posters. One is a list
of all the Federal programs on the right there, and then I have
put together, based upon the GAO report, the organizational
flowchart of the programs on the left, using your term dizzying
array.
So you still believe that? Yes?
Mr. Frank. I believe that there is a complex set of needs
provided by a complex set of organizations for people with
serious mental illness.
Mr. Murphy. The law states that SAMHSA must promote the
coordination of service programs conducted by other
departments, agencies and organizations, and individuals that
are or may be related to the problems of individuals suffering
from mental illness. So yes or no, do you believe SAMHSA is
responsible for the interagency coordination of mental health
programs?
Mr. Frank. I am focused with----
Mr. Murphy. Well, it is a yes or no. I have just read you
what is the regulations of law. Is that true or not?
Mr. Frank. Well, SAMHSA has some responsibilities. What I
want to do is point out that it is very important in our view
how services actually get coordinated on the ground for people,
and part of that is----
Mr. Murphy. That is a good point.
Mr. Frank [continuing]. On a Federal level, but part of it
is also done in other places that involve Federal activities.
Mr. Murphy. Well, that is a good point. So let me look at
the bottom line here because I don't want to just talk about
bureaucracy and the beltway--people don't understand that.
So first I have a slide up, heart disease mortality rate.
As you can see, it is going down over the last 10 years. Let us
look at the next slide. Stroke mortality rate. That is going
down. Next slide, HIV/AIDS mortality rate, that is going down.
Next slide, auto accident mortality rate, that is going down.
The next slide, cancer mortality rate, that is going down. Now,
none of these are within your wheelhouse, but let us look at
the next slide. Wow. Suicide mortality rate, it is getting
worse.
Ms. Hyde, you just talked about these programs you have;
one of them being the suicide plans, and I think you even said
you thought it was having some success, but I look at this--do
you intend to take any action to respond to either or both of
the recommendations by GAO about the need to better evaluate
and coordinate these programs?
Ms. Hyde. We have taken significant action in this arena
and brought together a public-private partnership that has
developed with the Surgeon General a national strategy for
suicide prevention.
Mr. Murphy. Well, they said some of these----
Ms. Hyde. It is only a----
Mr. Murphy [continuing]. Organizations haven't met for 5
years.
Ms. Hyde. It is only a couple of years old. We are just
beginning to implement----
Mr. Murphy These organizations have been in place for a
long time. The mandate of SAMHSA to meet has been in place for
a long time. The GAO report says that some of these groups
haven't met since 2009. Now, you said that there is a new group
which has met once in January. So when you talk about
coordination of these programs, I just want to deal with--we
are trying to help here, but I oftentimes tell people when they
come to this committee, if you want to meet a friendly
Congress, come in and say, you know what, we messed up big time
and we have to change this. But when you give me this litany of
all these successes, and I look at that, that is 40,000 people
died in this country last year. Forty thousand. One point two
million suicide attempts requiring some help.
Now, if we were to also look at the employment rate among
the mentally ill, it also is getting worse. You also have
states saying a huge number of people in jails, increase in
homelessness. I don't know where these numbers come from, but
when I go around to different states, I am sure where you are
from colleagues, it is a problem. So you are obligated under
the law to coordinate these programs. You have the
Congressional Committee that has jurisdiction over your agency.
It is concerned over this lack of coordination in this area.
And here the nonpartisan Government Accountability Office is
concerned about this. The Assistant Secretary for Planning and
Evaluation of HHS sitting next to you is concerned about this
lack of coordination in this area. So are you going to take
action to change this coordination, not to say we have done it
in the past, everything is fine, but are you going to make
further changes on coordination?
Ms. Hyde. You asked about one thing, and you made a comment
about a separate thing. So we have taken significant action on
suicide. We are concerned about those numbers and working on
it. We have plans in place and a public-private partnership
that is working to develop approaches to deal with zero suicide
and health care, and other clinical guidelines and other
approaches to measuring and dealing with getting people to pay
attention----
Mr. Murphy. Well, I----
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. To suicide. So we have a lot of work
going on in----
Mr. Murphy. I appreciate that, and I think----
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. Coordinating suicide efforts. You
asked a different question about a different entity.
Mr. Murphy. Well, it is all related here, and the issue too
is, as Dr. Kohn also said, that at first, SAMHSA couldn't even
acknowledge that suicide was related to serious mental illness
is a problem.
I am out of time. I will now recognize Ms. DeGette for 5
minutes.
Ms. DeGette. Administrator Hyde, I will give you the
opportunity to respond to the second question that the chairman
asked, if you would like to, very briefly.
Ms. Hyde. Yes, we initially didn't--obviously, not everyone
who has suicidal ideation, or decides that they may want to
make a plan to hurt themselves, has a serious mental illness,
but about 90 percent of them do have mental health issues. So
when first asked was that an SMI program, we were concerned
with calling it an SMI program. As we went through the work
with GAO, the distinction between a program that supports
people with serious mental illness versus a program that is
specifically and only designated for those individuals was
made, and in that case, we brought our program into the SMI
tent.
Ms. DeGette. And actually, that is a perfect segue, Dr.
Kohn, to the question I wanted to ask you, which is, you
testified and your report really talked about how agencies had
difficulty identifying which programs served the seriously
mentally ill. Is that because of definitional problems? In
other words, you might have a program that has a lot of
mentally ill people it is serving, some of them serious, some
of them not, by definition. Is it a definitional issue
sometimes?
Ms. Kohn. It may be sometimes. We provided a definition of
what we meant by program, what we meant by serious mental
illness, what we meant by serious emotional disturbance, SED.
We provided those definitions. So sometimes it could be that
there were definitional issues and they counted the programs
differently. Sometimes an agency might have rolled up their
programs into 1, another one disaggregated the programs.
Ms. DeGette. OK, so it is. Dr. Frank, I want to ask you,
throughout all of your agency's programs, is there one clear
definition of seriously mentally ill that all of the different
programs are broken into?
Mr. Frank. As I mentioned in my testimony, it is very
difficult to draw a line around a program and say that that
is----
Ms. DeGette. So your answer is no, it is not specifically
polled out?
Mr. Frank. We have a definition of serious mental illness--
--
Ms. DeGette. Right.
Mr. Frank [continuing]. So we can identify the people and
we can identify the services they need, but there are many
programs----
Ms. DeGette. But the programs aren't just separated out for
that.
Mr. Frank. The programs don't cut that----
Ms. DeGette. Administrator Hyde, is this true in SAMHSA as
well?
Ms. Hyde. That is correct. There are multiple definitions
of serious mental illness both in the law and in peoples'
parlance and how they use that term.
Ms. DeGette. Do you think in evaluating the programs at
your agencies, it would be important to make this distinction
or not? Yes or no will work here if you can do that.
Ms. Hyde. For any particular program, yes. We are in the
process of actually redefining SMI for purposes of the block
grants because the definitions and the DSM and the standards
for determining who has what diagnoses have changed.
Ms. DeGette. And, Dr. Frank?
Mr. Frank. Could you repeat the question?
Ms. DeGette. Yes, the question is do you think it would be
important to be able to more clearly identify illnesses--or
treatments affecting seriously mentally ill patients, or is
that impossible?
Mr. Frank. I think the most important thing is to identify
the people and then we can sort of work up to the programs----
Ms. DeGette. What the programs they need, OK.
One of the things Dr. Kohn talked about in her report that
really struck me was that a lot of the programs throughout the
Federal Government have really not been evaluated for efficacy.
And I am wondering, Administrator Hyde, if you can talk about
what she says, in particular, about SAMHSA, because I am a very
evidence-based person. If you have a program targeted at the
mentally ill in general, the seriously mentally ill in
particular, one might think that you would want to have
evidence that it works.
Ms. Hyde. If you look at the report, actually, SAMHSA is
doing a good job at evaluating our programs. And I am very
proud, actually, of the work we have done to create a Center
for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality to actually
develop our capacity to do quality measurement, and to do
evaluations.
Ms. DeGette. And so you think that kind of evaluation is
important?
Ms. Hyde. Absolutely, and we----
Ms. DeGette. And----
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. Are doing a lot of it.
Ms. DeGette. And, Dr. Frank, what about through the other
agencies?
Mr. Frank. Yes, we do a tremendous amount of evaluation.
Ms. DeGette. OK, but a lot of your programs have not been
evaluated----
Mr. Frank. Well, actually----
Ms. DeGette [continuing]. Like that.
Mr. Frank [continuing]. I think that one of the problems in
the report is when you overlook 89 percent of the money that we
spend, and pretend we don't evaluate there, you miss all the
evaluations we are doing. So we have lots of Medicaid----
Ms. DeGette. But of the ones you looked at----
Mr. Frank. Well----
Ms. DeGette [continuing]. Some of them were not being
evaluated.
Mr. Frank. Some of them were not, for example----
Ms. DeGette. Do you intend to evaluate them?
Mr. Frank. Well, let us take a particular example. One of
the four programs that they pointed out was a technical
assistance program. OK? We don't usually evaluate small
technical assistance programs, whereas we do evaluate treatment
programs. And so there is a distinction, and those were not
brought out very clearly in the report.
Ms. DeGette. If you could supplement your answers with more
specific----
Mr. Frank. Yes.
Ms. DeGette [continuing]. That would be helpful.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Murphy. Sure thing. Can I just ask, as a clarification,
because as this hearing goes on we are going to need this
distinction, when Congresswoman DeGette asked about defining
things for serious mental illness, and you said we should
identify the people, what does that mean?
Mr. Frank. What I think is very important to do is, as you
said earlier, work from the bottom line up. So let us find the
people we are worried about here, people with serious mental
illness, let us look at what they need, let us look at what
they are getting, and then when they are not getting what they
need, let us figure out how to fix that.
Mr. Murphy. So you are acknowledging that is not taking
place right now.
Mr. Frank. Excuse me?
Mr. Murphy. So you are acknowledging that is not taking
place right now.
Mr. Frank. I am acknowledging that it--well, as you held
out, my view of this is better but not well, which means----
Mr. Murphy. All right.
Mr. Frank [continuing]. We are getting better.
Mr. Murphy. Mrs. Blackburn, recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let us stay with this issue of efficacy because I think it
is so important. And, Ms. Hyde, I want to come to you on this.
Your strategic plan, the 2011-2014 strategic plan, does
acknowledge the need for coordination to solve the problems of
homelessness, joblessness, educational challenges of the
serious mental ill. The GAO report says this is not taking
place, so we are wanting to see where the outcomes are. So does
SAMHSA believe that the present state of program staff level,
as opposed to agency level coordination, within and across
different agencies, and Mr. Frank talked a little bit about
this, that it is adequate to achieve the GAO-approved standards
of interagency coordination, despite the concerns expressed by
the GAO report?
Ms. Hyde. I think we can always do better, but we do a
significant amount of work with Justice, with VA, with DoD,
with a number of other agencies that touch and work with our
population----
Mrs. Blackburn. Ms. Hyde, let me interrupt you right there.
Yes, you are doing work, but we are not seeing that you are
achieving outcomes. Now, you get $3.6 billion a year. How much
of that money, and I want a detail on this, how much of that
money is going to make it down to the local and state agency
level to help with these problems, and how much of that are you
all keeping here in D.C. over at the agency? I want to know
where this money is going and where it is meeting the need,
because we are not seeing the outcomes. And you can submit that
to me.
Dr. Frank, let me come to you. You say serious mental
illness is a collection of problems. And yes, you have
substance abuse and mental health, we understand that. Should
Congress help you out on this? Should we help you and legislate
a definition of serious mental illness? Do you need us to do
that to help you get to the point of saying here is a problem,
we can define it, here is an action item, here is what the
expected outcome. Yes or no?
Mr. Frank. I don't think there is a lot of disagreement. I
think there are ambiguities around the edges, but I would say
that if you and I and the chairman and the ranking member sat
down, we would come to a 99 percent agreement on what we are
talking about here.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Well, then let us pull Congress into
this, and as we are trying to get to a point of coordination,
how about working with the Energy and Commerce Committee, or
perhaps keeping an open mind to GAO's recommendations rather
than rejecting them outright, so that we can say here is the
definition of serious mental illness, and here is what the
expected outcomes are going to be to help individuals. See, I
don't think we are ever going to get to mental health parity
unless we can do this. We can admit there is a problem in how
we address it, how we expend these funds.
So are you all willing to keep an open mind to the GAO's
report say maybe we are not meeting the need, and maybe we are
missing the mark on this one? Are you open-minded about that?
Mr. Frank. Ms. Kohn?
Mrs. Blackburn. Each of you. Go ahead.
Mr. Frank. Yes, OK. I am certainly open-minded to--I think
the problem that we started the hearing off with that the
chairman raised, which is what do we do for people on the
ground, how do we coordinate their care, is absolutely
something that we have an open mind about how to deal with.
Mrs. Blackburn. Are you open-minded to working with us----
Mr. Frank. Absolutely.
Mrs. Blackburn [continuing]. To get to the bottom of this?
OK, Ms.----
Mr. Frank. Absolutely.
Mrs. Blackburn. Ms. Hyde?
Mr. Frank. Can I add one other point?
Mrs. Blackburn. Sure.
Mr. Frank. I think the very important thing though is we
need to talk about all of HHS programs, and all the tools we
have in the toolkit in order to fix the problem, and not just
focus on 11 percent of the action.
Mrs. Blackburn. Yes.
Mr. Frank. We need to focus on 100 percent.
Mrs. Blackburn. On the total thing. I appreciate that.
Let me ask you this, Dr. Frank, I only have 24 seconds
left. If we were to move to zero-base budgeting, where you
start from dollar one ever year and build out your programs
based on what is working, would that be helpful to you? So
would you have more flexibility there?
Mr. Frank. I was reading Robert McNamara's biography the
other day. I am not sure where I stand on zero-base budgeting
there.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
Now recognize the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Pallone, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
There are always going to be opportunities to strengthen
and expand the Federal programs that serve individuals living
with serious mental illness, and I know that the officials here
from HHS would agree with that statement.
So I would like to learn more about the new programs and
other improvements that the department has made since fiscal
year 2013 when GAO conducted its evaluation, and how the
department plans to expand its work in the future.
So in fiscal year 2014, SAMHSA implemented a new set-aside
in the mental health services block grant requiring the states
to use 5 percent of their block grant funds to support
treatment for individuals in the early stages of serious mental
illness.
Administrator Hyde, can you describe how states will be
using that funding, and how will SAMHSA be monitoring and
evaluating this initiative?
Ms. Hyde. Thank you for the question. First of all, we are
very pleased with this set-aside approach. We are working with
all 50 states and working with NIMH to provide guidance and
technical assistance to them based on evidence-based approaches
that NIMH has developed.
Some of the states get very little money out of this 5
percent set-aside because the block grant is, frankly, not
enough money for the country. So to the extent that it is a
very small amount, it is going to be hard to do a consistent
evaluation. We are working with each state to try to make sure
within their system they can identify what they are doing, and
in some states, for example, they are actually putting their
own money and multiplying these dollars by as much as seven
times. So different states are going to have different capacity
to give us, feed us back what they have been able to do with
it. Some states, they will be able to train people on what the
new evidence-based approaches are. And other cases, they will
be able to actually put services on the ground. And in many
states, Medicaid is going to pay for the actual service for
some people, whereas the state will be using our dollars to
evaluate, to oversee, to train, and to direct the traffic.
Mr. Pallone. OK, thanks. In your testimony, you mentioned
that many people living with serious mental illness are
unemployed. And in fiscal year 2014, SAMHSA launched the
Transforming Lives Through Supported Employment program to help
address this problem. Can you elaborate on how this program
specifically supports individuals with serious mental illness,
and what other partners does SAMHSA work with on this program?
Ms. Hyde. Yes. This is a program that we work with the
Department of Labor, and now within HHS because the program has
moved over to the Administration on Community Living to
implement an evidence-based practice that we developed through
evaluation and through research and approaches a few years ago
to develop a toolkit that is actually specifically for people
with serious mental illness, and specifically supports them in
gaining and maintaining employment.
We have seen increases in employment using that approach.
And so what we are trying to do with this very small amount of
transformative money is help a state figure out how to take
that to scale using their multiple systems and approaches
within their state. So their labor departments, their job
departments, whatever departments they have that make those
things and those supports available in their state.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Last week, SAMHSA outlined additional
plans to support individuals with serious mental illness in its
fiscal year 2016 budget request. So I wanted to ask you if you
could tell us about the demonstration program that SAMHSA has
proposed to improve state and local responses to behavioral
health crisis.
Ms. Hyde. Yes, thank you for that question. The crisis
program which I mentioned is, again, one we are really excited
about because there has been a lot of conversation about
emergency rooms and appropriate use of emergency rooms, and
that is the only option that people have, or people ending up
in jails and prisons when they really should be getting
treatment, or lack of inpatient beds, and all of that, when you
look at it, surrounds the issue of how you deal with a crisis.
How do you prevent it, how do you de-escalate it, and how do
you follow up so that it doesn't happen again, and how do you
engage the family as well as the individual in managing that
process.
So we are proposing a crisis services system program to try
to see if we can bring those multiple funding streams and
multiple systems together in a few communities to test and
demonstrate how best to do that. These are multifaceted systems
that have to work with that. We do have some evidence that if
we do it right, we can prevent the need for so many inpatient
beds, and certainly prevent the boarding and other kinds of
inappropriate emergency room use.
Mr. Pallone. Did you want to mention any other initiatives
that HHS hopes to launch or expand in the next fiscal year to
support individuals with serious mental illness?
Ms. Hyde. Well, we are expanding other areas for veterans'
mental health, we are expanding mental health workforce issues,
because that is a huge and growing issue for our ability to
meet goals. And we are actually also expanding tribal mental
health issues to try to make sure that we can address mental
health issues in Indian country, which have been sorely
unaddressed, especially for young people who are dealing with
suicide issues, bullying issues, job issues, and other things.
So we are trying very hard to focus on this transition-aged
youth. We also have a healthy transitions program that we are
going to continue in the next fiscal year through the
President's budget. So trying to put all of that together to
deal with that group or that set of young people, first episode
issues and trying to prevent, as the chairman said and Ms.
DeGette said, to try to prevent it from getting to be a more
serious problem later.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. Just as a follow up to something
that Mr. Pallone had mentioned, and you talked about the block
grant program, I want to clarify, in your draft block grant
application here, when it comes to the block grants, you
actually say that these block grants--you don't talk about
being for serious mental illness. In fact, you say the
opposite, ``it is about everyone, not just those with illness
or disease, but families, communities, and the whole
population, with an emphasis on prevention and wellness.'' That
is not serious mental illness. So I want to make it clear that
when you are responding to Members on this, if it is partly
related to mental illness, let us know that, but don't tell us
the whole thing is related to that because it is not.
Ms. Hyde. Mr. Chairman, the people with serious mental
illness have been documented to have significant health
problems. They die sooner----
Mr. Murphy. Yes.
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. Than other people, and some cases
with serious mental illness, years and years earlier, mostly
from preventable health issues.
Mr. Murphy. Right.
Ms. Hyde. So our wellness efforts are definitely directed
toward people with serious mental illness who, we don't want
them to die----
Mr. Murphy. I----
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. And we don't want them to have
diabetes.
Mr. Murphy. I will challenge that later, but I need to get
on to the next Member.
Mr. McKinley is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
holding this hearing. I think that this is something that you
have been championing for the 4 years I have been in Congress,
and I really applaud you for the efforts of trying to get
better attention on serious mental illness. So congratulations
on continuing to move this.
But, Ms. Kohn, I have a question of you, if you could. You
heard a lot of the testimony. I saw you studying those charts
that showed the mortality rate dropping, and we have heard some
folks here explain how they really are making progress. That is
the spin of Washington.
So my question is, based on what you have heard, what you
have studied, do you believe that HHS and SAMHSA have done
everything they can to reduce the chance of duplication, and in
particular, really supporting mental illness in this country?
Do you think they are doing everything they can?
Ms. Kohn. Our report acknowledges the variety of activities
they are undertaking right now, but we do believe there is room
for improvement, particularly in areas related to greater
interagency coordination, and greater evaluation as part of
helping uncover, develop, advance the data--the evidence base
for treatment of mental illness----
Mr. McKinley. OK, thank you.
Ms. Kohn [continuing]. And serious mental illness.
Mr. McKinley. Ms. Hyde, you appeared at this committee back
in 2013, and you acknowledged apparently during that, I wasn't
on the committee at the time, that some of the organizations
that SAMHSA is funding may be running programs or expressing
opinions that are at odds with SAMHSA. Is that still accurate?
Ms. Hyde. When we fund a program, we fund them for a
specific activity. They may have positions that they take
before Congress or in the press, or any place else, that they
have a right to take, that is not associated with our program.
Mr. McKinley. But are you funding agencies that--for
example, one was apparently cited during that meeting that you
were funding a group that encouraged individuals with serious
mental illness to experiment going off their doctor-prescribed
medicines.
Ms. Hyde. We do not fund going off medications. We do fund
assistance and helping----
Mr. McKinley. But----
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. People understand medications and
how best to work with their doctors.
Mr. McKinley. But you are funding the National Coalition of
Mental Health Recovery. Dr. Fischer has put out articles about
how it is designed to help people--in their literature, their
newsletter, how to come off their psychiatric medicine on their
own. So----
Ms. Hyde. We do not fund that organization for----
Mr. McKinley. I am sorry, but----
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. Any of those positions.
Mr. McKinley [continuing]. You funded it to $330,000.
Ms. Hyde. If you listen to my whole sentence, we don't fund
that organization for that position----
Mr. McKinley. Well, I saw you make fun of the other--so I
guess I need to get--because I saw your look, and I may be deaf
but I can read body language and I saw your disgust with the
question asked earlier. So I am concerned that you are funding
some of these programs, and I hope that you will be more
cognizant, more careful about the agencies that you are
funding.
I am curious about one other that I haven't seen. Is SAMHSA
taking a position on the--I guess it is the medical use or
maybe just the use of marijuana for relieving anxiety? Has
SAMHSA taken a position on whether or not marijuana is a drug
that might help people with mental illness?
Ms. Hyde. Our position on marijuana is that for young
people, it is unacceptable and inappropriate in any case, in
any state, anywhere. And our efforts around marijuana are
primarily around prevention and dealing with underage use where
the evidence shows that it has negative educational and social
and other implications for young people. Same is true of
alcohol.
Mr. McKinley. OK, but I am just staying with marijuana----
Ms. Hyde. That is in our effort----
Mr. McKinley [continuing]. That the epidemiological studies
have indicated that there is beyond a doubt that the marijuana
use increases the risk of schizophrenia. Do you agree with that
report that I have a copy of here?
Ms. Hyde. We are concerned about the issues with marijuana,
and we are working with NIDA and with other entities within HHS
to look at----
Mr. McKinley. So do you fund----
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. The research issues.
Mr. McKinley. Do you fund--we have such short time. You
know the game here. Do you fund any organization that supports
the use of marijuana as a treatment?
Ms. Hyde. I don't know the answer to that.
Mr. McKinley. Could you get back to me on that----
Ms. Hyde. I don't know whether or not the----
Mr. McKinley [continuing]. Please?
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. American Psychological Association
supports it, and we do fund them.
Mr. McKinley. OK, in the time frame that I have----
Ms. Hyde. I don't know whether or not other organizations--
--
Mr. McKinley [continuing]. Dr. Frank----
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. Support that.
Mr. McKinley. Dr. Frank, if you could, please, last week we
had on a meeting here about the influenza and the vaccines, do
you know of any group that the HHS is funding along the same
line of reasoning, any group that we are funding that is
advocating not using vaccines?
Mr. Frank. I don't know the answer to that question. I
would be happy to find out and get back to you on it.
Mr. McKinley. You understand the question?
Mr. Frank. No, I understand the question, I just don't know
the answer.
Mr. McKinley. Yes, OK. If you could please.
Mr. Frank. Yes.
Mr. McKinley. It would make a lot of----
Mr. Frank. I think it is a perfectly reasonable question, I
just don't know the answer.
Mr. McKinley. OK, if you could get back to us and----
Mr. Frank. Sure.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you very much. I----
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. Mr. Kennedy, you are recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank the
witnesses again for their testimony.
I just want to put the discussion today in context, which I
think is an extraordinarily important discussion, and hopefully
we can try to find some ways to work together on making sure
that these programs are getting to a population that needs some
extra assistance.
But, Dr. Frank, I think in the HHS response letter, they
put into context that--of Federal Government expenditures on
mental health, Medicaid pays for about 27 percent, Medicare is
about 13 percent, private insurance is about 26 percent, and
all of the other programs that are subject to today's
discussion are roughly 5 percent. Is that right?
Mr. Frank. Correct.
Mr. Kennedy. So the discussion that we are having here, as
integral as it is to making sure the system works better, we
are also talking about 5 percent of the overall mental health
spending in this country. So if we are looking at a much more
systemic approach, one would say we should also focus on the 95
percent of the rest of that funding, and how to reform that
delivery system and make sure that care is much enhanced. Is
that fair to say?
Mr. Frank. Yes. I think that is exactly the point I was
making, not to in any way diminish our need to pay attention to
the 5 percent, but the other part, the other 40 percent really
needs attention, and that is why our integration efforts on
Health Homes, on duals, on expanding SNPs, on expanding case
management, are so important because they happen in that other
part.
Mr. Kennedy. When I am back home, Doctor, I hear all the
time about lack of beds, lack of availability at doctors, lack
of wraparound services. It strikes me that a lot of that has to
do with incentives and the way the Federal Government
reimburses doctors, hospitals, clinicians that are working in
this field. You align those incentives properly, you are going
to get the beds, the treatment facilities, the incentives for
doctors to treat. Is that fair to say?
Mr. Frank. I am an economist and I believe that.
Mr. Kennedy. OK, thank you.
So with that as context, I do want to go back to the basis
of the report for a quick minute. The report indicates, ``that
coordination specific to serious mental illness was lacking
among interagencies, committees,'' but it goes on to say that,
I believe again, ``staff from 90 percent of the programs
targeted serious mental illness reported coordinating with the
counterparts in other programs.''
The coordination we are talking about doesn't happen
because it is legislated, it will only be enhanced if there is
a cultural change at some senior staff level, and a willingness
to implement both the letter and the spirit of the law.
Dr. Frank, how can we engage senior staff, and does that
interaction at the staff level suffice, or is more senior staff
interaction necessary? We will start with you and go from
there.
Mr. Frank. I think your point about culture is very
important, and I think this Administration has been
extraordinarily attentive to building that culture.
Administrator Hyde has had a central role in that, taking steps
to reach out far beyond their 5 percent there into Medicaid and
into other areas. Our Secretary is extraordinarily supportive
of these matters. And so the result is we have tremendous
amount of joint activities with HUD, with SSA, with Labor, with
Treasury, et cetera, and it is really those types of focused
working groups across the government that have really, I think,
improved our ability to coordinate with in a variety of
problem-specific areas.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you, doctor. I will just stop you there
because I have about a minute left. And, Ms. Hyde, if you have
a response to that.
Ms. Hyde. I think I would just echo Dr. Frank. The
recommendation that was made was about a specific type of
infrastructure that we think isn't going to be the best way to
address the issue on the ground. So that is the distinction we
are trying to make here, that we have a lot of coordination
going on, we believe in coordination, but the particular
recommendation and the approach seems just like more
bureaucracy.
Mr. Kennedy. So if creating that or strengthening that
interagency working group from the senior level isn't the right
way, and understanding that you are pushing coordination now, I
realize I only have about 30 seconds, but what would you
suggest, in 30 seconds, to really push that out to the lowest
levels on the ground and try to enhance that coordination even
more so? I think it is hard to debate the fact that that is
needed.
Ms. Hyde. I think it is multifaceted. We have to have
person-to-person interactions, we have to have working groups
on specific issues as what we described, we have to have staff-
to-staff level programmatic interactions, and we have to push
our grant programs to require coordination at the state and
grantee level. So we are doing all of those things, and trying
to bring that together where it works on the ground for
individuals.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you. I yield back my extra 7 seconds.
Mr. Murphy. Do you want Dr. Kohn to also answer your
question too because she didn't get a chance to answer----
Mr. Kennedy. Yes, if you don't mind.
Mr. Murphy [continuing]. That question?
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you.
Mr. Murphy. Dr. Kohn?
Mr. Kennedy. Please.
Ms. Kohn. OK, sure. Thank you. I don't think what we are
putting out here is an either/or, that if there is coordination
at a local level that, therefore, coordination at the Federal
level is unneeded, or vice-versa, that coordination at the
Federal level will supplant the coordination that happens at
the local level. I don't think there is that kind of a trade-
off. And the concerns we were raising about lack of
coordination at the Federal level inhibits our understanding of
the Federal footprint in this area. What are the programs in
place, recognizing that there is a lot there in Medicare and
Medicaid and Social Security, as the OMB letter in response to
this committee had shown, but we didn't start from that
spending side. We started from the programs, the population
served. As Dr. Frank noted, people don't fall into neat program
categories, and that is why that coordination becomes so
important because that coordination helps identify if there is
any potential overlap or duplication, are there gaps, are there
programs that are complementary that aren't being linked
together, need some stronger linkages so we maximize our
existing resources in our existing programs. If it is a gap and
nobody is looking at it right now, then how does the
coordination happen? It is by definition not visible.
So the coordination we talk about is not instead of the
coordination at the local level, it is in addition to.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you. Thanks for the extra time.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. Mr. Griffith, you are recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I appreciate
having 5 minutes, but I wish I had a lot more. I would like to
get the information that Mrs. Blackburn asked for earlier in
regard to the money as it flows to the state and local levels
as well. So when you report to her, if you could make sure I
get a copy of that, I would greatly appreciate it.
I am going to need some yes-or-no answers because I have to
fly through this because of the time limitations that we do
have. But GAO noted that SAMHSA officials did not initially
include any of their suicide prevention programs among those
that can support individuals with serious mental illness. Isn't
that true, Ms. Hyde, yes or no?
Ms. Hyde. I explained why. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. And SAMHSA explained to GAO that the suicide
prevention services it administered were not limited only to
individuals with serious mental illness, and served a broader
population. That is also true, isn't it? Yes.
Ms. Hyde. It does serve a broader population.
Mr. Griffith. And at the subcommittee's hearing on suicide
prevention held last September, the Chief Medical Officer of
the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention noted that in
more than 120 studies of completed suicides, at least 90
percent of the individuals involved were suffering from a
mental illness at the time of their deaths. And I thought I
heard you say earlier that you agreed with that number, is that
correct?
Ms. Hyde. That is correct.
Mr. Griffith. And my one concern there is that, of course,
we had the 10 percent. Would you also consider that 90 percent
to be serious mentally ill, yes or no?
Ms. Hyde. I don't think researchers think that that is all
serious mental illness as it might be defined in a functional
level.
Mr. Griffith. But it is pretty serious when somebody ends
up dead, isn't it?
Ms. Hyde. Absolutely. That is why we had the----
Mr. Griffith. All right.
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. Conversation about----
Mr. Griffith. And----
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. What to include in----
Mr. Griffith [continuing]. After further discussion with
GAO, SAMHSA included its suicide prevention programs, among
those that can support individuals with serious mental illness.
Isn't that also true?
Ms. Hyde. I am sorry, can you repeat that question?
Mr. Griffith. I can. After further discussion, you then
submitted the suicide prevention programs, among those that can
support individuals with serious mental illness, even though
earlier you had not included them because you thought it was a
broader audience. Isn't that true?
Ms. Hyde. We were trying to understand----
Mr. Griffith. Yes or no.
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. What GAO wanted, yes.
Mr. Griffith. OK. And DoD officials initially identified
all of their suicide prevention programs as supporting
individuals with serious mental illness. Do you think that
there might be some institutional bias on the part of SAMHSA in
favor of dealing with mild as opposed to more severe behavior
or health conditions that make it more difficult for SAMHSA to
recognize and act upon the unique nature and impacts of serious
mental illness or serious emotional disturbances?
Ms. Hyde. Goodness, no. We were trying to be honest and
fair about the answer to the question.
Mr. Griffith. All right. And I appreciate that.
Here is the reason that I am so concerned on these issues,
and while I recognize that you all have said previously that it
is getting better but it is not fixed, I do appreciate that. I
was a, what we call in our neck of the woods, a street lawyer
for many years. I can still see the eyes of the mother who
dealt with, while she was a client of mine, for years her
paranoid schizophrenic son who ultimately committed suicide. I
can see a former client standing in the courthouse with his son
crouched on a bench because he was back into the court system,
not in the mental health system but the criminal court system,
yet again, and not knowing what to do. I can see the faces of
the deputies as they started to go out of the building to deal
with a verbal fight in the parking lot of the courthouse where
a son and a father were having a verbal altercation after a
hearing in the criminal court system, and I had to advise the
deputies to back off because of the mental illness of the son.
He would have a violent reaction to the uniforms, not to the
individuals but to the uniforms, but he would not be violent
with his father, and they agreed to do that. And then my wife,
who continues to practice law although I have come here now,
last week was dealing with, in the juvenile system where she is
a practitioner and a substitute judge, dealing with a child who
attempted suicide, having a serious emotional disturbance,
learning that they couldn't deal with one plan that the
hospital had come up with because he hadn't been hospitalized
twice in the last year, he had only been hospitalized twice in
the last 13 months. And when I said are there questions, I have
HHS and SAMHSA coming in, are there questions I should ask
about what we are going to do about this child who is someone I
know, and who may very well end up being successful at some
point if we don't do it right. I said are there questions I can
ask, and her response was, no, they don't have anything to do
with this.
I ask you, do you believe that you all need to be
coordinating to such an extent that experienced practitioners
in law would know that you have something to do with it when
there is a suicide attempt, or that there might be a program to
help? I asked those questions. Nothing came back. And I noticed
in your report that you had something on the Garrett Lee Smith
Youth Suicide Prevention Program listed in the GAO study, and I
texted my wife and I said any of the contacts related to any of
the cases you have done in juvenile court for the last 16 or 17
years, have you ever heard of this. Answer is no. So I present
you with this indictment, and I hope to get some response at a
later time because my time is up.
And I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
Now recognize Mr. Tonko for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Dr. Frank, has the failure of some of our states to expand
Medicaid eligibility in accordance with the Affordable Care Act
affected in any way the ability to treat those with mental
illness or mental health disorders?
Mr. Frank. Indeed it has. Just to give you a flavor. Among
people with serious mental illness, in 2010 for example, call
that the before period, nearly 21 percent of them were
uninsured and they were disproportionally low-income. And so,
in fact, the states where you are seeing expansion are getting
more of those people covered than the states that aren't. That
opens up a lot of new opportunities for treatment because, as
you know, Medicaid offers a broad package of services that are
specifically, in many cases, tailored to people with serious
mental illnesses.
Mr. Tonko. Yes. And would you have any data that are
directly speaking to the mortality rates in those states that
you could provide to the committee?
Mr. Frank. I think it is too early to tell now, but just so
you will know, we are doing an evaluation of the Medicaid
expansions, and we are doing segments of that evaluation that
focus specifically on vulnerable populations like those with
serious mental illness.
Mr. Tonko. Yes. And if I could ask the three of you, and I
will start with Dr. Kohn, how do you define serious mental
illness?
Ms. Kohn. In our report, we used scientific definitions
that we worked with SAMHSA to develop. It includes conditions
such as major depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia,
PTSD. We used a definition that goes about half a page of a
footnote. It is a scientific definition.
Mr. Tonko. OK. Dr. Frank?
Mr. Frank. Well, rather than give you the science, I will
give you something that most of us would believe in common
parlance. So typically, I think schizophrenia, bipolar
disorder, major depression, some forms of major depression,
some forms of trauma, PTSD, and a variety of other things
depending on their functional capacity is what I think we
typically think of serious mental illness.
Mr. Tonko. And, Administrator Hyde?
Ms. Hyde. Generally, it is a combination of diagnosis and
functioning and history. So you generally have to look at all
three of them to see what the functioning level is. The
diagnosis is important but not in and of itself enough.
Mr. Tonko. And so, therefore, is serious mental illness a
static state?
Ms. Hyde. Not necessarily.
Mr. Tonko. OK. Well, there has been a lot of emphasis today
on SAMHSA's work on treating mental illness, and specifically
serious mental illness, but we need to keep in mind, I believe,
that these individuals represent a small portion of the overall
population living with mental illness. And we also need to keep
in mind that we will be more effective with these patients by
treating them early in the course of their illness, and perhaps
altering the trajectory of their condition, rather than
reacting to crisis situations that arise time and time again.
SAMHSA plays an important role in the prevention and early
detection of serious mental illness, and I have seen that in
programs that reach my district.
So, Administrator Hyde, can you discuss some of the ways
that SAMHSA supports the prevention and early diagnosis of
serious mental illness?
Ms. Hyde. Yes, thank you for that question. One of the ways
we are doing that is to implement the RAISE Program, which is
the evidence-based practice that NIMH has developed, that is
interventions both medical and psychosocial interventions done
at an earlier point in the trajectory of an illness after a
first episode. We are doing a lot of work in that area. We are
also starting to look at what is called the prodrome, or prior
to the first episode. NIMH is beginning to work in this area,
and we are working with them to try to identify what would be
the best way to look at that issue.
We are also looking at healthy transitions, or the
transition that young people have from age 16 or so to 25,
which is where a lot of this early first episode happens, and
we are trying to put programs on the ground to make sure that
those families and those young people are supported as they
move into adulthood. And so there are a number of programs like
that where we are trying to get upstream. We are also doing a
lot of jail diversion work, trying to make sure that
individuals who may be headed for jail because of a mental
health issue can be diverted into treatment and to appropriate
community-based supports instead of jail. Same thing is true
with homelessness. People who are homeless on the streets with
serious mental illness, if we can get them housed in evidence-
based supporting housing programs we can see very good
trajectories, reduction of emergency room use, et cetera.
So we have pieces of all of those kinds of programs working
with our colleagues and other departments.
Mr. Tonko. I thank you. And I believe we should not lose
sight of the agency's other critical activities, and how they
advance your mission as well. So I thank you all for your
responses.
I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. And we are glad you moved forward on
that program with RAISE. We know it is something that this
committee has raised, the appropriators funded it, and we are
glad you followed through on what Congress told you to.
I now recognize Mrs. Brooks of Indiana for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this hearing.
In August of last year, I held a mental health listing
session in Hamilton County, just north of Indianapolis,
Indiana, and pulled together advocacy groups, family groups,
doctors, and luckily, head of our state HHS component FSSA as a
psychiatrist, Dr. John Wernert, and he participated in this
session. And we talked about the pressing issues of mental
health in our state and in our country, and ways that Congress
could respond. And I have to tell you, a theme of that was the
fragmentation issue. And even now, as still a relatively new
Member of Congress, I am amazed at the number of people with
mental health issues contact our offices, and come to our
events, including recently a young woman who brought to a
public meeting stacks and stacks and file folders of her
correspondence with different agencies, trying to seek help for
her schizophrenia. And it broke my heart. And then when I read
this GAO report about the fragmentation, and would just ask all
of you to look once again at the chairman's chart, and I would
ask you to take that back to SAMHSA, and I applaud GAO for
putting together, or attempting to put together, the
comprehensive inventory, but if healthy people in a discussion
have a hard time getting through the bureaucracy, how do
mentally ill people and seriously mentally ill people get help?
And so, Dr. Kohn, why was it such a challenge in GAO's
opinion to identify all of these different programs? What
happened?
Ms. Kohn. I don't think it had been asked before, so OMB
had identified where the spending was from the budget
documents. I think this was one of the first times that the
agencies were being asked, and so it took a lot of
conversation. There was a lot of back-and-forth. We had to
develop a questionnaire and go agency by agency by agency, and
work with them to try to get the information.
So I think to some extent, they hadn't been asked that
before, at least not the folks we were talking to.
Mrs. Brooks. If I could, there was an organization called
the Federal Executive Steering Committee that you pointed out
in your report that was in place after another analysis of our
mental health system early in the 2000s, and it was in place
from 2003 until 2008, and it seemed to bring together at very
high levels the many agencies we are talking about, but it was
disbanded or has not met since 2009. Is that correct, Dr. Kohn?
Ms. Kohn. That is correct. It hasn't met since 2009.
Mrs. Brooks. And so, Ms. Hyde, you indicate all of this
coordination, but it seems to be at the highest levels only
within HHS, is that correct? Why was that disbanded? Why was
the Federal Executive Steering Committee, which brought
together at the highest levels, why was it disbanded?
Ms. Hyde. The Steering Committee had accomplished a lot,
but much of the coordination work had moved into the
programmatic area.
Mrs. Brooks. What do you think it accomplished? When we
have seen the growing numbers, what did it accomplish and why
would it disband?
Ms. Hyde. Well, I think it had difficulty solving the
problem. I think that is our whole point, is one Federal, high-
level coordinating body by itself is not going to solve the
problem.
That group did identify programmatic areas where
coordination needed to happen, and that began to happen at the
programmatic level. We haven't talked at all about what the
issue beyond coordination is, which is the lack of services,
the lack of support, and then as we are getting more people
able to get access to coverage and services, then that is going
to be a much bigger and more appropriate way to get services to
people.
Mrs. Brooks. Well, and I would agree that there are a lack
of services and a lack of support, but when there are billions
of dollars being spent, and I guess I want to ask you, Dr.
Frank, because you talked about, and my time is running short,
you talked about populations and programs specific to
populations, well, what if you are a middle-aged woman who is
not a veteran, who is not a young person, who is not homeless,
who is not in the workplace, what programs are there for people
who don't fit into these populations?
Mr. Frank. Thank you. I actually start in exactly the same
place you do with a broken heart for these people and families
that face these problems, and have trouble navigating their way
through the system. I think that is exactly it. I think where
we were uncomfortable with the GAO report was that there wasn't
enough attention paid to that question you just asked which is,
we have been trying to build health homes, we have been trying
to build patient-centered medical homes so that there would be
a place that people could rely on to help them navigate the
system, get them through, and make sure their care is
coordinated across the realm. And that is really a lot of the
places we have been putting our investments in, coordination.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you. My time has run out. We have,
obviously, much work to do.
I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
Now recognize Mr. Yarmuth for 5 minutes.
Mr. Yarmuth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the witnesses
for their testimony.
Anybody who has been in this job for any period of time
understands the extent to which mental illness impacts our
various communities and the country as a whole. Tens of
millions of people affected. And clearly, we have made
progress. I was proud to have supported the Mental Health
Parity Act that has made an enormous impact, and obviously
embodying that in the Affordable Care Act with the expansion of
Medicaid, in my state has made a remarkable difference. And,
you know, I don't think any of us would disagree with the
notion that coordination is important, and evaluation of
programs is important. We also can't lose sight of the amount
of resources that are committed to these kinds of activities.
And I am a member of the Budget Committee and I have seen how
budget cuts have affected many areas of our social safety net
and our human services initiatives. Now we are down the return
of sequestration in October of this year, and we had an
experiment with it a couple of years ago.
Dr. Frank and Administrator Hyde, would you talk to us
about the impact of sequestration potentially on the treatment
of mental illness throughout the country, and what happened a
couple of years ago, what impact, if any, there was and what
the new potential cuts are and how they could impact the same
kind of care?
Ms. Hyde. I can talk first about SAMHSA because that is the
thing I know the best. But certainly, cuts in programs have
made us tighten, it has made us do less grants, so less ability
to help communities out there, less ability to do new programs.
The one set of new programs we have been able to do is in the
President's Now is The Time plan, which I described. It also,
frankly, makes us take a second look at how much money we spend
on things that are not services, so it does make us tighten our
evaluation efforts at times, and it just overall makes us deal
with a system that is already significantly underfunded
compared to a lot of the other, heart disease and other
mortalities that we are trying to deal with. So I actually
could give you some comparisons between how much we spend for
certain of these diseases and the numbers of people that we
have associated with them, and I think you would be able to see
what those impacts of those dollars are.
Mr. Yarmuth. Dr. Frank, you want to comment?
Mr. Frank. I would agree with that. I do think it has hurt
our evaluation efforts a bit. I also think it shows up in
exactly some of the places we have been talking about here
because we work with HUD on supportive housing, we work with
Labor on supportive employment type of activities, and for each
of those we have had to scale back. And so, for example, our
plans to end chronic homelessness by next year have had to get
scaled back because the number of housing vouchers has been
scaled back.
Mr. Yarmuth. All right, thank you for that. Going back to
the question of evaluation for a minute, Dr. Kohn, I haven't
read the GAO report but it seems to me that it might be very
difficult to accurately assess some of the efficacy of these
programs because, say you are dealing with a homeless vet with
PTSD, the program may be able to prevent that vet from
committing suicide, but certainly hasn't cured his mental
illness. Do you have a model for evaluation of an efficacy of
serious mental health programs in the GAO report, and I guess I
would ask if you do, then I would have Dr. Frank and Ms. Hyde
comment on whether this is a problematic thing.
Ms. Kohn. The report doesn't tell the agencies in this area
to evaluate all of their programs all the time. We say that the
agencies need to prioritize which programs should be evaluated
and what is a time schedule for that, because they are costly,
they are time-consuming, and so we are just telling the
agencies to prioritize which programs do need to be evaluated.
Yes, GAO has a number of reports and guidance that it has
issued in terms of best practices for evaluation. It includes
having an outside agency doing the evaluation, identifying best
practices, what works, what doesn't work in the program, making
recommendations that the agency can act on in terms of how to
improve the program. So there is guidance there. The other
piece of the evaluation, of course, is leadership in driving
the evaluation, asking the question and hearing the answer.
Mr. Yarmuth. My time is up, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Thank you.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. I now recognize Mr. Mullin for 5
minutes.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
If you could, could you put that up for me? Ms. Hyde, do
you recognize what this is here?
Ms. Hyde. Yes, it is a--yes.
Mr. Mullin. It is a screenshot from SAMHSA's Web site. I
believe it is called building blocks for a healthy future, is
that correct?
Ms. Hyde. That is correct.
Mr. Mullin. Can you briefly tell me what that Web site
does?
Ms. Hyde. It engages young people and their parents in
emotional health development. We do have a responsibility to do
prevention----
Mr. Mullin. What is the ages----
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. In young people.
Mr. Mullin [continuing]. For that?
Ms. Hyde. I don't remember off the top of my head the
complete age range, but it is the younger----
Mr. Mullin. It is for substance abuse----
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. It is the younger kids.
Mr. Mullin [continuing]. For young children from the age
of----
Ms. Hyde. Yes.
Mr. Mullin [continuing]. Three to six----
Ms. Hyde. Yes.
Mr. Mullin [continuing]. Which I am sure that is a high
number that we have to deal with. I mean I have five kids from
10 years to 4 years old, and I am sure there is a high rate of
substance abuse for 3-year-olds, yet do you know how much money
we have spent on that Web site?
Ms. Hyde. Actually, the science tells us that the earlier
we start----
Mr. Mullin. No, I----
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. The better.
Mr. Mullin. Do you know how much money we have spent on----
Ms. Hyde. I don't know that off the top of my head. I can
tell you----
Mr. Mullin. Ma'am, you are the administrator.
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. Though that is important that we
are----
Mr. Mullin. Ma'am----
Ms. Hyde. We are----
Mr. Mullin [continuing]. You are the administrator----
Ms. Hyde. Yes.
Mr. Mullin [continuing]. And you don't know how much that
Web site costs. Because I went through that last night, and
there is a whole bunch of songs on there which are all knock-
offs of Old McDonald and Yankee Doodle, and I have a 3-year-old
and I couldn't keep her attention for no time at all on that.
And guess what, you have had 15,000 visitors, that is it, to
that Web site for an average of 3 minutes, at a cost of
$436,000. Now, do you think that is using taxpayer money
wisely?
Ms. Hyde. Actually, we are going through a----
Mr. Mullin. No, ma'am, that isn't what I asked you.
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. Something we call----
Mr. Mullin. I said do you think that is a good use of
taxpayer money?
Ms. Hyde. I don't know. Please let me finish the question
and I will tell you. We are actually going through our Web
sites right now. This is one of them. It is on the list to re-
examine----
Mr. Mullin. Going through, ma'am----
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. Whether or not----
Mr. Mullin [continuing]. The money is already spent. Was it
a good use of taxpayers' money? $436,000.
Ms. Hyde. I----
Mr. Mullin. A total of 15,000 visitors. In Oklahoma alone,
that would provide 176 outpatient services for the mental ill
for a full year.
Ms. Hyde. That is what we are assessing and evaluating
right now. We are going through each of those Web sites to
determine whether or not they are appropriate or need to be
continued, or eliminated or otherwise dealt with.
Mr. Mullin. How long does it take, ma'am, because we are
continually putting money in there? We are managing the Web
site. And what we want to do is efficient and be more
efficient.
We have heard throughout this entire hearing that we are
here to help. We understand there is an issue, but what has
happened is we are running into a roadblock, and instead of you
admitting that there is a problem, what ends up happening is
you get defensive about it. That is not helpful. That doesn't
prevent anything. All that does is cause a division between us.
We are not here to make you look bad, we are here to find out
and see if you are being efficient with the money being spent.
And so far what I am finding out is no, no, it is not. It is
not being efficient.
I have a big stake in this. I have five kids that go to
school every single day. These are real issues facing every
parent out there, and yet we are wasting money on a Web site,
or putting money out here, $436,000, you don't even know how
much you have spent, and you can't even tell me if it is being
efficient. Instead, you are saying you are going through it and
evaluating. We have heard that over and over again today. We
are going through it, we are going through it, we are going
through it. You know what, as a business owner, if everything I
was being evaluated on, I was having to go back and re-evaluate
it, I would deem that as a failure. Maybe it is time to relook
at the whole program and say is it really delivering the
services, is it really coordinating with officials on the
mentally ill. So far what I have heard, the answer to that is
no, absolutely not.
Dr. Kohn, you had mentioned, let me find it here, you noted
that part of the problem with tackling serious mental illness
is the Steering and Coordinating Committees that has been
established to handle the response to the mental illness over
the past decade are no longer active or focused mainly on
substance abuse. Is that correct?
Ms. Kohn. That is correct?
Mr. Mullin. OK. I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
Now recognize Ms. Clarke for 5 minutes.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank our
witnesses for sharing your expertise with us this morning.
My first question is to Dr. Frank. Unfortunately, many
states have refused to expand Medicaid coverage under the
Affordable Care Act, and according to the American Mental
Health Counselors Association, nearly 3.7 million uninsured
adults with serious mental health and substance abuse
conditions will not be covered in states that failed to expand
Medicaid. To me, that decision is astoundingly shortsighted.
Dr. Frank, why is Medicaid expansion so critical to this
population?
Mr. Frank. Well, in the Chairman's opening remarks, he made
a very strong case outlining how people experiencing serious
mental illnesses have their work disrupted, have their
education disrupted, have their functioning disrupted. And so
people who have trouble attaching to the workforce, attaching
to the mainstream of society, tend to have low incomes, tend to
rely on public programs like Medicaid. And so people in those
circumstances have a chance to get the best evidence-based
treatment if they are covered by Medicaid, whereas if they
aren't, those chances are much lower. And so I think that is
why it is so important.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Dr. Frank.
I want to switch over to Administrator Hyde and ask a bit
about living in a community setting. The report doesn't mention
the Americans With Disabilities Act, the Olmstead decision, and
how SAMHSA has been in the forefront of pushing for a service
system where people with serious mental illness can live in a
most integrated community setting. How does SAMHSA work to help
people with serious mental illness living in the community?
Ms. Hyde. Thank you for the question. We have taken a
leadership role with a number of other Federal agencies both
within HHS and outside, DOJ, Office of Civil Rights, to look at
the Olmstead decision and try to implement it, and try to help
states understand what they can do. We try to look at the
housing needs and how people can develop housing, we try to
look at the employment needs and income needs and how people
can develop that, and we try to look at the social supports
that individuals need in the community, and we provide
training, and sometimes we call them policy academies, bringing
states together so they can learn from each other, and trying
to make sure that they have the information they need and the
program designs that they need, because there are evidence-
based practices to try to develop that. We also try to bring
things like HUD vouchers and other kinds of resources to the
table that SAMHSA coordinates with but doesn't control.
Ms. Clarke. Well, that model is one that I think,
particularly in a place like New York City where I am from, is
a preferable one. There seems to be a reliance on the criminal
justice system to sort of be that community living environment,
and we have found that there have been a lot of challenges
within our city's jail systems, for instance, with individuals
who have been incarcerated and not treated, and the conditions
under which they have had to live have really compounded their
illnesses. So I want to commend you for your vision here, and
make sure that as we go forward, we look at a broader view of
practices that do work. It is unfortunate that the report
didn't mention it.
I wanted to circle back. I know my colleague, Mr. Tonko,
spoke to intervention, particularly in preventing recidivism. I
want to talk about early intervention for children, and get a
sense of the work of the programs that you are doing through
SAMHSA in early intervention. Could you speak to a little bit
of that as well?
Ms. Hyde. Yes, thank you again for the question. If you are
talking about young children, we have a program called LAUNCH--
--
Ms. Clarke. Yes, young children.
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. Which is for zero to 8-year-olds.
Ms. Clarke. Yes.
Ms. Hyde. Specifically to build emotional health
development and to look at early needs that might be emerging
there. We have some new work that we are doing on the framework
of Now is The Time to try to look at working with schools and
communities to be able to identify emerging behavioral health
issues before they become an issue. We have other prevention
activities that IOM helped us look at, the Institute of
Medicine, a few years ago, and bringing both behavioral
health--well, substance abuse and mental health, because they
often go together, so issues like what is happening in schools,
bullying, parenting, bringing multiple systems together to help
make sure that young person is able to grow and develop in a
positive way. We are also doing a significant amount of work on
trauma because we understand increasingly what trauma does to
young people, and how it creates, actually, adult problems. We
are also looking at the fact that, frankly, most adult
behavioral health issues start before the age of 24, and in
fact, \1/2\ of them before the age of 14. So the younger we can
start, the better we can build skills and resiliency, capacity,
moving into adulthood.
So we do a fair amount of that work. As I said earlier
though, \3/4\ of our dollars actually go toward persons, at
least in our mental health environment, goes to persons with
serious mental illness.
Ms. Clarke. I thank you for your work, Administrator.
And I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Murphy. Now recognize Mr. Collins for 5 minutes.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
If you could, Ms. Hyde, just kind of keep the questions as
brief as you can because of the time. I am going to start with
a fairly simple one. Could you give yourself a grade of 1 to 10
on how good a job you are doing?
Ms. Hyde. Tens being good?
Mr. Collins. Yes.
Ms. Hyde. I think we are doing 10. I think we have a lot--
--
Mr. Collins. OK, you are a 10.
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. More work to do.
Mr. Collins. That is pretty arrogant in my book, but we
will put that aside. So you have said you are underfunded, you
need more money, so I am just going to dive right in and say,
as you have looked at programs the last couple of years, which
ones you have just said here, you are going to look at this.
How many programs have you looked at and terminated because
they weren't a good use of taxpayer funds in the last 2 years?
Ms. Hyde. We actually have several programs that have been
proposed for reduction, some of which Congress has reduced, and
others of which have continued to be funded.
Mr. Collins. Could you give me a list, if you could, of
those that are being recommended and those that have actually
had their reductions?
Ms. Hyde. OK.
Mr. Collins. And when you say you are underfunded, are you
constantly looking at and evaluating each program like the one
that Representative Mullin said $436,000, which I think it is
pretty obvious was wasted money? Are you looking at those, and
who is doing that evaluation?
Ms. Hyde. Yes, if you look at the GAO report, I think you
will see that SAMHSA is actually doing more than----
Mr. Collins. Who in your organization? Do you have like
certain people?
Ms. Hyde. It depends on the situation. In some cases----
Mr. Collins. Well, either you do or you don't----
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. We do it internally.
Mr. Collins [continuing]. Have certain people.
Ms. Hyde. Some cases ASPE does it, and other cases----
Mr. Collins. Who is going to evaluate this sing-along
program?
Ms. Hyde. Well, as I was trying to explain, we are starting
the process of evaluating----
Mr. Collins. No----
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. That.
Mr. Collins [continuing]. Who? Who will evaluate that, how
quickly will it be evaluated, and when could you provide this
committee an answer on whether that program will be terminated
and that money, since you are underfunded, redeployed?
Ms. Hyde. We will be glad to answer that question for you.
Mr. Collins. And when will I expect that answer? I mean you
are a 10, so it should be tomorrow. Is that fair if you are a
10? If you were an 8, I could give you a week or so but since
you are a 10, is it fair to say you could get that to me
tomorrow? Who is going to evaluate it, when will we get the
answers? I am just asking you, can I get that answer tomorrow?
Ms. Hyde. We will get you an answer as soon as we can.
Mr. Collins. I guess the answer is no. Well, I think you
just went from a 10 to about a 7.
As I look at doing evaluations, best practices, are you
identifying best practices that other states can learn from?
Like this state, this program in South Carolina is exceptional,
they are really working well, let us roll this out across the
country. Are you identifying actively best practices to assure
that taxpayer money is being well spent, and since you are
underfunded, it is even more important?
Ms. Hyde. Yes, we have a registry of evidence-based
practices that we are actually in the process of redoing
because we need to do a better job on that.
Mr. Collins. You need to do a better job, but you are a 10,
so that is interesting. Can you provide me a list of the best
practices that you have identified, very specific, not just
general let us all do better, specific best practices that you
have shared with other agencies? Could you get that to me
tomorrow? You said you already have a list, could you get that
to me tomorrow?
Ms. Hyde. We will do our best to get it to you as soon as
we can. I don't----
Mr. Collins. So you can't get it to me tomorrow. You just
jumped from a 7 to a 5. I am asking for direct answers. You
said you have it. If you have it, you should be able to get it
to me at 1 o'clock this afternoon. So either you do or you
don't have it. Do you have it?
Ms. Hyde. We have the list. I don't know if I can----
Mr. Collins. So can you get it to me today?
Mr. Murphy. Well, let us----
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. Do some electronic version----
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Murphy. Well, let----
Ms. DeGette [continuing]. We have a standard practice in
this committee----
Mr. Murphy. We will expect that.
Ms. DeGette [continuing]. For witnesses to respond to
questions.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
Mr. Collins. Quickly and directly. I am just saying, do you
have it?
Ms. Hyde. I can get you a list of what we have, yes.
Mr. Collins. Tomorrow?
Mr. Murphy. I think she said she will get----
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Murphy [continuing]. That. We will expect that----
Ms. DeGette [continuing]. We have a standard practice, I
would ask--I would urge all of the Members----
Mr. Murphy. Yes, I----
Ms. DeGette [continuing]. Of this committee to hold to that
standard practice----
Mr. Murphy. That is OK. We will expect that information.
OK.
Ms. DeGette [continuing]. And to respect the witnesses.
Mr. Collins. Yes, and I would appreciate more direct
answers. I haven't actually had too many employees or witnesses
who would say they walk on water, and on a scale of 1 to 10 are
a 10, so I am just taking you at your word. I thought you were
going to tell me you were an 8. I am surprised at the 10.
So all I am suggesting is best practices work. You say you
are underfunded. We have an example here of $436,000 that I
think, generally speaking, will come back, and I would like
that as quickly as possible, as wasted taxpayer money that
could been redirected elsewhere. So I would appreciate a prompt
response as soon as you can get it to me, and that would be my
request.
And I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. We are going to do a second round of
questions here. I know some Members are coming back--Mr. Cramer
is here now. All right then, we will have Mr. Cramer. Go ahead,
I will recognize you for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cramer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
witnesses.
I just have one question for Ms. Hyde I was reading the HHS
budget justification, and in your opening, I think you said
something to the effect that--and maybe you could tell me what
you said, what percentage of the SAMHSA budget was dedicated
last year to SMI?
Ms. Hyde. SAMHSA's budget is in four buckets. Generally
speaking, we talk about the substance abuse part of our----
Mr. Cramer. Right.
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. Budget as being a little less than
70 percent. So the vast majority of our budget is substance
abuse. Of the 30 percent or so that is mental health, \3/4\ of
that goes to serious mental illness.
Mr. Cramer. That is what I thought--OK, thank you for that
clarification. Because in the budget justification put out by
HHS where it talks about SAMHSA, it never mentions serious
mental illness. Can you reconcile that omission with the
commitment that you are talking about today? That just seems
like somebody is not as committed to it perhaps as you are. Or
am I mistaken? Because I couldn't find it. I couldn't find any
mention of SMI in the budget justification from HHS.
Ms. Hyde. The particular programs that there are some
programs that are very specifically for serious mental illness
or serious emotional disturbance. That is the general rubric.
The block grant programs are that. It is a huge program. What
we talked about, the primary behavioral health care program is
specifically for that. A number of other of our programs we
have already talked about serve people with serious mental
illness, but they are not targeted to those individuals.
Mr. Cramer. I guess it is the lack of reference or
mentioning even raises for me the question of the seriousness
of the commitment to this particular issue, which is not a
small issue, this is a very big issue, a very big concern for
me. If you want to elaborate, I am willing, otherwise I yield
back.
Ms. Hyde. Just a quick----
Mr. Cramer. Sure.
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. Response. The----
Mr. Murphy. You can respond.
Ms. Hyde. The program I told you for fiscal year 2016, the
reason I was hesitating, I didn't know which justification you
were talking about, CJ 15 or 14 or----
Mr. Cramer. Yes.
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. Sixteen. The new programs that I was
telling you about, specifically the crisis one, specifically
mentions serious mental illness. I have that here if you would
like to see it.
Mr. Cramer. OK, very well. Yes, what I am talking about is,
the SAMHSA in brief never mentions serious mental illness. And
I just--again, what it raises for me, and I think a lot of us
are struggling with this, is the serious level of commitment to
SMI, and we hope going forward that there is a greater
acknowledgement and greater evidence that this commitment is
real and it is going to be dealt with in substantive ways, as
opposed to what we did last year.
I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. Gentleman yields back.
I do want to say that it is a tradition of this committee
to let witnesses complete their things. That is why I am even
asking, after Members have finished their time, to give more
time to do those things. And so if there was things that the
witnesses do want to finish up, we will be respectful of that
because we do want to hear your comments on this. The second
round, let me raise something here because part of this is some
of the committee's frustration with getting responses.
Ms. Hyde, so these are a few questions about what we have
requested from you. In emails my staff received this morning
from someone who I think is on your staff, someone named Brian
Altman who--just so I understand, does Mr. Altman work for you
or at least represent you when it comes to the committee? Does
that name sound familiar?
Ms. Hyde. Mr. Altman is here with me today, yes.
Mr. Murphy. OK, good. And he has been in that position, I
guess, for at least this last year from what I understand. So
as you may know, we wrote Mr. Altman on March 20, 2014, almost
a year ago, to ask for some very specific information,
following up on a meeting that was had with several SAMHSA
officials that very day. We sent our request with as much
specificity as possible to the department, and specifically to
Mr. Altman, to respond. Since then, I have to say, this
committee is very disappointed, we have received very little of
what we have requested, despite our repeated efforts to follow
up on that request. I am not sure I have a record of every
communication of my office and the department on this matter,
but we followed up on April 7, June 12, June 16, June 26, July
14, July 22, and September 18, and again, despite all of this,
we still don't have the overwhelming majority of the
information we requested, or a satisfactory explanation of why
it doesn't exist.
So I was really astounded this morning to be told that my
staff received an e-mail from Mr. Altman at 8:15 saying the
following, ``We are still reviewing the multitude of reports
you have requested, and will provide the reports as soon as
possible.'' He further writes, ``We have checked with program
staff and there are no documents regarding technical assistance
provided to the disability rights center in Maine following the
Bruce case.'' Now, you are familiar with the Bruce case, we
spoke about this before. This is the one where the Disability
Rights Center, in the medical record of the hospital it says
someone advised him when asked, are you going to harm yourself,
he said no, someone advised him, are you going to hurt someone
else, and he said no, under the advice of someone from that
agency. He then went home and shortly thereafter killed his
mother. He was on medication, wasn't in treatment, et cetera,
and so you can understand our concern that we have asked almost
a year ago, tell us what SAMHSA is looking into this. Now, I
understand part of the issue is I don't think states are
required to tell you what they are doing, and I think that is
important because they receive significant funding from you. So
I hope you understand our committee's frustration. This is a
serious case involving a homicide, and someone who was advised
by an organization that you fund to stop care, despite the
pleas of the family and the pleas of the treating psychiatrist
to say this is a dangerous person. So please understand the
seriousness of our request. We do want to make sure that you
understand. You are busy, I understand, but this committee will
make sure we get those records, and you will comply with that,
right? I appreciate that. Thank you.
Now, with regard to this organization, Dr. Kohn, you say in
your report that PAIMI--I think that is one of the things--you
look at some of the evaluations done, I think you even
mentioned that they are one of the ones that seems to have a
report that has good accountability written in there, am I
correct?
Ms. Kohn. We identified an example of an evaluation that
was done that was consistent with some of the principles that
GAO has talked about. We didn't evaluate that program or the
quality of that evaluation, we simply cite it as an example.
Mr. Murphy. So are you aware that the people who did that
evaluation are people, several of them who are funded by
SAMHSA, are part of these programs? Were you aware that--I
don't know if you dug deep enough to know who these people
were, but several of them appears were on the payroll or have
direct funding related to this. Are you aware of that?
Ms. Kohn. We just cite it as an example. We didn't hold it
up----
Mr. Murphy. I----
Ms. Kohn [continuing]. As a----
Mr. Murphy. I didn't think so. That is OK. I didn't think
so.
Ms. Kohn [continuing]. We didn't draw any conclusions about
the program.
Mr. Murphy. But it was nonetheless listed. When you say \1/
3\ of the programs, I think, actually had evaluations done,
and, Dr. Frank, you said that the programs within HHS have many
of these evaluations, but as I look at this list, Ms. Hyde, I
am looking at people who--first of all, the evaluation team, I
don't see a single psychiatrist or psychologist there. I see a
couple of social workers. I don't know if they practice still.
I see several attorneys, but in answering the question,
protection and advocacy for people with mental illness, I want
to know if they are advocating for those people to get better.
This case of Mr. Bruce and other cases they have had around
the country, I want to make sure that they are saying if they
are in jail and they are getting abused, we are standing up for
you. If they are in an institution being ignored, we are going
to stand up for you. But the key should be getting care. And I
look at this and I must admit this looks like the fox guarding
the henhouse.
And so, Dr. Kohn, I hope you will take another look at this
because I see people here that really should not be telling you
whether or not a program works. Of course they are going to say
it works. They get funding from it. Some of these actually are
the--the person, Curtis Decker, who runs the PAIMI Trade
Association. Of course he is going to say he is doing a great
job. I look at other people who say they received money from
SAMHSA, the projects they work on with SAMHSA. So it is a
concern that I think when we see these evaluations, and an
internal evaluation is no use, and particularly because--I
think it was perhaps you, Ms. Hyde, or, Dr. Frank, saying it is
important that outside organizations look at this. I agree
wholeheartedly. That is the way we should look at this. Is the
research done correctly, and bottom line, are we getting
results. Not just what they are doing there, and I think under
these programs too, and we were talking about prevention, I
want to know if we are getting results. I wish we knew how to
prevent schizophrenia. I know last summer we identified 108
genotypes of schizophrenia. I wish we could cure it but we
can't cure it. We can certainly do early interventions and
minimize, for a while, not awareness of it, but try and delay
some of the symptoms. But we don't take of these otherwise, and
so that is some advice to you.
And I recognize Ms. DeGette.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Chairman, I think this is the best
subcommittee in the House. This is the subcommittee where Mr.
Dingell made his name, and I like to think of myself as the
heir to John Dingell's legacy. And in all his years on this
subcommittee, he never took the cheap shot, he never attacked
witnesses personally, he never put them into traps, and I was
appalled today at the--and you have been with me on this
committee for 2 years. You know you have never heard me say
something like this. I was appalled at the way two of the new
Members of this subcommittee, Mr. Mullin and Mr. Collins,
conducted themselves today, because this is a serious and
legitimate investigation. This is an investigation about the
way our Federal agencies are handling serious mental illness,
and to bring them in and to refuse to allow these very serious,
high-level government officials to answer questions, to trap
them in to a when did you stop beating your wife type of
answer, it is disrespectful to the witnesses and it undermines
this committee's grand tradition. So I am glad you said
something about this, but, however, both of those individuals
were gone by the time you did. So I hope you admonish them that
is not in the grand tradition of this subcommittee.
Now, having said that, I want to follow up on their
questions. The first one I want to follow up on, Administrator
Hyde, is the question that Mr. Mullin was asking you about that
chart. You were attempting to answer the question and he would
not let you do that. So I am going to ask you, I think that Mr.
Mullin raises a good point, there are a number of programs
including some online things that would seem to many of us to
be unrelated to what SAMHSA should be doing on serious mental
health issues. You were trying to say, I think, that you were
evaluating these. Can you please let us know what you are doing
with these online programs, what criteria you are using, what
the purpose they have, and when you are going to finish that
evaluation?
Ms. Hyde. Thank you, Ms. DeGette. I was trying to say, yes,
that in fact, we are trying to evaluate this. It is on our
evaluation list. We are trying to take a look at it. I don't
have it in front of me here today the numbers he is putting
out, so I can't say if that is yes, no, or otherwise. We are
looking at a number of our Web sites who have been actually
held by a number of contractors, and we are bringing it inside
so we can control a little bit more about what goes up on those
Web sites. So we have had a very explicit approach to trying to
get at the issue of are the Web sites and is the content what
it should be. So we have done a fair amount of work about that,
but we are in the middle of it, we are not complete, and this
is one of them that is literally on the next list that we are
looking at.
Ms. DeGette. And what is your time frame for review and
completion of that?
Ms. Hyde. Actually, I just got the ability to get that
scheduled, so I know it is scheduled for next week but I don't
have a specific time----
Ms. DeGette. So it is going to be soon.
Ms. Hyde. With me. It is personally being scheduled with
me----
Ms. DeGette. Now, some of these things that this committee
has, frankly, been quite critical of that you are reviewing,
those have been around for quite some number of years, is that
correct?
Ms. Hyde. That is correct, and sometimes what appears on
its face to be a coloring book or a song, sometimes there is
actually science behind the use of those for young children,
for message and for outcomes. I don't have the answer here
today in front of me whether this one fits that mold or not.
Ms. DeGette. Well, perhaps----
Ms. Hyde. I wouldn't write it off----
Ms. DeGette. Yes.
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. On its face.
Ms. DeGette. So perhaps when you do finish that evaluation,
you will supplement your testimony and let us know if you think
that is worthwhile or not.
Ms. Hyde. I will.
Ms. DeGette. And the chairman also asked you, and we did
ask you in the last hearing about that case where apparently it
was a contractor of SAMHSA apparently told the person to stop
taking their medication. Can we get the information on that to
see if SAMHSA had any awareness of that, and if there are other
situations like that, or how you are choosing those
contractors? I think that would be helpful to this committee.
Ms. Hyde. We are working on that. I know it has taken a
while. We want to be absolutely clear though, because we
understand the seriousness of the question we are being asked,
so to the extent that we are reviewing bunches of records, and
if we see anything that looks inappropriate, we want to go back
and check it even yet again to make sure that it is or is not--
--
Ms. DeGette. And so when do you think----
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. So----
Ms. DeGette [continuing]. You might be able to get us that
information?
Ms. Hyde. It is very high on our list to do. I can't give
you a specific date, but we have been working through it and we
are pretty close to being able to give you an answer.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you very much.
Thank you, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. I do want to say, we don't mention
Members' names when someone disagrees with them, but we will
follow up, but please understand, a lot of this that I think is
our frustration is I think sometimes it is just a gut check.
Like when you were before this committee last year when I asked
you about the painting, the $26,000 painting of two people
sitting on a rock, and you told me that was for awareness. I
think there are some times we just want to see our leaders have
a gut check to say, you know what, maybe that is not a wise
spending of taxpayers' money, and that I think sing-along songs
with the circle, or whatever those other things are, do they
really work? I think that is what we would like to hear more
about. So we are looking forward to getting that information.
And now I want to recognize Mr. Griffith for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much.
And I don't think I will be quite as emotional this time as
I was on the first round of questioning, but I do appreciate
you all being here, and hope that you understand that even when
we get a little excited and emotional about the issue, it is
because we are trying to move the Government in the right
direction, and there is sometimes frustration, but we are all,
I think, everybody, you all included on the panel, trying to
work into the right direction.
Dr. Kohn, in 2013, the GAO issued a report finding that the
Office of National Drug Control Policy could better identify
opportunities to increase program coordination. GAO recommended
that ONDCP assess the extent of overlap and the potential for
duplication across Federal programs engaged in drug abuse
prevention and treatment activities, and identify opportunities
for increased coordination. It is my understanding that ONDCP
concurred with this recommendation, am I correct in that?
Ms. Kohn. Yes, they did.
Mr. Griffith. And did the fact that ONDCP concurred with
GAO's recommendation mean that ONDCP totally agreed with GAO's
analysis, such as the overlap of Federal programs, always being
a negative?
Ms. Kohn. No, they identified that sometimes there are
benefits to overlaps, such as reinforcing messages, that some
of the goals, if the data were cut different ways, showed
different----
Mr. Griffith. So they didn't----
Ms. Kohn [continuing]. Results.
Mr. Griffith. They didn't agree completely.
Ms. Kohn. No.
Mr. Griffith. But they did, as I understand it, state that
they were willing to work with the agencies administering these
programs to further enhance coordination even if it meant not
eliminating complete overlaps, is that correct?
Ms. Kohn. That is correct, and in our recommendation
follow-up, that has been implemented.
Mr. Griffith. And I guess the question then comes, and that
was the lead-in, Dr. Frank, so here we have a different agency
reaction to a similar report. Couldn't HHS have concurred with
the GAO recommendation even while expressing differences on
some of GAO's analysis, just like the ONDCP did?
Mr. Frank. I think the issue here is--well, first of all, I
understand your emotion and your commitment, and I only respect
and admire it and that of the whole committee, so thank you for
that. But I think the problem we had was, when you count
programs and you count evaluations, and you do so selectively
and you don't go in behind, so what was in the evaluation, what
are we really doing with the program, what are you really doing
over here in Medicaid, we feel like you haven't told the story
and that is what made us uncomfortable, that we agree.
Coordination is something that both Administrator Hyde and I
have spent our careers working on. In fact, the way I met her
was through a project to coordinate care for people with, at
that time, chronic mental illness. And that was in 1986.
Mr. Griffith. All right. We will get to one more point, and
then I hope I have enough time to make one statement. In a talk
you delivered in March of 2013, you indicated, and it is on
YouTube, and at about the 28 minute mark you spoke about the
dangers of mission creep where the aim of targeting
particularly high-risk groups becomes diluted to reach lower-
risk populations as well. And you noted at that time that the
mission creep could have disastrous results. Do you think you
have your guard up, do you think it is possible that SAMHSA may
be subject to similar pressures to engage in mission creep, and
how does this impact their ability to support individuals with
the most high-risk and severe mental illnesses?
Mr. Frank. I still believe the admonition, and I think it
is a question that we have to constantly ask ourselves. Every
time we make a sort of program decision, a budget decision, and
a policy decision, we have to ask ourselves are we working for
the customers that are most important. And I think that is your
question, and I think that we constantly have to ask ourselves
that question, and we try to.
Mr. Griffith. And I appreciate that, and appreciate the
self-examination is always a good thing even when it is
sometimes painful.
Part of your mission is to coordinate and to make sure
things are efficient. Might I recommend, and maybe you are
already doing this, and if so, please tell me, that you get a
few street lawyers out there and it is probably not the right
term, Mr. Chairman, but street clinicians, but people who are
out there on the frontlines who might be able to help you
figure out what is working and what isn't working, particularly
on making sure that folks know what programs are available. So
that would be my suggestion to you.
Mr. Frank. Thank you for that suggestion. Just to remind
ourselves, to give you an idea, a bunch of us, the deputy
secretary, myself, our principal deputy, we went out on a
homeless count the other night and we kind of walked the
streets just because of that kind of inclination, and we try to
visit programs, and I know Administrator Hyde does it all the
time, and I think it is important because otherwise you forget.
Mr. Griffith. Well, and sometimes it is good to have the
folks that are out there day in and day out because when it is
somebody new or different, and it is human nature, they are
going to whip out the spick and span and make everything look a
little bit better, but when you have folks who deal with it day
in and day out and over the course of years, they can give you
an unvarnished or an un-cleaned up, spic-and-span type view of
what is happening in the real world. But thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Frank. Thank you.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
I am going to recognize myself again for 5 minutes.
Dr. Kohn, when you reviewed the various agencies, did you
see in there any review between agencies, for example, what we
hear from states increasing instances of incarceration of the
mentally ill, did you see that anybody is doing that
investigation?
Ms. Kohn. We did not identify that.
Mr. Murphy. Dr. Frank, or, Ms. Hyde, if you don't, just let
me know, so it is kind of yes or no or we don't know. Are your
agencies involved with looking at sort of a state-by-state
report to the Nation, because we are hearing anecdotally, I am
hearing from a lot of governors and secretaries who handle
incarceration that they see increasing rates of people in
state, county and local jails of people with serious mental
illness. Is HHS conducting any study of this to give a report?
Mr. Frank. I will take that one. Yes, a couple of things.
My agency, ASPE, is conducting a study right now on mental
illness and violence, mental illness and criminal justice,
exactly because we have been hearing the same thing you are.
Mr. Murphy. Do you know when that will be completed? Any
idea? Within this year?
Mr. Frank. Within this year.
Mr. Murphy. Obviously, we would love to see that.
Mr. Frank. We would be delighted to share it. Also,
Administrator Hyde and I are actively involved in the Re-entry
Council, which is an interagency council that is run by the
Attorney General----
Mr. Murphy. OK.
Mr. Frank [continuing]. That focuses on re-entry, and a
disproportionate share of people that have serious mental
illnesses.
Mr. Murphy. Let me raise another question here. With the
Affordable Care Act, part of this is there is supposed to be
parity for access. And, you know, we passed a parity bill here
6 years ago. It took 5 years, I think, for HHS to get us the
regulations. I am still hearing a lot of concerns that parity
is not taking place. Is HHS preparing any state-by-state
evaluation of what states are doing with regard to meeting
parity guidelines with the insurance companies that operate
within the states? Is there anything happening with those that
you know of?
Mr. Frank. CMS and ASPE sit on that group as well,
continuously work with insurance commissioners to, A, do more
technical assistance, and also find out what is going on and
help them resolve complaints as they come in from consumer
groups.
Mr. Murphy. OK. Another thing with this too is that with
the ACA, a lot of people are finding themselves--they have a
very high deductible, and I am hearing from a lot of
psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers that people just
aren't coming in for their appointments because they say if I
have a $5,000 deductible for me, or a 10 or 12 or $13,000
deductible for my family, they are just not coming in for care.
Is that something that HHS is also investigating to find out
what those numbers are, and what impact that is having upon
care?
Mr. Frank. Yes. We are conducting several sets of analyses.
One set of analyses we have been monitoring the trends and
deductibles in private insurance broadly, and we are also
looking at just the design of the benefit, both in the bronze
and the silver plans within the ACA.
Mr. Murphy. But you know what I am saying, is----
Mr. Frank. Absolutely.
Mr. Murphy [continuing]. It is very important. I think this
committee----
Mr. Frank. And it is very important----
Mr. Murphy [continuing]. Would like to have that
information.
Ms. Hyde, you talked about, when you talked about this, in
families in serious mental health crisis, you want to engage
the family. One of the problems we consistently heard also is
the families said we want to be engaged but HIPAA laws keep us
from doing that. We keep hearing stories of someone who has
suffered because a doctor says I can't talk to you. And the
families say, look, all they want to know is what medication is
he on so I can follow up. When is the next appointment so I can
get him there? I know in the past HHS has given us some
clarification and said doctors can listen to family members,
they are allowed to do that, but they can't kind of in a cold
basis if someone calls over the phone and give information. I
get that. We should protect that. And nor should we release all
the records. But is this something that we can be addressing to
say how do we at least get that information when, in absence of
that information, that person becomes gravely disabled and it
is necessary for treatment, how are we going to deal with that?
Ms. Hyde. We worked with the Office for Civil Rights who
actually was taking the lead on providing the clarification to
practitioners about what you just said, Mr. Murphy, that
practitioners can, in fact, listen and they can, in fact, get
lots of information that can help them with treatment. I think
there are a lot of clinicians who it is just easier to say I
can't talk at all.
Mr. Murphy. But it is that other part about----
Ms. Hyde. Part of what we are----
Mr. Murphy [continuing]. Giving information. This is
something I think we really have to address.
Ms. Hyde. Yes. Part of what we are trying to do is develop
some training and some ability to help practitioners understand
what they can and cannot do, and also to see how----
Mr. Murphy. This is----
Ms. Hyde [continuing]. They can utilize existing state laws
to get at the issue of when someone cannot make a decision for
themselves.
Mr. Murphy. I have a couple more questions. I will go to
Ms. DeGette.
Ms. DeGette. I am sorry, I have already done my second
round.
Mr. Murphy. Well, I am doing a third and a fourth.
Ms. DeGette. I need to go, so----
Mr. Murphy. OK.
Ms. DeGette [continuing]. I would suggest----
Mr. Murphy. All right. Let me just say this. Dr. Frank, you
have suggested that GAO has, to paraphrase you, missed the boat
in its analysis of the coordination between Federal agencies by
failing to coordinate with, among others, the Medicaid program.
Now, this kind of goes into the struggle we are having at the
Federal level, but let me ask you how you coordinate it on the
ground, as you state. For example, I understand this morning
the state of Kansas is debating removal of many mental health
medications from its Medicaid program. Are you even aware that
Kansas is proposing to remove these drugs? Apparently, the
Federal Government pays 55 percent of the cost of that program,
but here is the Kansas proposal to even remove those. Are you
aware of that?
Mr. Frank. I am not aware of that specific proposal. We
have been concerned with the placement of psychiatric drugs on
formularies generally, and have been examining that pretty
carefully.
Mr. Murphy. OK. What was that one other thing I wanted to
ask? One other question I want to ask about the----
Mr. Frank. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Murphy. Yes?
Mr. Frank. I would never say that Dr. Kohn missed the boat.
I have known her for too long----
Mr. Murphy. OK.
Mr. Frank [continuing]. To think that.
Mr. Murphy. All right. Thank you. We don't want to have any
aspersions about boats or sailors too.
Another thing, Dr. Frank, in your 2006 book, which we are
promoting here, Better Not Well----
Mr. Frank. Yes.
Mr. Murphy [continuing]. One of the things you suggest is
this creation of a new Federal agency or authority, it doesn't
have to be a new agency, with budgetary oversight over all the
programs that serve people with mental illness. Do you still
think that is a good idea to give someone that authority so
they can really, I guess I will use the word mojo, have to go
to all these agencies and have to answer to someone and say is
it working, is it not working, is it interacting well, are you
meeting your targets, do you still believe that?
Mr. Frank. Well, at the time I wrote that in 2005 the world
was a somewhat different place, and that was the--you got the
rationale for why we were proposing that right. What has
changed since is, for example, the Congress has done a variety
of legislative things to sort of force some of that on the
ground. The Melville 811 Act, for example, forces housing and
Medicaid to come together. And we have added so many
institutions that now are coordinating better on the ground,
that what I would like to do is see how that works out before
adding another level of bureaucracy.
Mr. Murphy. Well, I am not talking about adding another
level of bureaucracy, I am talking about someone who really has
the authority to call for these things that people have to
respond to.
Mr. Frank. Yes.
Mr. Murphy. Because my concern is that, what we are hearing
from Dr. Kohn's report is it is not being coordinated. I am
pleased that some action just immediately took place, and that
some of these agencies have not been meeting in 5 years, so we
need someone who is singularly accountable to be that pivot
point. I mean I say in my bill there should be an Assistant
Secretary of Mental Health, which means someone within this
agency that has that power and authority to go to DoD and VA
and HUD and Education and Labor and saying we are going to sit
down, we are going to hash this out, because somehow having at
least 112 programs isn't working when we look at the outcome
measures and all those things to say that. So----
Mr. Frank. Yes, as you can imagine, I am sympathetic to the
view, but I really do think that we have changed--the idea that
we had was in service of making sure that the dollars got
funneled to the right place, to the right people, at the right
time. And we are trying a different way right now to do that,
and I would like to see whether it is successful, because, in
fact, I have also seen a lot of programs where we tried to
coordinate the bureaucracies up here, nothing happened on the
ground. And so I would like to--this time start at the ground
and then work my way up, and then see what happens. But it is a
hard problem and I am interested in seeing how our efforts work
out because I really think they are serious and they are
important.
Mr. Murphy. All right. Well, I thank you for those things.
I also know, Ms. DeGette, I am sure you also support the idea.
We will work with getting SAMHSA those documents, and she is
absolutely supportive. And that is the way we are. We want
those documents we requested a year ago, and get the other
responses here quickly.
I thank all of you for being here. This has been a very
revealing report. Dr. Kohn, thank you so much. I do recognize a
lot of work has to be done. You have heard that from Members
here. And I think the best thing here is approach us with
humility and honesty and saying, you know what, when we look at
what has happened with mental health in America, it really is
not good. From the thousands and thousands of families we hear,
from the frustrations I hear from providers, from consumers, so
many people saying this isn't working. We have to change this.
And so let us ease up on saying everything is fine, and let us
really look at how we have to change this. And if it takes
legislative changes, we are going to push those, and I am going
to continue to push that.
So I ask unanimous consent that the Members' written
opening statements be introduced into the record. And without
objection, the documents will be entered into the record.
And in conclusion, again, I thank all the witnesses and
Members that participated in today's hearing. I remind Members
they have 10 business days to submit questions for the record,
and I ask the witnesses all agree to respond promptly to the
questions.
And with that, this committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:29 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Today we continue our examination of federal efforts to
combat our nation's mental health crisis. This hearing is a
natural outgrowth of the committee's investigation into the
federal mental health system. Our work began following the
heartbreaking December 2012 tragedy in Newtown, Connecticut,
and we remain committed to addressing the problems that
contributed to that tragedy.
Severe mental illness is, and should be, a top priority for
U.S. public health spending. Unfortunately, the $130 billion a
year being spent on mental health surveillance, research,
prevention, and treatment activities, income support and other
social services has not solved the problem. In Southwest
Michigan, I've met with my local public health officials and
local law enforcement and they agree that more needs to be done
to grapple with these difficult issues.
Today we gather to discuss how we can better prioritize our
taxpayer dollars to address the threat of untreated severe
mental illness.
Thanks to the bipartisan efforts of this committee, and the
nonpartisan expertise of Government Accountability Office, we
now have some answers. GAO reports that there are at least two
significant problems facing our federal agencies and their
spending that addresses mental health. First, high-level
interagency coordination for programs supporting individuals
with serious mental illness is lacking, and SAMHSA, which is
charged with promoting coordination on these matters across the
federal government, seems largely to blame. Second, agency
evaluations of programs specifically targeting individuals with
serious mental illness are too few in number and often lacking
in quality or completeness.
Although the Department of Defense and the Department of
Veterans Affairs graciously accepted the GAO recommendation
targeting their shortcomings, as identified by this report, HHS
has explicitly rejected both of GAO's recommendations. GAO
stands by its recommendations, and we're going to hear about
those recommendations today.
We are looking for answers. In light of the seriousness of
the GAO's findings, we must ask: why do HHS and SAMHSA think
that there is no room for improvement in the areas identified
by the nonpartisan government watchdog?
The untold suffering of the families and individuals
impacted by the programs discussed in this report is simply too
great, and the cost to the federal purse is too high, to allow
us to continue on our present path. Lives are at stake, and we
can and must do better. I thank Chairman Murphy for his
dedication to this important matter that hits so close to home
for millions of American families.
----------

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
