- THE DISRUPTER SERIES: MOBILE PAYMENTS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE DISRUPTER SERIES: MOBILE PAYMENTS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, MANUFACTURING, AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

DECEMBER 1, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-105

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

20-159 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

_____

Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade

MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
Chairman
JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey              Ranking Member
Vice Chairman                      YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi                Massachusetts
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              TONY CARDENAS, California
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             PETER WELCH, Vermont
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana                 officio)
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Janice D. Schakowsky, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Illinois, opening statement...........................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     7
Prepared statement...........................................     8

Witnesses

John Muller, Vice President, Global Payments Policy, PayPal......     9
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Answers to submitted questions...............................    96
Jessica E. Deckinger, Chief Marketing Officer, Merchant Customer
Exchange.......................................................    20
Prepared statement...........................................    24
Answers to submitted questions...............................    99
Sarah Jane Hughes, University Scholar and Fellow in Commercial
Law, Maurer School of Law, Indiana University..................    33
Prepared statement...........................................    35
Answers to submitted questions...............................   101
Sang W. Ahn, Chief Commercial Officer, U.S. Samsung Pay, Samsung
Electronics America............................................    48
Prepared statement...........................................    50
Answers to submitted questions...............................   105

Submitted Material

Statement of the Electronic Transactions Association, December 1,
2015, submitted by Mr. Lance...................................    80
Statement of the National Association of Convenience Stores and
the Society of Independent Gasoline Marketers of America,
December 1, 2015, submitted by Mr. Lance.......................    85
Statement of the National Retail Federation, December 1, 2015,
submitted by Mr. Lance.........................................    91

THE DISRUPTER SERIES: MOBILE PAYMENTS

----------

TUESDAY, DECEMBER 1, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:21 a.m., in
room 2322, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Michael C.
Burgess (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Burgess, Lance, Blackburn,
Harper, Guthrie, Olson, Pompeo, Kinzinger, Bilirakis, Brooks,
Mullin, Upton (ex officio), Schakowsky, Clarke, Cardenas,
Welch, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Gary Andres, Staff Director; Rebecca Card,
Assistant Press Secretary; James Decker, Policy Coordinator,
Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade; Andy Duberstein, Deputy
Press Secretary; Graham Dufault, Counsel, Commerce,
Manufacturing, and Trade; Melissa Froelich, Counsel, Commerce,
Manufacturing, and Trade; Paul Nagle, Chief Counsel, Commerce,
Manufacturing, and Trade; Tim Pataki, Professional Staff
Member; Olivia Trusty, Professional Staff, Commerce,
Manufacturing, and Trade; Dylan Vorbach, Legislative Clerk;
Michelle Ash, Democratic Chief Counsel, Commerce,
Manufacturing, and Trade; Christine Brennan, Democratic Press
Secretary; Jeff Carroll, Democratic Staff Director; Ashley
Jones, Democratic Director, Outreach and Member Services;
Caroline Paris-Behr, Democratic Policy Analyst; Tim Robinson,
Democratic Chief Counsel; Diana Rudd, Democratic Legal Fellow;
and Ryan Skukowski, Democratic Policy Analyst.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Burgess. The Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing,
and Trade will now come to order. The Chair will recognize
himself for 5 minutes for an opening statement, and I do want
to welcome everyone to our hearing this morning examining
mobile payments, which are poised to upend how consumers pay
for goods and services in stores, online, in apps, and at the
parking meter. This hearing is the latest in our disrupter
series, covering a variety of technologies that are redefining
our lives and improving our or economic condition.
This past week, Black Friday, Small Business Saturday,
Cyber Monday flooded all of our inboxes and took over the
commercial breaks on television. As the holiday shopping season
is in full swing, this is a good time to take a look at the
consumer experience with mobile payments. This morning, we will
hear from our witnesses representing a variety of innovative
products and services in the mobile payments arena. This
hearing is an opportunity to learn about the innovations that
are available to consumers today and those that will be
available in the near future, but we recognize that there are
exciting innovations on the horizon for payments, including
mobile currencies, which will be a topic for another day.
Smartphones are increasingly an ever-present part of our
lives. It is no surprise that they are also changing the way
that we shop for goods and services. You can shop on your
tablet in front of the television, compare prices on your phone
as you browse in a store, and pay without ever pulling out your
wallet. Consumers have access to more information, and more
competitive options are at the tip of their fingers during the
busiest shopping season of the year. There has not been this
big an upheaval in how consumers pay for goods and services,
from groceries to haircuts, since computers replaced the old
knuckle-buster manual imprinters in the 1980s.
In 2014, 22 percent of mobile phone owners reported making
a purchase with their phone; 39 percent used their phones to
make a purchase in the store. When you find that perfect
Christmas gift, you may be able to pay by tapping your phone at
checkout or clicking the PayPal checkout button on a mobile Web
site. When you want to send your friend money for the concert
ticket they bought for you, all you need is their email address
or their mobile phone number. These mobile payment options
include protections not available with cash and are easy to use
for consumers who may be more likely to have their phone in
their pocket than carry the exact change with them.
Some basic questions remain top of mind for consumers when
they think about mobile payments: Are they safe? Can I use my
phone? This hearing is an opportunity to hear from companies
implementing the cutting-edge technologies in mobile payments
and how they are addressing these and other concerns raised by
consumers.
Two of the top security topics that are raised by mobile
payments are authentication, how the device knows you have
permission to make the payment with the device, and
tokenization, protecting your payment data through the payment
process. We all know passwords are difficult. They are
difficult to remember. They are difficult to keep straight,
which is why many people--myself not included, but many
people--simply use their name for their user name and 1234 as
their password. Mobile devices offer some alternatives to the
traditional password that add an additional layer of protection
for consumers.
Authentication is the process that a system uses to verify
the identity of a person that wants access to the system. The
user name and password is the most typical authentication
process used to log into a variety of Web sites. Mobile devices
have changed. They have changed how people think about
authentication. Fingerprint sensors, cameras are found in an
increasing number of mobile devices; and instead of having to
remember a separate password to unlock your phone or tablet,
you may be able to use the fingerprint scanner to unlock the
device with just a touch. This protects the information on the
phone, including access to payment options.
Another security feature that is regularly brought up in
discussions about mobile payments is tokenization. We are all
familiar with the tokens you get at the fair or the arcade.
Tokens in a mobile payment system are similar in concept,
replacing the valuable currency or payment information with a
code that then becomes useless for another transaction if
someone were to steal it.
As has been the case throughout history, technology has the
potential to solve problems and improve our lives. Mobile
payments are no exception to that trend. So I look forward this
morning to hearing from our witnesses and how they are
leveraging the mix of technologies to provide an easy and
secure experience for United States consumers as we make our
way through this shopping season.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Burgess follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Michael C. Burgess

This hearing is the latest in our Disrupter Series covering
a variety of technologies that are redefining our lives and
improving our economic condition.
Over the last week, Black Friday, Small Business Saturday,
and Cyber Monday flooded our inboxes and took over commercial
breaks. As the holiday shopping season is in full swing, this
is a good time to take a look at consumers' experience with
mobile payments.
This morning, we will hear from witnesses representing a
variety of innovative products and services in the mobile
payments arena. This hearing is an opportunity to learn about
the innovations that are available to consumers today and in
the near future, but we recognize there are more exciting
innovations on the horizon for payments, including mobile
currencies, which may be a topic for another day.
Smartphones are increasingly an ever-present part of our
lives and it's no surprise that they are also changing the way
we shop for goods and services. You can shop on your tablet in
front of the TV, compare prices on your phone as you browse in
a store, and pay without ever pulling out your wallet.
Consumers have access to more information and competitive
options at the tip of their fingers during the busiest shopping
season of the year.
There has not been this big of an upheaval in how consumers
pay for goods and services--their groceries or a haircut--since
computers replaced the old knuckle-busting manual imprinters in
the 1980s.
In 2014, 22 percent of mobile phone owners reported making
a purchase on their phone. Thirty-nine percent used their
phones to make a purchase in a store.
When you find the perfect Christmas present, you may be
able to pay by tapping your phone at checkout or clicking the
PayPal Check Out button on a mobile Web site.
When you want to send your friend money for the concert
ticket they bought for you, all you need is their email address
or mobile phone number. These mobile payments options include
protections not available with cash, and are easy to use for
consumers who may be more likely to have their phone in their
pocket than exact change.
Some basic questions remain top of mind for consumers when
they think about mobile payments: ``Are they safe?'' ``Can I
use my phone?''
This hearing is an opportunity to hear from companies
implementing the cutting edge technologies in mobile payments
and how they are addressing these and other concerns raised by
consumers.
Two of the security topics that are raised by mobile
payments are authentication, how the device knows you have
permission to make the payment with the device; and
tokenization, protecting your payment data through the payment
process.
As we all know, passwords are difficult. They are difficult
to remember and difficult to keep straight which is why many
people have the same password for multiple accounts. Mobile
devices offer some alternatives to the traditional password
that add an additional layer of protection for consumers.
Authentication is the process that a system uses to verify
the identity of a person that wants to access that system. Your
user name and password or passcode is the most typical
authentication process used to log into a wide variety of Web
sites.
Mobile devices have changed how people think about
authentication. Fingerprints sensors and cameras are found on
an increasing number of mobile devices. Now, instead of having
to remember a separate password to unlock your phone or tablet,
you may be able to use the fingerprint scanner and unlock the
device with just a touch. This protects the information on your
phone, including access to payment options.
Another security feature that is regularly brought up in
discussions about mobile payments is tokenization. We're all
familiar with the tokens you get at a fair or an arcade. Tokens
in mobile payments are similar in concept--replacing the
valuable currency or payment information with a code that is
useless in another transactions if a hacker were to steal it.
As has been the case throughout history, technology has the
potential to solve problems and improve our lives. Mobile
payments are no exception to this trend.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses about how they
are leveraging a mix of technologies to provide an easy and
secure experience for U.S. consumers as we make our way through
the holiday shopping season.

Mr. Burgess. And I will yield back the balance of my time
and recognize the subcommittee ranking member, Ms. Schakowsky,
5 minutes for an opening statement, please.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing and the series of hearings on disrupters. I just
learned that at my bank, I can now make a deposit by taking a
picture of the front and back of my check, and my bank will
take it, although it doesn't account for my husband's really
bad handwriting and says that it can't verify that the number I
put in is the number he wrote on the check. That is a problem.
But I think this holiday shopping season, it is very
important to hear from our witnesses about this important new
technology. We do expect mobile payments to double from today
to 2020. One of the fastest growing sectors of the U.S.
economy, mobile payments do facilitate transactions with anyone
from a food truck or farmers market seller or taxi driver,
parking meter, and they have made buying and selling goods and
services easier in many ways. But as this technology continues
to expand, we definitely need to understand how the payment
structure works, security, consumer protection vulnerabilities.
How to address those issues is a responsibility of our
subcommittee. We want to maximize benefits and minimize risks,
obviously.
Mobile payment technologies rely on a number of
nontraditional identifiers such as geolocation, purchase
preference, phone numbers, email addresses. Those features can
enhance protections against payment fraud. However, they can
also put consumers at greater risk if they are unprotected or
if their use extends beyond managing payments. With regard to
electronic communications generally, we need to ensure that all
of the players engaged in mobile payments, hardware and
software developers, businesses, banks, credit unions, and
credit card companies, are taking reasonable security measures
to protect the information that they are handling. We also need
to make sure that consumers know how these payment structures
differ from more traditional transactions. Consumers need to
know how consumer financial liability for these types of
payments differs from those made using credit or debit cards.
They should also know how mobile payments can be used to cram
consumers, running up bills that they never explicitly
approved. And as the subcommittee responsible for consumer
protection, we have an obligation to close those and other
existing loopholes that leave consumers more vulnerable.
So I look forward to hearing from our witnesses, getting
their perspectives on opportunities, challenges, and the way
forward with regard to mobile payments.
And I yield back my time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Schakowsky follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Janice D. Schakowsky

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding today's hearing on
mobile payments. I look forward to hearing from our witnesses
on this important subject, which is all the more relevant
during the holiday shopping season.
With mobile payments expected to double from today to 2020,
this is one of the fastest-growing sectors of the U.S. economy.
Mobile payments facilitate transactions with anyone from a food
truck or farmers market seller to a taxi driver, and they have
made buying and selling goods and services easier in many ways.
However, as this technology continues to expand, we need to
understand how these payment structures work, what security and
consumer protection vulnerabilities exist, and how to address
those issues to maximize benefits while minimizing risks.
Mobile payment technologies rely on a number of non-
traditional identifiers such as geolocation, purchase
preferences, phone numbers and email addresses. Those features
can enhance protections against payment fraud. However, they
can also put consumers at greater risk if they are unprotected
or if their use extends beyond managing payments.
As I have previously mentioned with regard to electronic
communication generally, we need to ensure that all of the
players engaged in mobile payments--hardware and software
developers, businesses, banks, credit unions, and credit card
companies--are taking reasonable security measures to protect
the information they are handling.
We also need to make sure that consumers know how these
payment structures differ from more traditional transactions.
Consumers need to know how consumer financial liability for
these types of payments differs from those made using credit or
debit cards. They should also know how mobile payments can be
used to ``cram'' consumers--running up bills that they never
explicitly approve. And, as the subcommittee responsible for
consumer protection, we have an obligation to close those and
other existing loopholes that leave consumers more vulnerable.
I look forward to hearing our witnesses' perspectives on
the opportunities, challenges, and the way forward with regard
to mobile payments.

Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentlelady. The
gentlelady yields back.
The Chair recognizes the chairman of the full committee,
Mr. Upton, 5 minutes for an opening statement, please.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Good morning. And today we continue our
Disrupter Series. We have previously examined the Internet of
things, the sharing economy, and, most recently, drones.
Today we discuss the growing trend of mobile payments. No
matter where folks choose to travel or shop, whether it be in
Michigan, the Nation, or even across the globe, their
smartphones are ever-present, always at the ready to provide
direction, daily news and scores, and even make payments. Early
estimates show that, for the first time ever, more people
shopped online than in stores over the Thanksgiving holiday.
Cyber Monday estimates are still being tallied, but we are no
doubt seeing a fundamental shift in how people are buying the
goods and services available to them throughout our economy.
Consumers have more choices than ever before about when and
where to shop. These choices open up opportunities for
innovations to take root and spread throughout the economy.
We have seen this sort of disruption throughout this series
of hearings, and mobile payments are certainly no different.
They are impacting how the Internet of things and the sharing
economy develops. The Disrupter Series remains important as we
work to better understand how innovations impact consumers, job
creation, and our economy as a whole.
Mobile payment technologies have opened up opportunities
for individuals and businesses alike, so businesses small and
large can benefit from these disruptions as we have seen with a
hardware like Square and software like Venmo, which make
payments easier for small businesses and between respectively.
These are just two examples in an ecosystem that is bursting
with growth as more and more Americans get smartphones,
tablets, and other mobile devices. New technologies and
competition are responding to consumer needs.
Mobile payment innovation is happening all over the
country. However, adoption across the ecosystem continues to be
a challenge that all businesses in this space are working to
address. There are a lot of facets to the mobile payment space,
and I am pleased that today we are going to learn more about
the options that consumers have, particularly how these options
can and will continue to improve security for consumers and job
creators.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Today we continue our Disrupter Series. We have previously
examined the Internet of Things, the Sharing Economy, and most
recently drones--and today we discuss the growing trend of
mobile payments. No matter where folks choose to travel or
shop, in Michigan, the Nation, and even abroad, their
smartphones are ever present, always at the ready to provide
directions, daily news and scores, and even make payments.
Early estimates indicate that for the first time ever, more
people shopped online than in stores over the Thanksgiving
holiday weekend. The Cyber Monday estimates are still being
tallied, and we are no doubt seeing a fundamental shift in how
people are buying the goods and services available to them
throughout our economy.
Consumers have more choices than ever about when and where
to shop. These choices open up opportunities for innovation to
take root and spread throughout the economy.
We have seen this sort of disruption throughout this series
of hearings and mobile payments are no different. They are
impacting how the Internet of Things and the sharing economy
develop. The Disrupter Series remains important as we work to
better understand how innovations impact consumers, job
creation, and our economy as a whole.
Mobile payment technologies have opened up opportunities
for individuals and businesses alike. Businesses small and
large can benefit from these disruptions as we have seen with
hardware like Square and software like Venmo, which make
payments easier for small businesses and between friends,
respectively. These are just two examples in an ecosystem that
is bursting with growth as more and more Americans get
smartphone, tablets, and other mobile devices.
New technologies and competition are responding to consumer
needs. Mobile payment innovation is happening all over the
country. However, adoption across the ecosystem continues to be
a challenge that all businesses in this space are working to
address.
There are a lot of facets to the mobile payments space and
I am pleased that today we will learn more about what options
consumers have and particularly how those options can and will
continue to improve security for consumers and job creators.

Mr. Upton. And I yield the balance of my time to Marsha
Blackburn.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I am so appreciative that we are doing this hearing
today, and I thank our witnesses. You all are the experts, and
we have plenty of questions that we are going to have for you.
Wireless and mobile devices and quick purchases are changing
things. And this past weekend, my 6-year-old grandson got into
the app store on my iPhone, found something that he wanted to
buy, handed me the phone and said, ``Marcia, you need to pay
for this,'' and, of course, I did not. But I use this
illustration to make a point of the simplicity and also the
assumption of our kids and grandkids that it is going to be at
the scan of a screen or a touch of a button or with great ease
that you are going to be able to make these purchases on the
go, in realtime, paid in realtime, and with great convenience
and security.
And that is where much of our focus is going to be, whether
it is the multifactor identification or tokenization or what I
want to hear from you, the ``what is next?'' Where do you think
we are going with this? Because convenience, yes, people want
it. Security, they are going to demand it because they want to
be able to protect their virtual presence online just as they
are able to protect their presence in the brick-and-mortar
relationship with those that they are choosing to do business
with. So I thank you for the time that you are going to spend
with us today, your preparation in coming to the committee, and
I look forward to your thoughts on what is next.
I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair thanks
the gentlelady.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, the
ranking member of the full committee, 5 minutes for an opening
statement, please.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Burgess.
During today's hearing, we will discuss the new ways
consumers are paying for goods and services through their
mobile devices. At a time when it seems like virtually
everything is tied to our smartphones, it should come as no
surprise that we are now able to store credit cards
electronically, transfer funds directly to our peers, and make
purchases by simply tapping our phones to a terminal at the
point of sale.
These exciting innovations hold promise for consumers.
Imagine the convenience of being able to send money instantly
to a friend or family member regardless of location or
proximity to an ATM. For consumers who forget their credit
cards at an outing, a mobile peer-to-peer payment could be the
difference between being squared away and an IOU. The ability
to store credit cards in your phone may also offer consumers
some peace of mind that in the event of a lost or stolen phone,
their information is safe behind a pass code, and a physical
card is not compromised.
Perhaps most encouraging for consumers with limited or no
access to a bank, mobile payments can be a welcome alternative
for purchasing the goods and services they need. For example,
the use of mobile payments has skyrocketed in Kenya, where
access to banking is quite limited.
With all these new products that involve consumers'
personal information, however, privacy concerns must be raised.
In general, mobile payment apps can access a wealth of personal
data through a user's smartphone, such as phone numbers,
geolocation, email addresses, and detailed purchase histories.
Consumers do not know who has access to their information or
with whom it is shared. This data may be used in ways the
consumer never intended, including by merchants sending
unwanted advertising tailored to consumers through their mobile
devices. And that personal information could also be sold, so
consumers' location and other private matters are shared with
the highest bidder. That is why privacy protection should be
baked into these new mobile pay applications.
It is also important that consumers are ensured a secure
transaction through a mobile payment system. As with any mobile
device or application, digitally stored or transmitted
information is hackable. With the major data breaches of the
past few years still fresh in consumers' minds, mobile payment
users will understandably be hesitant about using an app if
there is no protection from hackers who may try to intercept
their personal information. It has been made clear through this
series of hearings on disrupters, innovation, and consumer
protection must go hand-in-hand for these new technologies to
flourish. Mobile payments present an exciting opportunity to
make e-commerce a more seamless experience for consumers, and I
look forward to hearing from today's witnesses on this topic.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Thank you Chairman Burgess. During today's hearing, we will
discuss the new ways consumers are paying for goods and
services through their mobile devices.
At a time when it seems like virtually everything is tied
to our smartphones, it should come as no surprise that we are
now able to store credit cards electronically, transfer funds
directly to our peers, and make purchases by simply tapping our
phones to a terminal at the point of sale.
These exciting innovations hold promise for consumers.
Imagine the convenience of being able to send money instantly
to a friend or family member regardless of location or
proximity to an ATM. For consumers who forget their credit card
on an outing, a mobile peer-to-peer payment could be the
difference between being squared away and an I.O.U.
The ability to store credit cards in your phone may also
offer consumers some piece of mind that, in the event of a lost
or stolen phone, their information is safe behind a passcode
and a physical card is not compromised.
Perhaps most encouraging, for consumers with limited or no
access to a bank, mobile payments can be a welcome alternative
for purchasing the goods and services they need. For example,
the use of mobile payments has skyrocketed in Kenya, where
access to banking is quite limited.
As with all new products that involve consumers' personal
information, however, privacy concerns must be raised.
In general, mobile payment apps can access a wealth of
personal data through a user's smartphone, such as phone
numbers, geolocation, email addresses, and detailed purchase
histories. Consumers do not know who has access to their
information or with whom it is shared. This data may be used in
ways the consumer never intended, including by merchants
sending unwanted advertising tailored to consumers through
their mobile devices. That personal information also could be
sold, so consumers' location and other private matters are
shared with the highest bidder. That is why privacy protections
should be baked into these new mobile pay applications.
It is also important that consumers are ensured secure
transactions through a mobile payment system. As with any
mobile device or application, digitally stored or transmitted
information is hackable. With the major data breaches of the
past few years still fresh in consumers' minds, mobile payment
users will understandably be hesitant about using an app if
there is no protection from hackers who may try to intercept
their personal information.
It has been made clear through this series of hearings on
disrupters, innovation and consumer protection must go hand in
hand for these new technologies to flourish.
Mobile payments present an exciting opportunity to make e-
commerce a more seamless experience for consumers, and I look
forward to hearing from today's witnesses on this topic. Thank
you and I yield back.

Mr. Burgess. The gentleman yields back. The Chair thanks
the gentleman.
And this concludes Member opening statements. The Chair
would remind Members that, pursuant to committee rules, all
Members' opening statements will be made part of the record.
And we do want to thank our witnesses for being here this
morning and taking time to testify before the subcommittee. Our
witness panel today--and we do have a good and great group--our
witness panel for today includes Mr. John Muller, the senior
vice president for global payments policy at PayPal; Ms.
Jessica Deckinger, chief marketing officer at the Merchant
Consumer Exchange; Ms. Sarah Jane Hughes, university scholar
and fellow in commercial law at the Indiana University School
of Law; and Mr. Sang Ahn, chief commercial officer at U.S.
Samsung Pay.
We appreciate all of you being with us this morning. We
will begin the panel with you, Mr. Muller.
And each you of will be recognized for 5 minutes for a
summary of your opening statement.
Mr. Muller, you are recognized.

STATEMENTS OF JOHN MULLER, VICE PRESIDENT, GLOBAL PAYMENTS
POLICY, PAYPAL; JESSICA E. DECKINGER, CHIEF MARKETING OFFICER,
MERCHANT CUSTOMER EXCHANGE; SARAH JANE HUGHES, UNIVERSITY
SCHOLAR AND FELLOW IN COMMERCIAL LAW, MAURER SCHOOL OF LAW,
INDIANA UNIVERSITY; AND SANG W. AHN, CHIEF COMMERCIAL OFFICER,
U.S. SAMSUNG PAY, SAMSUNG ELECTRONICS AMERICA

STATEMENT OF JOHN MULLER

Mr. Muller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Schakowsky, and the other members of the committee. Thank you
for the opportunity to testify on behalf of PayPal. My name is
John Muller, and I am vice president of payments policy for
PayPal. And PayPal has been involved in mobile payments now for
16 years and started with the cutting-edge payments mobile
device of its time, which was the PalmPilot, you may remember,
the personal digital assistant without phone capability, but a
very portable device. And PayPal was actually built to beam
payments from one PalmPilot to another. At that point, we
quickly realized that more people had email and Internet access
than owned a palm pilot palm pilot, but we have now come back
full circle to a focus on mobile payments to the point that
last year we processed 1 billion payments from mobile devices
all around the world, and just in the last quarter of this
year, the growth rate continues, and we processed 345 million
mobile payments. I have some more information on PayPal in the
prepared statement, so I wanted to shift a little bit and just
make a few high-level points about mobile payments and where we
stand today.
One point is payments follows commerce, and it follows
where people spend their time. Very few people, maybe the
people on this panel excepted, make a payment just for fun or
just to try it out. There is always a purpose behind it, and
for most of us, the purpose is commerce, or the purpose might
be to pay back a friend. And increasingly, we are doing our
shopping on mobile devices, and we have our mobile devices with
us when we are out with a friend or contacting a friend, so it
is only natural for payments to be part of that broader mobile
experience.
Another point is that payment has been mobile for quite
some time. There are few things more portable than paper
currency and coins or a plastic card. What is really new about
the new generation of mobile payments is the opportunity for
all of us in the payments industry to take advantage of what
the technology makes available, namely increased security
through things like the device identifier or geolocation on the
device or biometrics on the device--the thumbprint being the
first live version of that, but certainly more to come in that
arena. And then, to that security, add a better user experience
compared to just paying with cash or a card: things like
automatically recognizing my loyalty program, giving me points,
giving me choice of funding methods. So if I have a card, a
plastic card, then I have to use that card. If I have a digital
wallet like PayPal or the other wallets, I can use my mobile
device in realtime to switch among all the different payment
methods that I have available. So those are some of the reasons
why we see the growing popularity of mobile payments.
Another point I wanted to make is we often use the term
broadly mobile payments, and it really covers to a large degree
three different fields. One--and certainly the one that
predominates for PayPal and many other payment companies--is
using the mobile device as a substitute for what a few years
ago would be a transaction on the laptop or desktop computer,
so just communicating with a new kind of device but really very
similar to the kind of e-commerce transactions we were doing in
the early 2000s.
The second type--and certainly the one that gets a great
deal of attention for good reason now because the opportunity
to touch not just e-commerce but physical commerce--is using
the phone as a substitute for the plastic card and paying at a
physical point of sale.
And then the third type, certainly not to diminish it in
any way, equally important, is using the mobile device as a way
of enabling businesses, mostly small businesses, to accept
cards and other payment methods electronically in a mobile
business environment, whether it is a food truck or a farmers
market or any of the other many opportunities that small
businesses use for devices, attaching a small reader to their
device and using it usually to swipe a card or enter another
payment method. Companies like Square and PayPal have made that
available to small businesses all over the country. And all of
those are different types of mobile payments, but it is
important to recognize that there are distinctions among the
three.
And then, finally, also important to recognize that the
field is already regulated. We have to give credit to the
drafters in particular of the Electronic Fund Transfer Act.
When they created consumer protections for what at the time was
primarily the ATM card quite a few years ago, they drafted the
statute in terms of access devices and financial accounts, not
limited to plastic cards or any other kind of specific
technology. So an access device can be a password or a phone or
any other device, and the consumer protections remain in place
supplemented by the zero liability programs that Visa and
MasterCard and PayPal all offer to buyers. So I just wanted to
make those broader points.
And, with that, I will conclude my remarks. Thank you, and
I look forward to the questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Muller follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
And, Ms. Deckinger, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JESSICA E. DECKINGER

Ms. Deckinger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Schakowsky, and distinguished members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on behalf of Merchant
Customer Exchange for MCX. We appreciate the invitation to
appear before the subcommittee to discuss the rapidly
developing and evolving mobile payment space. The
subcommittee's interest in the topic is welcome as mobile
payment solutions are rapidly moving to the forefront of
consumer technology innovations, both in the United States and
globally.
Who is MCX? So the Merchant Customer Exchange was founded
by a leading group of U.S. merchants in 2012 to create a
broadly accepted mobile commerce platform. MCX's members
include retail leaders in the big box, convenience, fuel,
grocery, quick service, full dining, and specialty retail
travel categories. MCX is focused on creating convenience for
consumers by allowing them to securely pay for goods and
services from their handheld mobile device while also providing
opportunities for merchants to directly connect with consumers
to provide offers, loyalty programs, and more direct
interaction with the merchants they shop with. I prepared a
short video for you to get a sense of what CurrentC, our app,
is all about.
[video shown.]
Ms. Deckinger. This new network will benefit a wide range
of consumers in three ways: One, delivering a better shopping
and payment experience by enabling customers to interact
directly with merchants through virtually any smartphone; two,
safeguarding consumers and merchants by maintaining the direct
relationship that merchants have with customers and protecting
customer data; three, bringing balance to the payments
ecosystem.
Together MCX's member companies process in excess of $1.2
trillion in payments annually, giving MCX scale and ubiquity
that will allow consumers to use their smartphones wherever
they may shop. MCX brings together the best-in-class technology
and mobile payments partners to create an unparalleled network
in the mobile space. To achieve this goal, MCX has launched its
own proprietary application called CurrentC that can be
downloaded to any smartphone a customer may choose.
We have conducted private rollouts with leading retailers
and their employees, and as of September 15, 2015, this year,
we are currently in a public beta operating in Columbus, Ohio.
The purpose of our beta in Columbus is to gather additional
learnings from consumers and merchants to continue to refine
and improve the product to meet the needs of both consumers and
the merchants. Expansion of the rollout will continue as
additional merchants and partners go live in Columbus through
the balance of 2015 with national public availability currently
anticipated in 2016.
Today consumers' experiences with payments can differ
fairly drastically depending on where they are shopping. At a
fuel station, they may be asked to dip their card or type their
ZIP Code in to begin fueling. At a sit-down dining
establishment, consumers wait for the server before physically
relinquishing their card to the establishment. Other merchants
have more self-service experience, where consumers swipe their
own cards at checkout. And we have specifically designed our
technology platform to support the best, most progressive
technologies to deliver an optimal payments experience at any
merchant to serve their customers in the best way possible.
To deliver that best consumer experience at merchants, we
are leveraging several types of technology solutions. We remain
open to new technologies and are always looking to source the
very best options for consumers and our merchants. At present,
we are working with several different innovative technologies,
including QR codes, Bluetooth low-energy beacons, and
geolocation, providing the best user experience regardless of
location.
Fundamentally the current payment system works well from a
consumer's perspective. Swiping a credit or debit card is
widely accepted, easy to do, and familiar. MCX and its
merchants are focused on providing consumers new, more
convenient, and more rewarding, and safer ways to shop.
CurrentC provides incentives to consumers in four important
ways. Wide acceptance: Our owner-merchants already include
national leading retailers and regional leaders in large-
format, convenience, pharmacy, fuel, drug, grocery, quick,
full-service dining, specialty retail, and travel categories.
We are focused on acceptance in the places where consumers shop
every day. Developing that network will give consumers the
ability to shop with frequency and to develop muscle memory
using CurrentC, allowing it to replace the card swipe over time
while providing additional security and convenience.
At MCX, we are technology agnostic. CurrentC is available
on any smartphone regardless of model. We believe the consumer
should have the convenience of mobile payments regardless of
their hardware choices. And because CurrentC is cloud-based, it
is easily transferrable should a consumer choose to change
their chosen mobile device solution.
We have also partnered with merchants to provide CurrentC
payments network to consumers within the merchant's own
priority apps. This means a consumer can choose to access
CurrentC directly or have the ability to garner the same
benefits if they wish to use the merchant app which they use
every day.
Merchants value their relationships with their customers
and want to enhance those relationships, adding value that
motivates consumers to shop in store with faster, safer, and
more secure way to transact. CurrentC delivers by including
consumer loyalty cards and accounts, empowering consumers to
apply offers, coupons, promotions, and when they pay in a
single transaction. Our solution is designed to combine all
those benefits instantaneously together in one QR code read so
that a consumer no longer has to remember a phone number to
activate their loyalty account or use their key chain to get
discounts.
Because CurrentC is tied directly into the POS terminals at
our merchants, we have the ability to deliver additional
benefits, such as item level coupons, which alleviates the need
to either clip or carry paper coupons or discount offers, all
in an effort to provide flexibility, choice, and the ability to
benefit from offers and loyalty directly from their handheld
device.
Currently, we are testing several discount and incentive
programs in Columbus. Two of our most popular are a coupon for
a free Frosty, which is an ice cream cone, with every purchase
at Wendy's, and a $5 bonus extra care box with a first purchase
using CurrentC at CVS. What we are seeing is that to the
average consumer, these are tangible motivators.
Consumers will have the freedom to pay using a variety of
financial accounts, including personal checking accounts,
merchant gift cards, private label credit and debit cards, and
general purpose credit and debit cards.
MCX recently signed a partnership with JPMorgan Chase which
will increase options available in the CurrentC wallet by
enabling Chase customers to use their Chase cards wherever
CurrentC is accepted. It is anticipated that additional general
purpose credit and debit cards will be available in the future.
At MCX, we are always open to adding new forms of payment
that will provide greater convenience to consumers and allow
them to realize the benefits and incentives of moving to paying
with their favorite merchants using CurrentC mobile payments
platform. At MCX, we are focused on leveraging innovative and
secure technology.
Consumers are inundated with headlines around data breaches
and identity theft. As a result, they have become more aware of
the vulnerability of various payment methods and technology.
However, many consumers remain in the dark about how to
leverage the latest security technologies in their everyday
lives. At MCX, we believe it is incumbent on mobile payment
technologies like ours not only to use the latest security
technology but to help educate consumers on how it is working
for them. We are leveraging cloud technology to avoid storage
of any sensitive consumer information on the phone or
transferred at the POS. Our app uses secure dynamic tokens
uniquely generated for each individual transaction to
facilitate transactions instead of constantly passing data
between the consumer, merchant, and financial institution. In
the simplest term, using a dynamic token means that the
consumer can feel assured that their personal financial
information or payment information is never stored on the
device, is never stored on the merchant POS, and even if the
dynamic token was stolen, it is worthless because it can never
be used again.
CurrentC was designed to ensure consumers are in control of
their own personal security. It provides visual evidence to
demonstrate that our security measures are working for them.
Mr. Burgess. Ms. Deckinger, let me ask you to please wrap
up. We have other witnesses to hear from.
Ms. Deckinger. OK. Thank you. I will just finish this
section and then finish. Our registration process includes
several security questions, a four-digit PIN, and consumers can
disable their phones easily and quickly.
We want to reiterate our appreciation for your interest in
mobile payments technologies and providing Merchant Customer
Exchange the opportunity to share about our innovation and
currently underway in the mobile payments space. We truly
believe that mobile payments will provide a better opportunity
for merchants and consumers to experience an improved
experience overall. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Deckinger follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
Ms. Hughes, you are recognized for 5 minutes, please.

STATEMENT OF SARAH JANE HUGHES

Ms. Hughes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Schakowsky, Representative
Brooks from Indiana, and other honorable members of the
subcommittee and committee who are present today, I am very
pleased to be here with you to talk about mobile payments
generally, and with the microphone, it will be even better--
yes--and to talk about consumers in today's marketplace, and I
am especially pleased not only to be here with you but to be
here with my longtime professional acquaintance, John Muller of
PayPal.
I have three disclaimers that are unique to me and a couple
of others that relate to mobile that I think I should say.
First, I am not here as a representative of Indiana University,
so the trustees don't stand behind what I say. This is my
personal opinion. I am also not here as a representative of the
Uniform Law Commission, although I am currently working on a
virtual currency project with them. And I am not here as a
representative of the Federal Reserve System's Faster Payments
Task Force, even though I am also working with them on that. So
those are the formal usual disclaimers.
Now the personal ones. I do use PayPal, and I use PayPal on
my phone. I do use Square, particularly to buy tickets and buy
things, as Mr. Muller said, at farmers markets and at arts and
crafts fairs and to make ticket purchases, and I use both
Square and PayPal to make charitable contributions because it
is not just the Christmas shopping season that we have right
now; it is also the end-of-year charitable fund drive, and
mobile payments are very important to charities. And as John
segregated, even stationary e-commerce payments are very
important to charities.
I don't use Apple Pay or Samsung, and the reason is because
I don't have a new enough phone to make an Apple Pay, and I
don't happen to be carrying Samsung.
So the committee asked us to look at four questions, and in
the interest of time, the first was whether mobile payments
were disrupting other forms of payments. And I personally
believe the answer is not yet. And I am not certain when that
moment will come when that will happen, but I think that it is
a question of a level of adoption, and I am not positive, given
that mobile payments will continue to rely on credit, debit,
and other traditional sources of the funds for clearing and
settlements, the degree to which mobile payments will disrupt
in the way that we typically use the term. I would prefer to
say that mobile payments can augment.
The second question the committee asked me to discuss was
the security and what the technologies are. And while I agree
that there have been some significant upturns in security, I
like multifactor authorization, which we do not yet have with
plastic cards in this country, but in other countries, we do. I
like the tokenization options, and I like the geolocation
options from a security perspective. I must be honest: from a
privacy perspective, I don't like the geolocation option quite
so much, but that is because I am really a privacy hawk, and so
I think that that is a significant issue.
The hurdles that are existing to widespread consumer
adoption of mobile payments include something that MCX is going
to solve by allowing ubiquitous types of utilities. But the
other hurdle I believe requires significant consumer education
expenses on the parts of the companies that are engaged in
this, and I don't know whether you noticed, but yesterday, I
saw an ad, I thought, for Samsung on this score. And I know
that there have been others, but I think that there is an
absence of consumer education which could be significantly
enhancing the opportunities in this field.
Security depends in part on the contract between the user,
me, and the providers. And so in addition to the Electronic
Fund Transfer Act, which is older than my oldest child, who is
37, I think it also depends on the degree of supervision of
payment processors who are not the providers and not chartered
financial institutions to take good care of security in the
middle.
And the next question that you asked involved privacy in
this ecosystem. Many years ago now, by comparison, the privacy
was put into place in the Gramm-Leach-Bliley bill, and the
banks live with other privacy opportunities and
responsibilities that they believe are considerable.
I would welcome any questions that the committee may have.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Hughes follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
Mr. Ahn, you are recognized for 5 minutes, please.

STATEMENT OF SANG W. AHN

Mr. Ahn. Chairman Burgess, Ranking Member Schakowsky, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify on behalf of Samsung Electronics
America. For today's hearing, I would like to introduce you to
Samsung Pay, which combines security, simplicity, and
widespread acceptance like no other mobile payment solution.
Whether it is fighting fraud or helping consumers zip through
Black Friday checkout lines, Samsung Pay benefits consumers,
retail merchants, and financial institutions.
For consumers, Samsung Pay is accepted virtually anywhere
you can swipe or tap a card. It is secure, easy to use, and
simple. Swipe up--I will demonstrate on my phone. Swipe up to
launch the application. Confirm your identity with a
fingerprint. Hover the device over the payment terminal and
pay. It is that simple and has the widest acceptance of any
mobile payment service.
For merchants, Samsung Pay helps merchants provide a
secure, innovative, and fast payment experience. Samsung Pay
supports all payment terminal types, including magnetic stripe,
NFC, and EMV terminals. For financial institutions, Samsung Pay
has security features, including tokenization and fingerprint
authentication, that limit fraud and reduce liability. So those
are Samsung Pay's benefits in broad strokes.
Importantly, our innovation was made possible by the
Government's decision to have consumers pick the winners in the
mobile payments space without additional regulations. Going
forward, Congress should continue to allow consumer choice to
drive innovation and differentiation in this space.
Before diving further into Samsung Pay, it might help if I
highlighted Samsung's presence in America and how our U.S.
employees are contributing to Samsung Pay. Headquartered in New
Jersey and with facilities in Dallas, Palo Alto, Austin, South
Carolina, New York, and Massachusetts, Samsung Electronics
America is a recognized innovation leader in smartphones,
consumer electronics, IT, and home appliances. We employ
approximately 15,000 people in America, and our $15 billion
investment in our Austin semiconductor plant is the largest
single site foreign direct investment in America. In regard to
Samsung Pay, our U.S. employees have driven much of Samsung
Pay's development and success.
Several years ago, Samsung Pay's R&D teams examined mobile
payments. We found that consumers would transition from plastic
cards to mobile payments if the technology solution is, one,
secure; two, simple to use; and, three, widely accepted at most
merchants nationwide. We concluded that many companies can make
a secure and easy-to-use mobile payment solution, but the trick
is making the payment solution widely accepted by merchants.
Current solutions rely on NFC, near field communications.
Although NFC shows great promise, only a small fraction of
merchants in the United States have adopted NFC-equipped point-
of-sale terminals. Without the infrastructure in place for
accepting NFC-based transactions, consumer acceptance of NFC-
only mobile payment services has remained low.
Enter Samsung Pay. Unlike other mobile wallets in the
market, Samsung Pay lets you pay at most any terminal where you
can swipe a credit card. To accomplish this, we are using an
innovative new technology known as MST, magnetic secure
transmission. MST leverages magnetic stripe technology already
accepted by more than 30 million merchants around the world.
Specifically, MST emulates a swipe transaction thanks to a tiny
coil in our phones that transmits the same magnetic data and
code that magnetic stripe readers normally get from a credit
card or debit card. By including both MST and NFC technologies
in our phones, Samsung Pay enables customers to make secure
payments almost anywhere regardless of the merchant's point-of-
sale equipment.
Because of Samsung Pay's wide merchant acceptance, we can
make a meaningful contribution to payment security by enabling
the largest footprint of secure, tokenized payments. With
tokenization, Samsung Pay never provides a consumer's personal
account number to a merchant. Instead, Samsung Pay provides
merchants with tokens yielded created by the consumer's credit
card company that enable the merchant to process the
transaction without exposing sensitive customer information to
potential data thieves.
Samsung Pay utilizes biometrics as well, which allows users
to apply a fingerprint to the phone's built-in sensor to
authenticate a transaction. Additionally, our smartphones
incorporate the Samsung KNOX security platform, keeping all
payment data locked and secure.
Finally, getting user privacy right is critical. For
Samsung Pay, we do not and cannot monitor user purchases. The
transitional details areencrypted and can only be decrypted on
a consumer's device.
Samsung wants all consumers, regardless of income, to make
secure payments. No other mobile manufacturer reaches as
diverse an audience as Samsung or offers its consumers such a
wide array of innovative products at different price points.
Accordingly, we closely are examining how to include Samsung
Pay in a greater range of devices. As we do so, we would
welcome your thoughts any input from your constituents.
Thank you, again, for holding this hearing and allowing
Samsung to share our thoughts and benefits about mobile
payments.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ahn follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
The Chair thanks all of our witnesses for providing
testimony today and food for thought.
We will move into now the Member question part of the
hearing. I will begin recognizing myself for 5 minutes for
questions.
Ms. Deckinger, let me just ask you, obviously, we have
heard from Mr. Ahn about some things that are rather device-
specific, but you talk about being agnostic as to the type of
device. So how does that interplay into the consumer experience
having a device, any device, which is then able to use your
product?
Ms. Deckinger. Thank you so much for your question. We are
very focused at MCX on creating consumer choice and enhancing
that, making it available to all consumers. We feel like it is
very important to have consumers have the option to use
whatever device they would like to. Therefore, we have designed
our technology to work on all devices, all smartphones.
Virtually any smartphone that a consumer has can leverage our
technology pretty easily.
Mr. Burgess. I have got to ask the question. What about a
flip phone? Some of us still have them.
Ms. Deckinger. We are not quite there yet.
Mr. Burgess. Not quite there yet. Mr. Ahn, you bring up
some great points, and I think you heard Ranking Member Pallone
talk about providing services to the unbanked in places where
the infrastructure for check to bank does not exist, whether it
be because of civil strife or warfare or poverty. So you
actually could to some degree bridge that gap, could you not,
with the devices that you are talking about?
Mr. Ahn. That is right. We have the opportunity through our
phone ecosystem--and remember we have over 700 million devices
in market around the world, and we are a global company--we
have the opportunity through application to provide payment
solutions that are relevant for consumers. What we are doing in
the United States with our recent launch of Samsung Pay is
providing an opportunity for the user, the consumer, to pay at
any merchant location, whether it is a big box retailer, like
many of the MCX merchants, or small mom-and-pop shops.
MCX, as you remember, there are many partners within MCX
that we are very close with; we are in discussions as partners.
MCX is designed to be a large consortia of the largest
merchants, and they are relevant and important from a consumer
experience point of view. However, we think that we need to go
beyond just large box retailers into mom-and-pop stores.
Anywhere there is a transaction, we want to be there for the
consumer. So that is our near-term opportunity.
Having said that, I think it is the early stages of this
payment ecosystem, and all innovations are helpful. As a rising
tide lifts all boats, we want all innovations to succeed and
move the payment ecosystem forward, primarily creating
additional security for the user moving forward.
Mr. Burgess. Very good. Mr. Muller, let me just ask you,
PayPal, one of the originals and I think when I ran my first
campaign 13 or 14 years ago, I actually had a PayPal option as
far as for people who wanted to support. You have probably had
more experience in this space than almost anyone else. How do
you leverage the security? How do you add layers of security to
or additional layers of security for the transactions for the
consumers?
Mr. Muller. So it is always a matter of trying to add
security with user convenience and the user experience, and
that is what the mobile device offers in a somewhat unique way,
is the way to improve both the user experience and security,
and that is a rare thing in the payments field, through the
kinds of technologies we have already mentioned, like the
device location or unique device identifier, and do it in a way
where the user controls what information they are sharing. So
that is the Holy Grail we are all trying to achieve. And I also
want to emphasize that all the same risk programs are still
running in the background, so we don't assume that there is a
silver bullet type solution in security. So even if we do have
a customer who is taking advantage, say, of the fingerprint
authentication or device location and they pass that test, we
are still running all these other tests in the background
looking for risk variables in the transaction. So it is a
matter of adding to risk-reducing programs that already exist,
not substituting them purely with new types of authentication
or security.
Mr. Burgess. Well, thank you. This is not a question. It is
an observation. We had a hearing here not too terribly long ago
about senior citizens who were taken advantage of by various
phone solicitations. And as this technology becomes easier and
more ingrained, I would just ask you to be thinking about, you
have always got to stay one step ahead of the very clever thief
out there, so to help protect senior citizens against this type
of activity, do be thinking about what type of safeguards may
be incorporated into the technology.
With that, I am going to recognize Ms. Schakowsky for 5
minutes for questions.
Ms. Schakowsky. So, Ms. Deckinger, we celebrated Small
Business Saturday. I went to a number of small businesses, took
selfies, in my neighborhood. So your technology right now
really favors larger operations. Right?
Ms. Deckinger. At the moment, yes. We are in the early
stages of a pilot at the moment. So we are still developing our
technology and working to build a network that consumers can
use CurrentC in places where they shop every day, yes.
Ms. Schakowsky. I wanted to ask some questions about
consumer privacy.
Professor Hughes, what kind of data is collected by these
apps, and is that data different from what a more traditional
means of payment might collect, like a credit card?
Ms. Hughes. Thank you, Ms. Schakowsky. I think it depends a
great deal on the system. Mr. Ahn has just said that Samsung
Pay which was relatively recently introduced in the United
States, does not have, does not allow the merchant to see any
of the information, and so the authentication device does not
share that information with the merchant. It operates in a more
traditional way, like an escrow service, if I understood you
correctly, for that information. You keep it, and you are
passing the payment through, but you are not passing the
consumer's information through. PayPal----
Ms. Schakowsky. Is that a correct description?
Mr. Ahn. That is correct. The way we implement today is we
send a data package over that is completelyencrypted, and no
one sees what is inside.
Ms. Schakowsky. Is that unique to your company?
Mr. Ahn. No, it is not.
Ms. Schakowsky. But it is not mandated in any way right
now. Right?
Mr. Ahn. This is one implementation of tokenization that is
prevalent in the market by leading technology companies.
Ms. Schakowsky. OK. Go ahead.
Ms. Hughes. I was about to say, but I think your
clarification was extremely helpful, that PayPal also operates
in an escrow mode because the transaction flows into PayPal,
and then PayPal processes the payment transaction in a way that
is lots more like an escrow than many people believe. That is
not true of every app that might be available, which is one of
the reasons why I said when it comes to security and, indeed,
to privacy also, it really depends on who the provider is,
whether it is a branded company like PayPal and Samsung,
whether it is an app for another purpose.
The manner in which tokenization is employed is also very
random at this stage, so there are a number of alternatives
that do not have the same levels of security and/or customer
privacy as Samsung and PayPal have.
Ms. Schakowsky. You know, my experience with these kinds of
things is that they ask you to accept the deal. And that is
preceded by a lot of stuff on a very small device that you have
to figure out in legalese whether or not you push accept. I
would challenge almost anyone whether or not they carefully
scrutinize those things before pushing ``I accept'' and then
moving on to use. I am just wondering if since there are
alternatives, some more secure than others, should there be
some standardization? Should there be some requirements to
protect consumer privacy?
Ms. Hughes. I had mentioned earlier that I am a privacy
hawk, but I believe very firmly that everybody should have the
privacy protections that Congress and many States have already
provided, basically Congress has provided. I believe that
everybody should have the same access to those privacy
protections, but I also believe that one of the dynamic forces
in mobile payments is the ability to compete to provide better
than other people do. So the companies that are working with
multifactor authentication, working with tokenization, that are
doing, as Mr. Muller suggested, continuing to run their risk
platforms, which are old-fashioned, artificial intelligence
operations in the background that are monitoring the payments
transactions that are coming through their systems. As long as
there is a floor, then I believe people should be able to
compete to offer better tokenization, more extensive or
unique----
Ms. Schakowsky. That is something we are going to have to
consider if we think competition based on level of risk and
protection for consumers is a legitimate way to compete.
I have actually run out of time, so I am going to I yield
back.
Ms. Hughes. Would you like me to answer the question?
Ms. Schakowsky. Yes, sure.
Ms. Hughes. I think the answer is right now among the
various payment systems in the United States, there is already
a broad array of risk that relates to privacy and security. And
because we have silos around different kinds of payments, this
has been the constant in the marketplace back to the 1970s or
the early 1960s. And efforts to harmonize that were not
successful in the past, and whether they can be successful in
the future remains to be seen.
Ms. Schakowsky. Can I just say, I am not talking about
necessarily harmonizing the method or the technology, but I am
talking about setting a level of risk that is acceptable in the
marketplace. So I need to move on.
Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
The Chair recognizes the vice chair of the full committee,
Mrs. Blackburn, for 5 minutes for questions, please.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Schakowsky might be moving on, but I will just kind of
put a comment to the end of her words. We have had a privacy
and data security working group here at Energy and Commerce,
and we all are focused on making certain that consumers are
safe in the marketplace. And Mr. Welch and I have worked on a
data security bill. And we continue to try to push this forward
so that we can do some preemption, establish some breach
notification, and bring some certainty to bear. So I appreciate
the questions that are being asked around this issue this
morning, and we hope that you appreciate them too.
Ms. Deckinger, I want to come to you. Those of us who
appreciate the virtual marketplace and want to see people in
it, and then we see articles like this, and it makes you go
``ouch.'' It is the ``Apple Pay Rival and Walmart-Backed MCX
Hacked, User Emails Snatched.'' And this was in your beta test
period. It was October 2014. That was a Forbes article that was
written about this.
And, Mr. Chairman, I am going to pass this down so Ms.
Schakowsky can see it because I know she is, like me on this
privacy issue, very concerned about that.
I want you to provide some information about that hack and
what you did on resolving it.
Ms. Deckinger. Yes. Thank you so much for the question. So
a subcontractor of MCX, not MCX itself, had a security incident
where some emails were released. That subcontractor was
immediately terminated as a partner.
Mrs. Blackburn. How long did it take you to isolate the
hack?
Ms. Deckinger. Immediately. We also opted to notify folks
within hours of finding out, very rapidly after finding out
that this occurred, and we have taken extensive precautions.
Security is very important to us. Obviously, it is very
important to our users. We have taken extraordinary precautions
now to address any issues that we found with that subcontractor
with additional subcontractors that we have then partnered with
in the future. We continue to evolve our security platform and
are always looking. There are always, as someone mentioned
earlier, clever and creative criminals out there who will seek
to look for data, and no security is perfect. But we are
working hard to achieve a----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Let me pick up on that evolution in
this process. Talk to me about what precautions you are taking
around data security when it comes to the multifactor
authentication or tokenization. What are you moving toward, and
are you pleased with those advances? And I am coming to each
one of the rest of you on this panel, so get ready. The clock
is ticking, 30 seconds.
Ms. Deckinger. So we have a cross-functional security
council internally within MCX. We work together regularly and
meet regularly to discuss the latest technology innovations,
the latest security innovations. We are always evaluating what
is possible to make things more secure for consumers, to make
them more secure for merchants and for the app. We are always--
always--implementing the state-of-the-art technology that we
can, whatever is available for us to implement, and we will
continue to do so. Obviously, the trust of consumers and their
feeling of security when using an app is of the utmost
importance, and we recognize that, and so we have worked to
make sure that we are always sitting on the cutting edge.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Mr. Muller?
Mr. Muller. OK. I think for all of us, you will probably
hear the theme that it is constant battle and constant
investment in security because the fraudsters are out there
also continually changing their methods of attack. And so we
have tried to make that investment, and it is certainly a huge
part of our cost base. And then we also try to do what we can,
first of all, to minimize data collection, because, frankly, if
we don't have the data, then even if we were somehow to be
breached, it would be less vulnerable.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Mr. Ahn, I am going to come to you.
Talk about the Fast Identity Online Alliance and your
protections.
Mr. Ahn. So the security protocols we put in place are
quite extensive. What we think about is putting multiple walls
up such as the fraudsters have to hop over many, many steps to
reach the information. One of the things that we do is we have
at the integrated chip level, the microprocesser alone has a
way for us through KNOX, which is our proprietary solution, to
shut down in the event of a rooting event. The application must
be authenticated by fingerprint or PIN to get into the
application. If the phone is lost or stolen, we have the
ability to remotely turn off payment credentials completely and
turn them back on. And when the card networks----
Mrs. Blackburn. So hold on. So you have got three tiers of
encryption before you get to----
Mr. Ahn. We have multiple ways of protecting the consumer
information. The last one is that the card networks and credit
card companies that we work with themselves have the ability to
remotely turn on and off tokens. So what happens--and the last
and most important piece is we purposely architected our
solution to not store personal information and card transaction
information. We only pass along a token. And so, for us, there
is no central point to hack. The only information that is
available temporarily is transaction history for the last 10
transactions on your device, and this one device is not a rich
enough target for fraudsters. So that is how we view security.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Pallone, ranking member of the full committee, 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to ask Professor Hughes, a consumer's ability to
dispute unauthorized charges on a mobile payment varies
depending on the payment method being used. For example, a
consumer's liability for unauthorized charges on a credit card
after a certain date is lower than on a debit card. Could you
tell me what protections are available to consumers who do not
have access to a credit or debit card and choose to link a
mobile payment to their mobile phone bill?
Ms. Hughes. I believe, Representative Pallone, that you
have hit upon the single greatest challenge from the consumer
perspective. And this particularly affects unbanked and
underbanked individuals. So the persons who are using credit
cards and debit cards have access to two Federal statutes that
have been in place, in one case, for more than 40 years and, in
the other case, for 37-plus years: the Fair Credit Billing Act
and the Electronic Fund Transfer Act. You are correct that
their standards are slightly different. You have to report
faster on an EFT transaction than on a credit card transaction,
and your liability can be different, although Visa and
MasterCard on the credit card side have a no-liability policy.
And PayPal, as I remember since I am a PayPal user, does have a
no-liability policy, and there are other opportunities.
The consumer, however, who is billing to a mobile phone
statement, as opposed to using a financial institution for the
clearing and settlement of the payment they are making, does
not have the same level of protections because those are both
either because there is a credit card present or a bank account
present. And so the credit and debit cards are access devices
to those two different kinds of accounts that many people who
are unbanked--certainly they won't have debit cards--although
they may have prepaid or payroll cards. And the prepaid and
payroll cards are increasingly being brought under the
Electronic Funds Transfer Act.
So the key gap at the moment is the person who is billing
something to their mobile phone account without some other
financial services provider doing the clearing and settlement
for the payments. And that is the gap that exists in Federal
legislation right now, and that is a gap that also exists in
the States.
Mr. Pallone. So you said that with prepaid cards--and what
about gift cards--there is some protection?
Ms. Hughes. That is correct. Not all of the electronic fund
transfer protections currently extend to gift cards. Some of
the issues about dispute resolution do not extend all the way
through the gift card family at this stage, but payroll cards
have better protections than regular gift cards do in the same
environment because of efforts to bring them under the
Electronic Fund Transfer Act.
Mr. Pallone. What do you suggest that we do legislatively,
agency action, whatever, to have the strongest protections for
all these different things, particularly the ones that have the
lesser protection, based on what you said?
Ms. Hughes. Well, one issue which this committee doesn't
have is jurisdiction, so the Federal Trade Commission doesn't
have jurisdiction over carriers for that purpose, for example,
and I don't believe the CFPB does either. The States, because
of the strength of the Federal Communications Act, I don't
think the States have authority to do all of this work. If you
wanted to do that, I think it would be up to Congress to
instruct the Federal Communications Commission, giving them
some additional authority to play in that realm, or to extend
the reach, if you felt it was important, to extend the reach to
persons who do not use financial institutions and access
devices to accounts, either credit cards or debit cards, to
have comparable protections. I haven't thought about exactly
what those would look like, but I think it is an extremely
interesting topic.
Mr. Pallone. I have just a little time.
With so many vendors and third parties involved in some of
the mobile payment transactions, I was concerned that consumers
could be given the runaround, in other words, each vendor
pointing the finger at the other? Do you want to just comment
on that? We only have just a little bit of time.
Ms. Hughes. I think that the consumers may go to vendors
for that purpose, but I think consumers largely go to their
financial service providers, whether, it is Samsung and PayPal
or their bank, to get resolution of disputes. The one gap you
have identified, sir, is the one where they are not going to
have that person to help them----
Mr. Pallone. OK.
Ms. Hughes [continuing]. Not in the same fashion.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Burgess. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair thanks the gentleman. The Chair recognizes the
other gentleman from New Jersey, the vice chair of the
subcommittee, Mr. Lance, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Chairman Burgess.
Ms. Deckinger, it is apparent that one of the biggest
hurdles to getting consumers to adopt a certain payment method
is scale. What steps need to be taken in order for a payment
method to be accepted with enough ubiquity that consumers find
it to be beneficial? And, from your perspective, are there any
legal impediments in order to make sure that this is the case
that we can move forward?
Ms. Deckinger. Thank you so much for your question. We
believe, fundamentally, that you have to have what I mentioned
earlier, which is muscle memory for consumers. They are very
comfortable with our current forms of payment. They are very
comfortable going to a store and striping a credit card. It is
not difficult for them. So getting them to change that behavior
we believe requires having a presence at places where they shop
every day and multiple times.
We believe that our network includes that kind of scale and
has that great reach. Consumers are gassing up at fuel stations
several times a week if not at least once a week. They are at
coffee shops. They are at their big retailers doing their
grocery shopping. We feel like having that scale is really
going to drive that adoption and regular usage that will create
that muscle memory for consumers to get used to using a new
form of payment.
I don't currently feel that there are any legal
restrictions that are keeping us from getting that kind of
scale, but I would welcome other input on that.
Mr. Lance. Yes. Anyone else on the panel?
Professor Hughes?
Ms. Hughes. I would agree with Ms. Deckinger that there are
no legal imperatives or hurdles to the greater adoption. As I
mentioned earlier in response to a question from the chairman,
I believe it is one which may involve consumer education more
than anything else. And I think that the--it may also be
generational. And so I think it is a-- millennials are much
more likely to use mobile payments than older people. My late
mother, who was very clever, never used an ATM, not because she
didn't feel like it, just because she wasn't a particularly
mechanical person, and I think she was comfortable with the
option she had. And the comfort level with the options that are
currently available, even though they are expanding, is a
difference between us and other parts of the world where the
banking system is not as robust, where the penetrations of the
Samsung and PayPal style opportunities are not as great, and
where, in the case of some, you have to have a smartphone, and
a new enough smartphone to use it. You are going to see in
older generations and in less affluent generations lots of
smartphones, but not everybody has one. And so the mechanical
barrier may be, depending upon the nature of the service being
offered, the mechanical barrier of what kind of device you have
available for this purpose, which is something that just takes
a maturation of a marketplace.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. Mr. Muller, you said how many
transactions from PayPal a year? A billion, did you say?
Mr. Muller. A billion in 2014. That is right.
Mr. Lance. And there will be more, you believe, this year,
because in your last quarter, it was 350 million or something
like that.
Mr. Muller. That is correct.
Mr. Lance. What percentage are in the United States? And
what percentage are in Europe? And what percentage are in Asia?
Mr. Muller. So our largest markets overall in the world,
you know, are by and large the English-speaking countries:
U.S., U.K., Canada, Australia, also Germany. And in all of
them, we see pretty comparable rates of mobile payment as a
proportion of total payment, so getting toward a third of all
of our payments are on a mobile device, again, usually either a
phone or a tablet that is used where 5 years ago, it would have
used a laptop or a desktop.
Mr. Lance. Thank you.
Mr. Ahn, explain Samsung's latest device. In your
testimony, what did you say that Samsung is doing next? Samsung
Card? Samsung----
Mr. Ahn. So the question is with respect to our products--
--
Mr. Lance. Yes.
Mr. Ahn. In the ecosystem?
What we are doing today is we have reflexive devices, which
we call Galaxy and Note. We are looking at future devices and a
broader ecosystem where we can put Samsung Pay onto them,
whether they are additional mobile devices or even wearables.
We are looking at a broad ecosystem.
Mr. Lance. A wearable would be a----
Mr. Ahn. A watch.
Mr. Lance [continuing]. A watch? And you can then purchase
items or pay for items from that device?
Mr. Ahn. That is part of our thinking.
Mr. Lance. Has that occurred yet, or is that still in
development?
Mr. Ahn. We are evaluating and developing now as we speak.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. And thank you for making New Jersey
your headquarters in this part of the world. We deeply
appreciate that. And I have been at your world headquarters in
Seoul and have been deeply impressed with them.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Burgess. The gentleman yields back. The Chair thanks
the gentleman.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from New York, Ms.
Clarke, 5 minutes for questions.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank our
ranking member.
Transparency. Unlike simple cash transactions, using a
mobile payment system can bring in unseen third parties. So
Professor Hughes, it seems like there are often many entities
involved in mobile payment transactions than consumers may
realize. How can we assure consumers know who is involved in
their mobile payment transaction apart from themselves and the
service that they are directly interacting with?
Ms. Hughes. Representative Clarke, that is a very
interesting question, and I believe it is one to which we do
not have a very clear answer. So I think that there are systems
that operate, particularly apps, not services of the kinds
being offered by PayPal and Samsung. And where the app is
involved, it is much more likely that there are unknown third
parties involved in processing for the merchant, particularly,
because merchants use a lot of third-party payment processors.
And third-party payment processors are among the least
regulated entities in the payment space today. They are not
very well regulated by the States. Some of them are regulated
as money transmitters; some of them are not. And they are not
particularly well addressed by congressional legislation to
this point.
Asking the merchant, for example, or the app provider to
make that kind of disclosure could possibly be more burdensome
than it would be worth. So I think it is more important to
ask--and each of these groups and others do--for people to
engage in robust supervision of the choice of providers that
they use along a tract that may be involved and to supervise
them appropriately for risk-management purposes.
The members of this panel might not be excited, but you
might care to read a study that was issued in August of 2015 by
The Clearing House payments company on, which I would be happy
to provide to your staff if someone tells me to which person it
should be sent. That study talks about this issue in particular
in greater depth than I have time to do this morning or you do.
And so I would suggest that it might be something that you
would read on that particular narrow subject, which is quite an
important one.
Ms. Clarke. So let me----
Ms. Hughes. I urge you not to make it too complicated
because people choose providers based on their histories with
them, and it would be very difficult to make new disclosures
constantly if you had to abandon a provider because they didn't
behave appropriately and choose a new one----
Ms. Clarke. I think we are concerned more about breaches.
You know, you are then dealing with many more entities that are
holding the data, right?
But let me move to ask about lack of transparency and
consumer consent, the notion of consumer consent.
How can consumers consent to business relationships with
entities that they are unaware of?
Ms. Hughes. Well, Representative Clarke, that is a very
complicated question. And I think that as there are already
lots of payment processors operating in the United States where
we are not seeing a lot of transparent consent, I think that it
may be the necessary level of consent, maybe the consumer who
chooses the payment method and the consumer who chooses the
merchant at this point. And I firmly believe that the mechanics
of this are such that we should put the primary focus on the
merchant to choose wisely and on the payment provider to choose
wisely and to ask them to perform the functions that are
currently present in Federal and State law to supervise them.
Ms. Clarke. Do you believe that greater transparency could
encourage more consumer use of mobile payments? Because,
certainly, consumers who are unwilling to use mobile payment
services may feel unsure about who will have access to their
data afterward.
Ms. Hughes. That, too, Representative Clarke, is an
excellent question. And I think the more that consumers
understand how mobile payments work, as a general, as opposed
to a specific proposition, but perhaps both, the more they are
likely to be willing to use them because just like ATMs 40
years ago, there was a period of adoption, and it made a
difference when consumers----
Ms. Clarke. But ATMs don't have a third party. You know you
can just walk into that----
Ms. Hughes. Some do, actually.
Ms. Clarke. Absolutely, right. Absolutely. Clearly.
Ms. Hughes. Kiosks in stores and other places have a
landscape and an ecosystem that is very much like mobile
payments today. So the answer is, but there, you are talking
about your bank, and you are talking about the place where you
use the machine, assuming you remember where it is, and it is
usually on your receipt. So I am not sure that that is so much
different than what consumers are already dealing with with a
fair amount of comfort. I just think they need more education.
Ms. Clarke. I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Burgess. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair thanks
the gentlelady.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Mississippi, Mr.
Harper, for 5 minutes, please.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks to each of
you for being here.
I guess I would have to say that I never envisioned the
title of mobile payments would be exciting, you know. So it is
an incredible topic, and it is affecting our lives in so many
ways as we look at this. And so I am all in. This is a great
topic.
Mr. Muller, if I could start with you. In your testimony,
you mentioned that PayPal has been involved in mobile payments
innovation since the PalmPilot devices. What have been some
turning points that you have seen in the development of mobile
payments from PayPal's perspective, and what are the next big
applications that we should be on the lookout for?
Mr. Muller. So, you know, like most companies, there have
been some successes but also some learning opportunities. One
was, as I mentioned, the switch away from the PalmPilot as the
focus towards email and Internet connection. A second
generation really starting, I think, in 2006, we launched a
mobile payment feature available to users to make payments
mostly intended for person to person, but a few also businesses
had signed up using text message and just sending a text
message with the amount and a certain code in it. And that,
frankly, was not very successful I think largely for some of
the reasons that have come up about security and many consumers
just feeling a little bit too uncertain that just by pushing a
text message, the money would go to the right place and be
credited correctly.
So that----
Mr. Harper. Does that mean it was too simple to give
confidence?
Mr. Muller. Well, I think perhaps to some degree, I don't
know if too simple or simply too unclear, too little
information associated with the actual transaction itself. And
this was at a time just before the iPhone. So we are still
talking about flip phones and other types of phones with very
small screens.
So the whole texture of the experience, to some degree, was
not as comforting as is available today with smartphones and
larger screens.
So I think we have learned that lesson, and a big part of
what we have done that got to us to the 1 billion transaction
number that I mentioned is not just building mobile apps and
experience on the consumer side, but also helping our
merchants, who are, by and large, mostly small- and medium-size
businesses optimize their Web site and their checkout pages for
mobile devices so that the experience is as good as it can be
on the smaller screen.
Mr. Harper. So what is the next big thing to look for?
Where are we headed?
Mr. Muller. Well, so one thing that is already live for
us--and it is an experience, again, that many other payment
companies are also in their way matching or trying to--is what
we call the one-touch experience, taking advantage of the
information that the consumer has chosen to share with us,
recognizing them the next time they go shopping even at a
different merchant than they have shopped at before. We can
recognize them so they don't have to type in information on a
small screen. We can recognize them if they have chosen to opt
into this feature and, again, improving both the shopping
experience and the merchant checkout. And then the other set
that is coming out, say, is at the point of sale, where to
date, you know, certainly PayPal is less prominent, but finding
that right match of convenience and merchant acceptance and
speed and security, something all of us are working on, and
that is coming. Just who unlocks the right combination is yet
to be seen.
Mr. Harper. You know, our time is almost up. But one phrase
that was of interest was in your testimony; you note that 17 of
the 100 most unbanked places are in Mississippi. How do you
envision mobile payments increasing consumer options in those
communities?
Mr. Muller. So that is another challenge for the industry
as a whole that we are eager to take on and do more. Today, I
would say, really, that the primary vehicle linking the
unbanked to mobile transactions is through prepaid cards or
prepaid accounts of different kinds that different providers
are offering. You know, and there are, of course, starting with
the baseline that many of the financially underserved today do
have smartphones.
Mr. Harper. Mr. Muller, I apologize. My time is well over.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Thank you, Mr. Muller.
Mr. Burgess. The gentleman yields back. The Chair thanks
the gentleman.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Cardenas, 5 minutes for questions, please.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And thank
you to all the witnesses that are here enlightening us of what
has been, what is, and even what may be coming in the future.
But I think the main concern of this committee is the
safety and security of Americans and people in our country,
whether they are visiting or what have you, making sure that
they feel comfortable and confident that we have a system that
actually works and hopefully works for as many people as
possible.
Speaking of as many people as possible, there are still
many communities here in the United States of America that are
underbanked and underserved by financial institutions and
instruments, et cetera, so they tend to not experience or see
the safest and best technologies and, unfortunately, sometimes
actually are subject to more problems because they don't have
the best systems available to them.
That being the case, when it comes to these kinds of
communities, how can mobile payment providers better reach
minority communities and underserved or poor communities and
ensure that these consumers also enjoy the safe and community
commerce that everybody else expects or can experience?
The main thing there is, certainly, if there is a community
with a lot of wealth and a lot of activity and probably a
bigger contributor to the billion transaction mark, you have
other communities that want to participate, yet, at the same
time, how do we make sure that we have an even system that is
available to them, really?
Professor?
Ms. Hughes. Well, I think this is a truly important
challenge. And I think that mobile payments are an enormous
opportunity to help unbanked and underbanked individuals.
Unbanked individuals don't have bank accounts. Underbanked
individuals may just not have a bank very close by. And if we
think about the ability of someone to make a payment remotely
or to take a payment from an employer or to pay their rent
using their mobile device and not having to take time off from
work to do that or to take time to go to the bank to deposit
checks and the like, I think that the underbanked communities
that have bank accounts or other credit union accounts, et
cetera, but may not have time to get there during reasonable
work hours are among the communities that will benefit the most
from mobile payments.
I think the opportunities in those markets are huge. I
think they will help the citizens of Mississippi and California
and the other jurisdictions that are here. They will help inner
city people as well, people who no longer have a corner branch
of a bank to help them. And because, as Mr. Muller suggested,
there are opportunities to use prepaid cards, including payroll
cards, and to spend money out of them using devices of this
kind, the opportunities for unbanked and underbanked persons
and minority individuals residing in rural or very urban
communities expand.
The last thing I would say, sir, is that the least secure
thing on the face of the planet in the United States, as least,
is cash. So if you have a way to link to some form of an
account and to use it as if you were using your bank account
through a mobile payment, you may level the field for lots of
people to participate in commerce, both the recipients of
payments and as people who can make payments on time and,
therefore, avoid late fees and other charges that are
associated, and that these opportunities are enormous for
helping a lot more Americans have a lot better access to
payment options than they have had in the past.
Mr. Cardenas. Well, my last question, because our time is
limited, is it is interesting that ``60 Minutes'' talked about
this payment system in Kenya that you touched on, Mr. Muller,
that has to do with the texting, and it doesn't have to be a
smartphone, et cetera. The thing that concerns me about that
isn't that it is kind of cool; it is that I would imagine that
the safety of those individuals in those transactions are a lot
more vulnerable than, perhaps, what Americans understand that
we are not as vulnerable with the systems and the advances we
have.
I would like to know, as quickly as possible, due to
constraints of time, the fact that in this country, we do have
regulations and we do have benchmarks and push industry to make
sure that they have safeguards for our consumers and our
participants, is that something that is helpful to the
industry? Or is that something that you can do without?
Mr. Muller. So I would say, certainly, it is helpful, in
general, of course, the right kind of regulation. But, in
general, regulation is certainly one component that leads to
consumer adoption. And, as you said, if people viewed these
kinds of transactions as really, the same as cash with no
purchase protection or no protection against unauthorized
transactions, they would be much less inclined to use it.
So regulation is one component of addressing that issue.
Industry efforts, like Visa and MasterCard and PayPal, zero
liability, all come together to lead to the broader mobile
adoption for all of us.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you.
I yield back my time.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair thanks the gentleman.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr.
Guthrie, 5 minutes for questions, please.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you very much. It is neat having this
hearing today. I was flying back yesterday reading a biography
of Andrew Jackson, and it is amazing moving an army,
speculating land, all the others things that he did. One of his
biggest concerns was always how did he move currency, cash, how
did he pay people. Was it going to be barter, bank drafts? It
was just a big issue then. And so how currency moves really
played into how he was able to move his armies and so forth
back and forth. So we are still talking about moving currency,
and how we move it in the best and most efficient and safe way.
And I was watching, I guess, a football game or so this
weekend. And Samsung had their advertisements. They must have
bought a lot of time because I remember seeing the app that we
are talking about here today. And I grew up in a rural grocery
store, so I always view things through rural, kind of,
groceries. So it appeared that anywhere that you can do a
credit card, your phone would work. So if you can pay at a
pump, then you can actually scan or whatever the technology is,
if I am using the right term, then your phone works in all
applications like that? So if any merchant takes a credit card,
then you have the ability to use your application? Is that----
Mr. Ahn. So, Congressman, thank you for the question. When
we say virtually anywhere, what we are talking about is very,
very high percentage of locations and terminals that accept any
credit card or debit card. However, we say ``virtually''
because we are not fully 100 percent there. There are instances
such as DIP readers, gas stations, ATMs, and a small percentage
of merchants where the technology software needs to be upgraded
for us to get to everywhere. And so we are not quite there yet,
but we are substantially ahead of our competition.
Mr. Guthrie. Well, thank you.
My first question was your level of mixes of security and
how it protects consumers. You answered that with Mrs.
Blackburn, I think.
So does it prevent the consumer from doing it to
themselves, I guess we would say? Are there things the consumer
needs to do? Once they use your phone, your phone is--can the
consumer--like if, the old days, when you swiped a debit card
and you didn't throw the receipt away and somebody took it out
of your garbage or you didn't tear it up, is there something
like or equivalent to that the consumer can do, or have you
protected them from all aspects?
Mr. Ahn. So the consumer is essentially protected behind a
level of password protection and fingerprint indication that is
required to open up the app. And, therefore, everything that
they are doing is really sitting behind that level of
protection. We don't publish that information. It is not easily
accessible. And the consumer really has full control over that.
So, to that extent, it is secure.
In terms of usability, I think all mobile payments have
usability issues because people are--for the most part, their
muscle memory today is credit card and debit swipes, and so it
is going to take the ecosystem to work together to help educate
consumers about the advantages of having more secured payments
and a new way of tapping, a new way of paying. This is
happening in different parts of the world. Western Europe, for
example, is actually more tap-centric payment countries. In the
U.S., we are further behind.
However, you know, as a technology company, we are very
optimistic about technology advances. Five years ago, the cell
phone, smartphone penetration was very different than it is
today. New applications of services are quickly adopted if they
are helpful and make an impact. So we are hopeful that there is
enough security, utility, and a better experience to compel
consumers to move toward a more technology-centric way of
paying.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you.
And, Mr. Muller, I understand that PayPal utilizes the
cloud for storage of consumers' payment information. And why
did you choose to utilize the cloud instead of storing payment
information on the phone or the app? Is it more secure, I
guess, is the question I am getting at?
Mr. Muller. Well, for us, it was partly out of necessity in
that we don't have the same access to mobile phone hardware and
operating system that some of the other companies that are
operating point-of-sale payments through a mobile device do.
But, also, we do think there are some advantage of storing the
information in the cloud and not--certainly not storing any of
the information on the device. I mean, that is clear, and that
is undesirable. But, also, we don't have the same access to the
device as the handset manufacturer might.
Mr. Guthrie. So being in the cloud, you are obviously--
PayPal is not a device. You are not device-specific. That is
your----
Mr. Muller. Yes.
Mr. Guthrie. So what innovations have you seen over the
last year or two that would make online payment data more
dynamic and less useful for criminals?
Mr. Muller. Well, so, certainly, tokenization continues to
develop. It just started, so it is certainly not static by any
means. But the first, really, live implementation of
tokenization in a practical way that we have seen is a big step
forward, and the controls that can be built in for one-time use
of the token, merchant-specific use of the token, all those are
certainly, a step forward compared to where we have been with
the primary account number being stored and transmitted in many
ways. So that is probably a major recent development.
There are new ones coming out all the time that we read
about. So it is an exciting field with, certainly, dynamic
codes. Sort of the three-digit or four-digit code in the back
of your card that you are used to entering, now companies are
coming up with a capability to generate that dynamically and
change it for every transaction. So certainly new developments
are coming out, and there will be more to come.
Mr. Guthrie. Well, thank you. And I only have 15 seconds. I
am not going to ask another question.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you.
Mr. Kinzinger.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, all, for being here. I appreciate it. The
innovation of mobile payments is at the forefront of many
consumers' minds, especially those that were considering
purchasing a new smartphone and all consumers interested in the
technology to ensure their transactions are safe and secure.
Like with many new technologies, it is subject to some
suspicion before adoption, and many consumers want to know if
their personal information, including financial and personal
health information, will remain protected and private.
Certainly, no system is foolproof. In the technology world,
we frequently read about cyber attacks and successful hacks of
various systems. Consumers have a right to be concerned about
new technology, but I am hopeful that today's conversation will
showcase some of the great strides in technology that we have
made and what its future could look like.
Mr. Muller, the number of smartphones in the U.S. continues
to grow, and obviously, mobile payments are increasing in
popularity. Over the course of PayPal's involvement with mobile
payments, what have been the largest keys to consumer adoption,
and what have been your biggest challenges?
Mr. Muller. So, certainly, one of the keys is the one you
mentioned, which we certainly can't take credit for, but is the
proliferation of the smartphone and the affordable smartphone
through the work of the handset manufacturers and the mobile
carriers, and that is probably--that is the baseline for all
adoption that we have been talking about.
And then, really, there is just the passage of time, as we
have seen with other payment devices. Professor Hughes
mentioned the ATM card, the credit card, the debit card as a
purchase device.
Consumers get comfortable through word of mouth, through--
there are always early adopters, and that is one of the things
we are lucky to have in the U.S. is people who are eager to try
new things, and if it works for them, to spread the word.
And then, ultimately, another important factor has been
merchant adoption and getting the merchants to realize this is
something that is good for them as well. It creates a good
experience for their buyers and ultimately more transactions
for them. And so just that extra nudge from some of the
merchants to encourage their consumers to try their app on the
mobile phone, that can be the deciding factor for many
consumers.
Mr. Kinzinger. And you also, you know, you obviously,
described, that when you started up, you called it, basically,
an early form of tokenization. Very like 50,000-foot level. Can
you just briefly describe how your security methods have
evolved over the years from 16 years ago to today? I know we
can talk for hours about it, but----
Mr. Muller. Well, as I said, the basic component and what
we were referring to as that early form of tokenization is just
not creating a process where the merchant receives the card
number in the first place. So, with PayPal, they receive news
of the payment in the form of either an email; or, for some
more advanced merchants, they might receive an automated notice
to their systems; or they can just go look at their account to
see that the payment is there. But, in any case, they are not
receiving the consumer's card or bank account information to
start with. So that is a similar concept to what tokenization
is now achieving more broadly.
That, of course, makes it incumbent upon us--we are
receiving the account information--to protect that account
information. We had the good fortune, as one of our founders
was and still is a computer security expert and designed the
system in a solid way. And, of course, as I said earlier,
continuing to make investments on that foundation for both
encryption of the data and limited access even by employees to
the data.
Mr. Kinzinger. Well, Mr. Ahn--I hope I said that correct--
some of the security concerns that I have heard raised with the
NFC-based mobile payments has been eavesdropping, data
manipulation, interception attacks, relay attacks, and device
theft. Can you discuss if these are real concerns or
misconceptions and perhaps how the Samsung Pay approach
addresses some of these?
Mr. Ahn. Some of the concerns you mention are real; some
are misconceptions. The real concerns are related to device
theft and loss that relate to relay or replay attacks. There
are a number and a host of ways that fraudsters can steal
information, and our job is to be ever-vigilant and put the
best and most advanced security features in cooperation with
our partners, with banks, the Visas, MasterCards of the world,
the networks, and make sure that we have as much fortification
as possible.
With respect to Samsung Pay, we have looked at every
possible angle of security, and it starts, again, as I
mentioned before, at the baseline level, moves all the way up.
We are very, very concerned about security.
As a matter of background, Samsung is one of the most
respected brands around the world. We have a very strong
relationship with a large base of consumers. That relationship
and trust and brand is sacrosanct to us. We will not jeopardize
it. And so when we think about what we put into market, we will
index heavily toward security. And, yet, as a viable consumer
solution, we have to have it usable and simple. And so that is
our challenge and our burden to bear.
And so we take that very seriously, and we would be happy
to share addition information in more detail.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for your
leniency. I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you very much.
Congresswoman Brooks.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This past August, I had the opportunity to visit Tanzania,
Africa, where I saw the majority of the population utilizing
mobile payments and paying for everything from cabs to a dinner
tab to hotel stays, and so the mobile payment technology I
think is incredibly advanced in Africa. And we know that in a
large part of sub-Saharan Africa, traditional banking has been
hampered by a lot of infrastructure problems and
transportation. And we now know that so many people worldwide,
approximately 2.5 billion people, don't have formal accounts at
financial institutions, as Professor Hughes touched on. It is
allowing these communities to provide for the unbanked and the
underbanked individuals and businesses to conduct business.
And so I am curious, though, how it is that Africa, in many
ways, has leapfrogged over the United States in using this
technology? And it was being used in the smallest of shops and
to the large hotels. And so I am curious, particularly, for
anyone with any--companies with the international background,
how and why did that happen? Mr. Ahn?
And what should we be thinking about in seeing that, you
know, other countries--and I am talking about visiting with
people in huts that didn't even have significant access to
electricity at times. And so a lot of them were charging their
phones with solar-powered devices and so forth. But how is it
that Africa has, I think, advanced so much faster than we have?
Mr. Ahn. So, Congresswoman, one thing I would add is the
examples in Africa highlight that necessity is the mother of
invention. In Africa, the financial institutions and the
infrastructure for typical banking is at such a state of
underdevelopment that those in need of payment remittance,
access to funds, needed to find some other way to move money
around, pay each other, and to conduct commerce. And so these
payment solutions on pace in Kenya and other leading
applications leapfrogged the need for established banking
institutions in such a way to create viable payment commerce.
And I think the relevant piece of what we have learned in
developing countries for us is the question that the
Congresswoman asked earlier with respect to how we serve our
underbanked populations and provide access to as many people as
possible for these payment solutions.
For us, we argue that mobile changes everything. Mobile
does not tie you down to location or place.
As Ms. Hughes was saying, you can, at your own time, at
your own choosing, and location, conduct transactions and
services that are important to you and have access on a more
equal playing field than if you were tied to time and place.
And so when mobile is coming into the picture, we believe that
our job now is to then open up access to the services and
solutions that we can make an impact for consumers. The way we
think about it is we have a large device footprint. We want, as
I mentioned in my testimony, we have plans to continue to
evaluate broader ways to provide Samsung Pay on more devices.
One very easy way to do so is when previous generation phones
are in market, they come down in price point, making it more
accessible for different consumers. In addition, we know from
our own data that Samsung as an OEM has one of the highest
percentages, if not the leading percentage, of share of market
in underserved populations as well as lower income populations.
And then, on top of all of this, the way we have constructed
our solution is to open our doors for all payment types. What
that means is that we can support credit cards, debit cards,
prepaid cards. We will roll out in the near future gift cards.
We have every opportunity for any payment instrument in any
tendered type to be usable in our device. So that is how we
think about this.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you.
Professor Hughes, I am curious what you believe the impact
is going to be for this type of payment method for the--is
there going to be any burden of entry for entrepreneurs who are
just starting businesses, or do you think this will be
beneficial to them?
Ms. Hughes. Congresswoman Brooks, I think this is a boon to
small business. I think, as I mentioned earlier, it is a boon
to farmers markets and artisans and music festivals like we
have in Bloomington, Indiana, and arts organizations and
charitable causes around the country. I think particularly for
smaller businesses, this is an enormous advantage because it
will allow them to take payments that they may not have been
able to take before in a speedy and secure environment.
And I think that we should be optimistic about the future
of mobile payments and their ability to serve underbanked,
unbanked, and small business.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you. Thanks for your testimony.
I yield back.
Mr. Lance [presiding]. Thank you.
Mr. Olson.
Mr. Olson. I thank the Chair.
And welcome to our witnesses.
I have a challenge for you, Mr. Ahn, Ms. Deckinger, and Mr.
Muller. In preparing my questions for this morning, this
testimony, I relied on advice from people here in DC, lots of
folks back home, and two of my own personal experts, my two
teenagers, my 18-year-old daughter and my 15-year-old son. They
are all about mobile. That is all they know. And they are
current and future consumers, big consumers.
So, Mr. Ahn, can you explain how your mobile technology
works that I can show my daughter and my son, explain to them
and their friends, ``Hey, Samsung has got this great vision''?
What can I say to my kids? How could you explain it in English?
Mr. Ahn. So, apparently, the previous testimony was----
Mr. Olson. No, it was good. It was good for DC. I want to
make sure my kids understand this because they are the future.
Mr. Ahn. So the young population is an important
demographic to follow. What they do and what their habits are,
are leading indicators of what new consumer trends will be. For
them, what is important is the ability, I think, to focus their
life around services and goods that revolve around mobile
devices. Our view is that we want a future where consumers have
the ability to pay in a store offline, inside an application,
an app, let's say an Uber, or a mobile-Web context. Anywhere
you are, in any space that you are, we want you to be able to
pay with the secured credentials that you have loaded. So we
have that opportunity as we build out our product roadmap.
What the Samsung phone allows you to do is to take a credit
card or debit card or any other payment instrument, put it into
the phone, and make a secure payment at the terminal. Over
time, we expect to create more intelligent services that create
more consumer impact, things that we can't discuss today. But
over time, we expect that the ability to pay in a secure method
with a phone allows you--allows us to open the door for new
innovations that will have a direct impact for them.
Mr. Olson. Is there any PII left after--PII, personal
identifying information--after a transaction with your mobile
system?
Mr. Ahn. There is no PII except for you do know that the
phone belongs to a certain user; traditional information is
already there. But no additional information is left.
Mr. Olson. Mr. Muller, same question. Explain to my kids,
how does PayPal's system work, and is there any PII involved
after the transaction?
Mr. Muller. So, PayPal's system, you know, works somewhat
differently, or it is not tied as closely to the physical
device. It does involve working through an account that has to
be set up to start with either by the individual themselves if
they are over 18, since that is one of our rules----
Mr. Olson. One is there, one is not.
Mr. Muller [continuing]. Or by their parents. We do offer a
student account capability where parents can control an account
on behalf of the student. But there is that initial step of
setting up an account. Once the account is set up, we then have
a broad network of merchants that the user can access through
their mobile device, through their laptop, or other kinds of
device. So it becomes very easy to make that payment once that
initial step of setting up the account.
Mr. Olson. Any PII left over after a transaction with
PayPal system?
Mr. Muller. So, you know, the PII is something that is kept
only by us, so we do have it, and we do have the information,
and then the merchant has what they need. If they are shipping
physical goods, inevitably that means they need a physical
address to ship it to.
But, really, that is the extent of the information.
Mr. Olson. And, Ms. Deckinger, you are the new kid on the
block. How does currency envision its testing phase, and can
you explain how your mobile technology works for my daughter
and son?
Ms. Deckinger. Yes. We have some pretty cool technology----
Mr. Olson. I like it already, the word ``cool.''
Ms. Deckinger [continuing]. That would help ease the path.
One of the great things we have, for example, is Pay at Table.
So that frustrating experience when you are at the end of the
transaction in a restaurant, sitting in a restaurant, and you
want to pay your bill and you are waiting for the server to
come over and bring your bill, we allow you to scan the QR code
that is on the receipt, pay and leave without having to do
that. We allow to you stay in your car when it is 100-plus
degrees in Texas and pay from the comfort of your car.
Mr. Olson. Thank you.
Ms. Deckinger. And we allow to you pay at the drive-through
without handing a card out the window to the person on the
other end. Pretty cool thing, the phone actually that when you
pay at drive-through is pinged through the Bluetooth low-energy
beacon, so that is a fairly cool technology that your teenagers
will find fascinating. And PII was the other question.
Mr. Olson. That is a--yes, ma'am. How are you guys planning
on protecting that if you have any after-transaction left over?
So like Mr. Muller----
Ms. Deckinger. Similar to Mr. Muller, there is some PII
involved. However, we do not pass any financial information
through the transaction. So we use tokenization, everything
from a financial perspective is tokenized and encrypted. So
that means that there is never any financial information stored
on your phone, nor information that is of worth to anybody to
store on your phone. So should your phone be stolen or hacked
or taken by someone nefarious, nothing can be done with it.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. My time is up. My kids would be very
happy. Thank you, all.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Mr. Olson.
Mr. Welch.
Mr. Welch. I got here a little late. I missed--would you
like me to comment?
Mr. Lance. Very good.
Is there anyone else who would like to ask questions?
Thank you.
I thank each of the members of the panel for participating.
I think this has been a very interesting and informative
hearing. Before we conclude, I include the following documents
to be submitted for the record by unanimous consent: a
statement from the Electronic Transactions Association; a
statement from the National Association of Convenience Stores
and the Society of Independent Gasoline Marketers of America;
and a statement from the National Retail Federation.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Lance. Does the ranking member have anything that
should be included in the record?
Mr. Schakowsky. I don't, but I approve all those
inclusions.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. Pursuant to committee rules, I remind
Members that they have 10 business days to submit additional
questions for the record. And I ask that witnesses submit their
responses within 10 business days upon receipt of the
questions.
Without objection, the subcommittee is adjourned.
Mr. Schakowsky. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:15 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
