- STATUS OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY BROADBAND NETWORK

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

STATUS OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY BROADBAND NETWORK

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 2, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-112

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

99-943                         WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Missouri               JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                     Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology

GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                ANNA G. ESHOO, California
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BILL JOHNSON, Missouri               JERRY McNERNEY, California
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
CHRIS COLLINS, New York                  officio)
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Anna G. Eshoo, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     4
Hon. Marsha Blackburn, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Tennessee, opening statement..........................     6
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7

Witnesses

T.J. Kennedy, President, First Responder Network Authority.......     8
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Answers to submitted questions...............................    57
David Furth, Deputy Chief, Public Safety and Homeland Security
Bureau, Federal Communications Commission......................    22
Prepared statement...........................................    24
Answers to submitted questions...............................    61

STATUS OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY BROADBAND NETWORK

----------

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 2, 2016

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:15 a.m., in
room 2322 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Greg Walden
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Walden, Latta, Barton,
Shimkus, Blackburn, Lance, Guthrie, Olson, Bilirakis, Johnson,
Long, Ellmers, Collins, Cramer, Eshoo, Doyle, Welch, Yarmuth,
Clarke, DeGette, Matsui, McNerney, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Ray Baum, Senior Policy Advisor for
Communications and Technology; Rebecca Card, Assistant Press
Secretary; Andy Duberstein, Deputy Press Secretary; Gene
Fullano, Detailee, Telecom; David Redl, Counsel, Telecom;
Charlotte Savercool, Professional Staff, Communications and
Technology; Gregory Watson, Legislative Clerk, Communications
and Technology; Christine Brennan, Minority Press Secretary;
Jeff Carroll, Minority Staff Director; David Goldman, Minority
Chief Counsel, Communications and Technology; Jerry Leverich,
Minority Counsel; Lori Maarbjerg, Minority FCC Detailee; and
Ryan Skukowski, Minority Policy Analyst.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. We will call to order the subcommittee on
Communications and Technology for our hearing on Status of the
Public Safety Broadband Network.
This morning we convene to examine the progress in the
deployment of the nationwide Public Safety Broadband Network, a
mandate given to FirstNet by the Congress in the Middle Class
Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 and for which FirstNet
was created.
With the January 13th release of the request for proposal
to award a contract for the deployment and operation of the
network, FirstNet has achieved its most crucial milestone to
date and within the time frame promised by Chairman Sue
Swenson. I commend Ms. Swenson, the FirstNet board, and the
staff of FirstNet for reaching this milestone, especially given
the time lost in FirstNet's early days when controversy hobbled
its efforts.
If FirstNet is able to stay the course to the timeline it
has established for the RFP process, proposals will be due just
one year after the United States Government Accountability
Office released its report on FirstNet's progress in
establishing the network. In that GAO report they observed that
FirstNet faces a multitude of risks, significant challenges and
difficult decisions in meeting its statutory responsibilities,
including how to become a self-funding entity.
Today's discussion with FirstNet will give us the chance to
gain a better understanding of the RFP, what it means for our
nation's first responders, and FirstNet's thoughts on how it
envisions its future. To that end, we have begun to hear
concerns from parties that are candidates to build FirstNet's
network.
Some have expressed concern with FirstNet's attempts to
establish a private-public partnership for the deployment and
operation of the network through a single contract that covers
all the states and territories rather than a ``network of
networks'' approach. FirstNet is asking one company to take on
the obligations nationwide. This approach could make it tougher
for small and regional companies to participate in FirstNet
without partnering with one of the nationwide carriers.
Others are concerned that FirstNet's RFP asks the winning
bidder to take on the obligation to serve the needs of public
safety, but does not provide an economic incentive to do so. In
broad strokes, the RFP takes the approach that rather than
FirstNet paying for the contractor's services, wireless
providers will come to play in exchange for access to
FirstNet's spectrum and the ability to charge public safety
users subscription fees.
The RFP also envisions grants of up to $6.5 billion in
funding to support the build-out and operation of the network,
but requires repayment of nearly 85 percent of that money in
the form of sustainability payments to FirstNet. In short, it
appears FirstNet is asking a wireless provider to take on the
obligation of building a network to public safety
specifications in exchange for a monopoly on public safety
users and a zero interest loan.
Others still have expressed concerns that this seems to be
a rehash of the failed approach of the FCC's 2007 700 megahertz
D block auction. Then, the FCC asked the wireless industry to
pay $2 billion for a nationwide license that would come with an
obligation to negotiate with, and serve the needs of, public
safety. Even with the prospect of holding the D block license
going forward as enticement, the wireless industry was not
willing to put up the capital needed or build the network
public safety was demanding.
Nine years later, FirstNet is asking wireless providers to
take similar terms without the enticement of a license. I hope
that these concerns are misplaced, but there is a small but
growing chorus asking why FirstNet believes that this time it
will be different.
The legislation that created FirstNet was not my preferred
approach. I favored construction from the bottom up, not the
top down. And while I take some comfort that FirstNet has
chosen a public-private partnership as the vehicle to deploy
the network, the concerns we are hearing are valid. But for
better or worse, the RFP is in the field. The die is cast.
Whether a business case can be made for what FirstNet is asking
will be better understood in April when responses are due and
proposals are submitted.
So today is an opportunity for FirstNet to answer some of
these questions, maybe assuage some of the fears, and to inform
the committee of what the RFP means for the deployment of a
public safety broadband network that reaches all corners of the
United States, urban and rural.
Finally, we will also hear from the FCC. The FCC plays a
critical role in the state ``opt out'' provisions of the
statute as it is charged with reviewing and approving a state's
plan to deploy its own radio network. With the RFP issued and
an award in the fourth quarter of 2016 anticipated, states will
need to understand the process in order to make an informed
decision on whether to accept FirstNet's plan or deploy on
their own.
As delay from the commission could frustrate deliberations
of states deciding whether to opt out, I hope that when we
gavel out today we will do so with an understanding of when the
FCC will satisfy this statutory duty. I now recognize the vice
chair of the subcommittee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden

This morning we convene to examine the progress in the
deployment of the nationwide public safety broadband network. A
mandate given to FirstNet by Congress in the Middle Class Tax
Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 and for which FirstNet was
created.
With the January 13th release of the Request For Proposal
to award a contract for the deployment and operation of the
network, FirstNet has achieved its most crucial milestone to
date, and within the timeframe promised by Chairman Sue
Swenson. I commend Ms. Swenson, the FirstNet Board and the
staff of FirstNet for reaching this milestone--especially given
the time lost in FirstNet's early days when controversy hobbled
its efforts.
If FirstNet is able to stay the course to the timeline it
has established for the RFP process, proposals will be due just
one year after the United States Government Accountability
Office released its report on FirstNet's progress in
establishing the network. In that report GAO observed that
``FirstNet faces a multitude of risks, significant challenges,
and difficult decisions in meeting its statutory
responsibilities, including how to become a self-funding
entity.''
Today's discussion with FirstNet will give us the chance to
gain a better understanding of the RFP, what it means for our
nations' first responders, and FirstNet's thoughts on how it
envisions its future. To that end, we have begun to hear
concerns from parties that are candidates to build FirstNet's
network.
Some have expressed concern with FirstNet's attempt to
establish a private-public partnership for the deployment and
operation of the network through a single contract that covers
all the states and territories. Rather than a ``network of
networks'' approach, FirstNet is asking one company to take on
the obligations nationwide. This approach could make it tougher
for small and regional companies to participate in FirstNet
without partnering with one of the nationwide carriers.
Others are concerned that FirstNet's RFP asks the winning
bidder to take on the obligation to serve the needs of public
safety, but doesn't provide an economic incentive to do so. In
broad strokes, the RFP take the approach that rather than
FirstNet paying for the contractor's services, wireless
providers will come to play in exchange for access to
FirstNet's spectrum and the ability to charge public safety
users subscription fees. The RFP also envisions grants of up to
$6.5 billion in funding to support the build-out and operation
of the network, but requires repayment of nearly 85 percent of
that money in the form of ``sustainability payments'' to
FirstNet. In short, it appears FirstNet is asking a wireless
provider to take on the obligation of building a network to
public safety specifications in exchange for a monopoly on
public safety users and a zero interest loan.
Others still have expressed concerns that this seems to be
a rehash of the failed approach of the FCC's 2007 700 MHz D
block auction. Then, the FCC asked the wireless industry to pay
$2 billion for a nationwide license that would come with an
obligation to negotiate with, and serve the needs of, public
safety. Even with the prospect of holding the D block license
going forward as enticement, the wireless industry was not
willing to put up the capital needed or build the network
public safety was demanding. Nine years later, FirstNet is
asking wireless providers to take similar terms without the
enticement of the license. I hope that these concerns are
misplaced, but there is a small but growing chorus asking why
FirstNet believes that this time will be different.
The legislation that created FirstNet was not my preferred
approach. I favored construction from the bottom up, not the
top down. And while I take some comfort that FirstNet has
chosen a public-private partnership as the vehicle to deploy
the network, the concerns we are hearing are valid.
But for better or worse, the RFP is in the field. The die
is cast. Whether a business case can be made for what FirstNet
is asking will be better understood in April when responses are
due and proposals submitted. Today is an opportunity for
FirstNet to answer some questions, maybe assuage some fears,
and to inform the committee of what the RFP means for the
deployment of a public safety broadband network that reaches
all corners of the United States, urban and rural.
Finally, we will also hear from the FCC. The FCC plays a
critical role in the state ``opt out'' provisions of the
statute as it is charged with reviewing and approving a state's
plan to deploy its own radio network. With the RFP issued, and
an award in the fourth quarter of 2016 anticipated, states will
need to understand that process in order to make an informed
decision on whether to accept FirstNet's plan or deploy on
their own. As delay from the commission could frustrate
deliberations of states deciding whether to opt out, I hope
that when we gavel out today we will do so with an
understanding of when the FCC will satisfy this statutory duty.

Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
our witnesses for being here. Good to see you again.
In 2012, Congress recognized the importance of public
safety and emergency communications and established a
nationwide public safety network to meet the needs of all
Americans and our first responders. Since that time, this
committee has long agreed that a reliable network is essential
for first responders to facilitate their communication needs
and support their everyday missions.
Developing a nationwide interoperable network is a
significant task, but if properly established would be vital to
protecting the lives of the American people. Therefore, it is
imperative that the implementation of FirstNet is successful. I
am encouraged by the progress FirstNet has made since its
creation, however, there are still many unanswered questions
about the future of this network ranging from the inclusion of
rural providers to the FCC's review process of the states' plan
to build their own radio access networks.
I hope today's hearing will be an opportunity to learn more
about current developments and the next steps for FirstNet. I
look forward to the witnesses' testimony today, Mr. Chairman,
and I yield back.
Mr. Walden. The gentleman yields back. The chair recognizes
the gentlelady from California, the ranking member of the
subcommittee, Ms. Eshoo.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ANNA G. ESHOO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for convening
this important hearing. It is an important time in the life of
FirstNet and we welcome the witnesses and eager to hear from
you.
A few weeks ago I joined with the sheriff of Santa Cruz
County at home to unveil the 21st Century Policing initiative
which is designed to improve the public trust and safety in the
communities that they serve. It is the first law enforcement
agency in California to adopt the White House initiative, which
I think really makes it a stand-out agency. It was a forward-
looking announcement of renewed commitment to stronger police-
community relations.
And essential to the effort, the reason I raise it, is
providing law enforcement and public safety officials with the
tools and the resources they need to do their job. And of
course this includes the deployment of the nationwide
interoperable communications network for first responders, or
FirstNet. So I know that the entire sheriff's department was
eager to know where we are on our work, and they want to see it
fully implemented and operational.
So where do we stand? And I think that that is what we want
to examine today. In California, there are more than 2,000
public safety agencies and over 200,000 first responders. It is
no wonder we are called the nation state. While FirstNet is a
nationwide effort, its success really depends on local
consultation with communities and, I think, the states, and I
want to examine that in my questioning.
And so I think the success really is going to depend on the
consultation that takes place with both, and I know that over
the course of nearly three years that FirstNet has traveled the
country, met with public safety leaders, tribes, federal
agencies and the industry, last month was really was the
culmination of the investment in that time where the RFP
established a framework and was put out.
Now ultimately we all want to see the creation of a robust
and reliable network that is going to eliminate the tragic
communication failures on 9/11, but I think that success is
also going to be measured by whether we integrate the network
with NG911 where we ensure device competition and utilize
strong security measures.
In 2013, California received 15.3 million calls to 911,
15.3 million calls, and 9.5 million were wireless. These calls
were answered obviously by dedicated professionals located in
450 public safety answering points, the PSAPs across the state.
So as we move to an NG911 environment where call takers can
receive text messages, photos and videos, it makes sense that
this information can be seamlessly transmitted to the first
responders headed to an emergency situation. That is all part
of this network. It has to be.
I have been a long time advocate for greater device
competition. Now late last year I wrote to the FBI urging the
agency to ensure that they engage in a forward-looking
procurement of land mobile radios that does not restrict
competition to brand name, proprietary features and standards
that can only be met by one vendor. This is all in the interest
of the taxpayer.
And we need to ensure that first responders are equipped
with state-of-the-art radios, and I think that FirstNet can
learn from the FBI's failed acquisition of the LMR which was
eventually struck down by the GAO last October, so there is a
lot of there there to this.
Finally, in order to prevent the breach of sensitive
FirstNet data cybersecurity has to be a core focus, so I hope
that you will address that issue in your testimony. The
continuation of the unraveling of the OPM and the IRS and other
agencies that have the massive security breaches should be
instructive to FirstNet, because you are going to have to
utilize the most innovative security technologies available.
And I think that in doing so it will not only lessen the
chance of a widespread breach and prevent disruption, but there
is a word that is so operational in this and that is
``confidence,'' confidence in the system by all the users.
So I thank Mr. Kennedy and Mr. Furth for being here today.
We look forward to asking you questions and look forward to
hearing your testimony, and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. The gentlelady yields back. The chair
recognizes the gentlelady from Tennessee for opening comments.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I appreciate
each of you for taking your time for preparing for being here
and to work with us through this. As you know, it is not the
first hearing that we have had and I am certain it will not be
the last one that we are having. We all agree that we do need a
national public safety network and we know that it is something
that we still have some outstanding questions, some issues and
some lack of agreement on.
First of all, as I mentioned last June, and I am going to
come back to this issue, looking at the redundancies and the
ability for you to protect yourself from breaches and hackings.
And we know that that exists. I think the possible hacking of
the NASA network and what we have learned from that is of
tremendous concern to us, and thereby it is of concern for what
you are doing.
When you talk about an enterprise system you have one set
of expectations. When you talk about a closed system you are
going to have an additional set of expectations and
encryptions, and so let us delve into that a little bit as we
approach this issue. Second thing, and the chairman has
mentioned this, the opt-out process and the ability for states
to control some of that. I think we have got to go in and look
at that just a little bit.
So we will discuss those further, and Mr. Chairman, I will
yield the balance of my time back to you so we can move forward
to their testimony.
Mr. Walden. OK. The gentlelady yields back the balance of
her time. We recognize the ranking member of the full committee
now, the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Pallone.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and our ranking
member, for holding this hearing, and thanks to Mr. Furth for
being here, and welcome back, Mr. Kennedy.
It was not many months ago that FirstNet was here to
testify, but at the pace that FirstNet is moving a few months
can be a lifetime. Since our last hearing in June, FirstNet has
released its much anticipated request for proposal, and while
government procurements do not usually keep people sitting on
the edge of their seats this one is a big deal because it
contains a road map to the future of communications for first
responders.
Back in New Jersey we know from experience how important it
is that we complete this road map quickly. After we were struck
by Hurricane Sandy, I heard from first responders about their
difficulty communicating. I heard time and again how their
radios were not interoperable, public safety officials from
different communities could not coordinate because their radios
could not talk to each other, and first responders could not
call for help when they needed it. So this past September I
hosted a forum in my congressional district with local
officials and industry leaders to see the progress that has
been made, and Mr. Kennedy joined us and provided valuable
feedback. Thank you, T.J.
Together we took a critical look at what worked and what
did not work during the storm. We learned a lot. I incorporated
many of these lessons into the Sandy Act that I recently
introduced, and we also heard once again that interoperability
was a big challenge.
But this is why FirstNet is so important. FirstNet will
help ensure that first responders across the country have the
best, the most rugged communications equipment, and it will
also make sure first responders can hear each other when they
call for help.
In New Jersey we are already seeing the fruits of this
labor. We are the home to one of FirstNet's five early builder
projects, ours is called JerseyNet, and these projects are
already showing how this network can benefit first responders.
I had the opportunity to see this equipment for myself at the
forum and it is impressive and it will save lives.
I am happy to say that JerseyNet was up and running when we
were hit by the recent snowstorm that crippled the east coast
last month. As large and devastating storms become more
frequent because of climate change, we need FirstNet at full
force across the country as soon as possible.
So thanks again to our witnesses, and I yield the balance
of my time to Mr. Doyle.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Thank you Chairman Walden and Ranking Member Eshoo for
holding this hearing today. And thanks to Mr. Furth for being
here. I'd also like to welcome back Mr. Kennedy.
It was not many months ago that FirstNet was here to
testify. But at the pace that FirstNet is moving, a few months
can be a lifetime. Since our last hearing in June, FirstNet has
released its much anticipated Request for Proposal. And while
government procurements do not usually keep people sitting on
the edge of their seats, this one is a big deal. Because it
contains the roadmap to the future of communications for first
responders.
Back in New Jersey, we know from experience how important
it is that we complete this roadmap quickly. After we were
struck by Hurricane Sandy, I heard from first responders about
their difficulty communicating. I heard time and again how
their radios were not interoperable--public safety officials
from different communities could not coordinate because their
radios could not talk to each other. First responders could not
call for help when they needed it.
So this past September I hosted a forum with local
officials and industry leaders to see the progress that has
been made. Mr. Kennedy also joined us and provided valuable
feedback--thank you T.J. Together, we took a critical look at
what worked and what did not work during the storm. We learned
a lot. I incorporated many of those lessons into the SANDy Act
that I recently introduced. We also heard once again that
interoperability was a big challenge.
But this is why FirstNet is so important. FirstNet will
help ensure that first responders across the country have the
best, most rugged, communications equipment. And it will also
make sure first responders can hear each other when they call
for help.
In New Jersey we are already seeing the fruits of this
labor. We are the home to one of FirstNet's five Early Builder
Projects--ours is called JerseyNet. These projects are already
showing how this network can benefit first responders. I had
the opportunity to see this equipment for myself at the forum.
It is impressive and it will save lives.
I am happy to say that JerseyNet was up and running when we
were hit by the recent snowstorm that crippled the East Coast
last month. As large and devastating storms become more
frequent because of climate change, we need FirstNet at full
force across the country as soon as possible.
So thank you once again to our witnesses. And with that, I
yield the balance of my time.

Mr. Doyle. I want to thank Mr. Pallone for yielding to me,
and thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this important
hearing. I am glad that we are continuing our oversight of
FirstNet. This year marks the 15th anniversary of the attacks
on 9/11, and that terrible day is a constant reminder of why we
need to make sure that FirstNet is successful.
I am very disappointed that it has taken this long for us
to address our first responders' pressing need for upgraded and
interoperable communications system. FirstNet will play an
integral role in bringing our first responders into the twenty-
first century, giving them access to high speed data, apps and
a competitive market for devices.
Everywhere in our economy we see how these advances have
been leveraged for unprecedented improvements in coordination
and communication. From Uber and Lyft to Waze and Twitter,
smartphones are enabling unparalleled innovation at an
unparalleled pace. My hope is that FirstNet will bring these
same benefits to first responders and that the results will be
a safer country for both our citizens and first responders
alike. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Walden. The gentlemen yields back the balance of his
time, and now we will go to our distinguished panel of
witnesses. We appreciate you both being here today and the good
work that you are doing out there for our first responders and
trying to make all this work.
So we will start with Mr. T.J. Kennedy who is the president
of First Responder Network Authority. Good morning. Welcome
back and we are glad to have you here.

STATEMENTS OF T.J. KENNEDY, PRESIDENT, FIRST RESPONDER NETWORK
AUTHORITY; AND, DAVID FURTH, DEPUTY CHIEF, PUBLIC SAFETY AND
HOMELAND SECURITY BUREAU, FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

STATEMENT OF T.J. KENNEDY

Mr. Kennedy. Good morning. Thank you. Chairman Walden,
Ranking Member Eshoo, and members of the subcommittee, thank
you for inviting me to testify on behalf of the First Responder
Network Authority. I welcome the opportunity to brief you on
FirstNet's ongoing progress in facilitating the deployment of
the first interoperable nationwide public safety broadband
network that will serve our nation's first responders. It is
also a pleasure to appear here today with Deputy Director of
the FCC's Public Safety and Homeland Security Bureau, Mr. David
Furth.
FirstNet continues to take the responsibility of creating
the nationwide public safety broadband network very seriously.
The FirstNet board and executive management team are proud to
be leading such an experienced, diverse and hardworking team
that understands that when it comes to public safety failure is
not an option. They are dedicated to delivering a network that
our first responders will depend on into the future.
We have learned as we have grown, and akin to every start-
up organization we have developed structure and procedures to
improve the way that we do business. As mentioned the last time
I was before this committee, we continue to do what we said we
would do and remain on track in meeting our timelines. The most
tangible example of this is the recent release of our
objectives based RFP that ultimately will result in the
selection of a partner or partners which will actually deploy
and operate the nationwide public safety broadband network.
The release of this RFP is the culmination of years of hard
work comprising tens of thousands of working hours and more
than a few all-nighters. It is the result of numerous RFIs,
public notices on 64 different topics, a special notice in
draft RFP documents, responding to over 650 questions from
industry related to those documents, two different industry
days, 55 state and territorial consultations, hundreds and
hundreds of outreach events, conferences, meetings and public
safety data input that came in from more than 15,700 public
safety entities representing around 1.7 million public safety
individuals.
Nowhere else in government has there been the level of
interaction and coordination between and among local, state,
tribal, federal, and industry stakeholders to deploy such a
network. This network has not yet been deployed not because of
any lack of desire or need, but because it is extremely
complex.
Well, today I sit before you feeling optimistic that we are
on the cusp of a successful public-private partnership to
deploy a truly interoperable broadband communications network
for public safety, informed by public safety and our other
state, local, tribal, and federal stakeholders.
This input from public safety across the country is an
incredibly important effort and we have been able to draw from
it and ultimately use it to develop performance based public
safety-centric RFP. After all, this is public safety's network.
Throughout the RFP process, we will select a private sector
partner and together establish the nationwide network.
Additionally, we will develop an open and competitive
marketplace where public safety objectives will drive
competition for industry to deliver equipment that public
safety needs to fully utilize and leverage all the great
innovation that the network will provide.
FirstNet is dedicated to open standards for the network for
applications and even the devices that run on it. Application
of open standards policies ensures the widest opportunity for
companies of all sizes to bring innovation and to bring new
solutions and products to the market for use on the nationwide
public safety broadband network.
Through teaming and partnership opportunities, we believe
that industry will be able to truly develop an innovative
network that will not only be deployed in urban areas, but also
available in rural America which is critical as it makes up the
majority of land mass in the United States. We believe that
rural telecommunications and infrastructure providers will be a
key component of the network in rural America, which is why we
made teaming with such providers an evaluation factor in the
RFP.
FirstNet understands the critical importance of rural
coverage, and we believe the significant effort that FirstNet
has undertaken to engage and encourage teaming and foster
inclusion of these important entities can ensure the widest
possible geographic coverage for the network overall.
We expect our efforts in the RFP to achieve a win-win-win
for public safety for states and for industry, and will create
a viable public-private partnership that will provide all of us
with the best opportunity to move forward quickly and do
something that many people have felt was just too hard and
complicated to achieve.
The release of this RFP along with the substantial
consultation efforts across the nation are significant
accomplishments, but we have an enormous amount of work ahead
of us in both of our core areas of focus. The first being to
execute and complete the procurement process, the second being
our ongoing important consultation with public safety across
the country.
Mr. Chairman, while this is not an easy task, I and our
team are truly dedicated to the mission that Congress has given
FirstNet on behalf of public safety, and I am honestly excited
to come to work every morning to work on this amazing mission.
I am confident reporting to you that our board of directors and
the rest of the FirstNet staff are equally passionate about
deploying this network for public safety.
FirstNet is very fortunate to have attracted a talented
group, and I am honored to be a part of this organization as we
work towards that successful deployment of the FirstNet
network. I applaud the leadership and guidance of the FirstNet
board. Sue Swenson, our board chair, and the entire board have
worked tirelessly to make sure that we ensure that public
safety is the key focus of everything we do each day. Thank you
very much.
[The statement of Mr. Kennedy follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Kennedy. We appreciate your good
work and your testimony this morning.
We now go to Mr. David Furth, the deputy chief, Public
Safety and Homeland Security Bureau, Federal Communications
Commission.
Good morning and welcome. We look forward to your comments,
sir. Is that on? Yes. It is push-to-talk technology.

STATEMENT OF DAVID FURTH

Mr. Furth. Oh, yes. We are going to move past that
sometime. Good morning, Chairman Walden, Ranking Member Eshoo
and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity
to appear before you today to discuss the FCC's role in
supporting FirstNet.
Let me emphasize at the outset that the FCC is fully
committed to the success of FirstNet's mission. My testimony
today will focus on our actions to support FirstNet and to
implement the tasks that the act has assigned to the
Commission. Since the act's passage, we have taken significant
and timely steps in this regard and have met each of the act's
deadlines to date.
For example, one of the FCC's first tasks was to establish
the Technical Advisory Board for First Responder
Interoperability, or Interoperability Board. The Commission
established the board as directed, reviewed and approved the
board's recommendations and provided those recommendations to
FirstNet in 2012. The Commission also took prompt action in
2012 as directed by the act to designate 22 megahertz of
spectrum in the 700 megahertz band for FirstNet's use and
issued FirstNet's spectrum license.
Beyond these tasks, the Commission has worked to meet its
statutory obligation to take all actions necessary to
facilitate FirstNet's spectrum use. In 2013, the Commission
adopted a Report and Order establishing basic technical rules
for the FirstNet spectrum, providing regulatory certainty, and
enabling prompt certification of equipment for the band.
A current example of our work to facilitate FirstNet's
spectrum use concerns the need to relocate a limited number of
public safety narrowband incumbents that have been operating in
FirstNet's portion of the band since before the Commission
reorganized the spectrum in 2007. In October 2015, FirstNet
informed the Commission that it intends to provide funding
later this year to relocate these incumbents and requested that
we condition the incumbent licenses to require their relocation
from the FirstNet spectrum by mid-2017.
We have sought public comment on this proposal and are
currently considering those comments. We recognize that a
prompt resolution of this issue will promote certainty for all
interested parties.
Another important responsibility that the Act assigns to
the Commission is the initial review of state opt-out requests.
Section 6302(e) of the act--and let me pause here. My written
testimony inadvertently had a typo. It should read 6302(e) not
6502(e). Section 6302(e) of the act provides that upon
completion by FirstNet of the RFP process, FirstNet shall
provide each state governor with a proposed plan for build-out
of the radio access network, or RAN, in that state. Within 90
days of receiving FirstNet's proposed state plan, each governor
must elect whether to accept the FirstNet proposal or to opt
out.
A state that opts out will then have 180 days to develop an
alternative plan and submit it to the Commission. For any opt-
out state, the act directs the Commission to apply a two-prong
test in determining whether to approve or disapprove the
alternative state plan. The act specifies that an alternative
state plan must demonstrate, one, compliance with the minimum
technical interoperability requirements developed by the
Interoperability Board, and two, interoperability with the
FirstNet network.
We recognize the need to provide states and FirstNet with
clear and timely guidance on the process that the Commission
will use to receive, review and approve or disapprove
alternative state plans as required by the act. Our goal is to
have the details of this process finalized and in place in
advance of the date that FirstNet delivers its proposed state
plans to each of the state governors, which FirstNet estimates
will occur in the second quarter of 2017.
To that end and consistent with FirstNet's anticipated
timeline, we intend to seek public comment in the near term on
how to structure the process to ensure that the Commission
fully carries out its statutory obligation. Beyond these
specific examples we have been and will continue to be in
regular contact with our FirstNet counterparts to consult and
coordinate on issues as needed.
We have also been working with a number of stakeholders
including FirstNet to help transition the nation's 911 call
center to Next Generation 911, so that NG911 and FirstNet can
complement one another as integrated components of an end-to-
end public safety broadband ecosystem. While this transition is
still in its early stages, planning from the start is critical
to achieving these synergies and benefits.
In conclusion, we are committed to working with FirstNet as
well as with our other federal, state, local and tribal
partners to achieve Congress's vision for a nationwide public
safety broadband network. Thank you for your consideration and
I look forward to any questions you may have.
[The statement of Mr. Furth follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. Thank you very much, Mr. Furth. We appreciate
the FCC's role in all of this as well.
Mr. Kennedy, I will start off with the questions. The
states are permitted to opt out and build their own radio
access networks. Could you just very briefly explain how the
statute treats revenue generated by an opt-out state on the
state opt-out network?
Mr. Kennedy. When it comes to state opt-out networks, they
have the ability to leverage the spectrum as part of the
covered leasing agreement that was laid out in the act itself.
And for each state, what they have the ability to do is to make
sure that they can cover the cost of the radio access network
as per the state plan.
As part of our legal interpretations leading up to the RFP
itself, we tried to make sure we added clarity to this. And one
of the things that we have laid out is that there is additional
revenue above and beyond what it costs to deploy the state plan
in that state that will have to come back into the network. It
will not be able to be kept in the state beyond what is
required to deploy the radio access network.
Mr. Walden. All right. One of the most critical
requirements of FirstNet is that it is nationwide in scope. My
district is extremely rural. How does the RFP address the
statutory requirement that the network cover rural America, and
how do you envision the service being provided in the rural
areas?
Mr. Kennedy. So a couple of things that we did on rural is
we wanted to ensure that rural is part of each phase of build-
out for the network. One of the things we heard during
consultation is that in rural areas a lot of times they are
left until the very end.
Mr. Walden. Right.
Mr. Kennedy. So as part of that we have put out in our
draft RFP and in our final RFP that we expect rural milestones
to be met at each phase of build-out. Because of the great
feedback we received we actually increased that, and so
actually by the end of phase 3 we are looking for 80 percent of
those milestones to actually be met in rural America. So we
believe we have taken that input from states and really tried
to leverage the fact that we want that rural build-out during
the entire build-out of the network.
Mr. Walden. All right. And central to the value proposition
underlying your proposal is the ability of the contractor to
monetize excess network capacity. I recall during the debate in
the subcommittee over reallocation of the D Block that public
safety's position at that time was that it needed all 20
megahertz for public safety services.
Despite the growth of the use of high bandwidth services by
public safety, how do you conclude that there is so much excess
capacity available now that it will generate sufficient revenue
to entice wireless providers to build your network?
Mr. Kennedy. Twenty megahertz of a 700 megahertz spectrum
is an extremely large swath and as you well know is quite
valuable in the wireless industry here today. Just like
Congressman Doyle mentioned during his opening statement,
during big emergencies like 9/11, certainly leveraging all 20
megahertz of that spectrum to be able to handle all the police
officers, firefighters, paramedics and the EMTs that are
responding to a massive incident could certainly leverage every
single bit of that.
But in most areas we really want to make sure that also we
have a network that is built to the coverage and capacity to
handle those huge emergencies and to do that that network has
to be built to a significant size. As part of that the ongoing
costs of operating that larger network are going to be more
expensive, but we do believe that there will be a large swath
of that spectrum available in the excess capacity on that
radiating network to actually generate significant cash to both
deploy and operate the network for public safety in a cost
effective manner.
Mr. Walden. Now the licenses have to be reauthorized every
ten years or you have to come back, but your RFP calls for the
contractors to put out a 25-year plan. Can you tell me how
those two interact?
Mr. Kennedy. Sure. As you well know in understanding the
way the FCC works, every ten years those licenses have a
certain number of rules to really be reallocated and re-upped
every 10 years. We believe that a successful offerer who
deploys on the schedule that we laid forward will certainly be
meeting those particular requirements of the FCC for future
renewals.
Also on the 25-year time frame, we really wanted to make
sure that we had a return on investment and certainty for the
offerer. If we look at the wireless industry over the last 25
years, it has gone from 1G to 4G LTE where we are today and it
is really the overall history of wireless in America. So the
next 25 years will bring a lot of innovation and a lot of
changes, but we also wanted to ensure that public safety has
this network for the long haul.
Mr. Walden. In one of our first oversight hearings, a
witness from the Commonwealth of Virginia discussed the
budgetary challenges faced by state public safety entities
across the U.S. He pointed out that because of these
constraints only a subset of first responders currently enjoy
cell service, and noted that if FirstNet's vision was premised
on all first responders in the state having service there
simply isn't enough funding to achieve this level of
penetration. I would think this fiscal challenge is especially
problematic with volunteer firefighting services which are
particularly prevalent in rural areas.
Is FirstNet envisioning volunteer firefighters nationwide
using FirstNet, and what level of penetration do you anticipate
and how does that factor into your economic analysis?
Mr. Kennedy. We absolutely believe that volunteer
firefighters, and for that matter volunteer EMS and other
public safety professionals, will be on the network. We believe
that they are excited to be able to leverage it going forward.
Many of them today carry personal cell phones and other
devices, but don't have the ability to communicate with other
public safety professionals. We have ensured every step of the
way that FirstNet has built into our network policies and
procedures so far that volunteers will always have access and
have the same kind of access as their professional brother in
the public safety.
Mr. Walden. Yes, I think their issue is just affordability
of what that will be, and it is an unknown right now, right?
Mr. Kennedy. It is an unknown, but we also think it will be
very competitive with the commercial services that are out
there today and that we think that public safety having the
volunteer ability to get lower priced devices will also be
something that will allow them to get access to it.
Mr. Walden. Thank you. I turn now to the gentlelady from
California.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to both
Mr. Kennedy and Mr. Furth for your testimony. I like hearing,
Mr. Kennedy, that you can't wait to get to work in the morning.
That is a pretty good sign to be excited about what you are
doing.
I want to go back to some of the issues that I raised in my
opening statement. Of course the 911 centers are a central part
of FirstNet's ecosystem and they are the nerve centers. And so
I have four questions. I would like you to tell the
subcommittee what steps you are taking to ensure that there
will be full integration with the 911 centers and the benefits
that come from that.
To Mr. Furth, I would like you to address the issue of
cybersecurity, because there is, I think it is part of the task
force's responsibility--I think I am correct on that--and how
you are addressing that. My third question, and I think it
would go back to Mr. Kennedy, is the whole issue of competition
and how that is actually going to be addressed. And I think
that is three. I can't remember the fourth.
Well, I think the security of the data that FirstNet is
going to handle, it is not only public safety's information but
it is also citizen information at the same time, and the other
issue I want to raise is the role of the states. I am getting
some feedback that it is kind of all or nothing at all; that
FirstNet controls all of the dollars. Where is the incentive
with the states?
This is delicate. I am a believer in you have a
relationship that isn't all that it should be in the beginning
and then there is another layer that is added to it and another
layer that is added to it and that can have an effect on the
overall system. We are the United States. We have 50 states,
and each state has different needs. And the chairman raised it,
some issues about it.
I think you need to unpack for the committee members
exactly how it is going to work with the states. You control
all the money. Are there any incentives that you offered to the
states as you built this out with each one? And the whole issue
of rural and urban is really very, very important, because the
RFP has gone out to all of the major outfits and yet in
broadband and in their own services they have trouble getting
services to rural areas in our country.
So is it all of a sudden because it is FirstNet that all of
that goes away and all is going to be well? So if you could,
between the two of you, comment on those four issues. Most of
them are yours, Mr. Kennedy.
Mr. Kennedy. Sure.
Ms. Eshoo. Yes, thank you.
Mr. Kennedy. I will take the first one and then I will
defer to David on the second. So on integration with Next
Generation 911, we have an amazing relationship and have been
reaching out to all of the 911 associations such as APCO who is
here in the room today, NENA, and other key associations that
support the need of our dispatch communities around the
country.
Currently, what they do in 911 today and the ones who are
already progressing to Next Gen 911 are very eager to make sure
that they have the ability to take videos, texts and other
things that will be coming in from citizens and to share that
across FirstNet with public safety.
What is great about FirstNet being a data network is we
will have the ability to take a video, to take a photo and make
sure that that is put in the hands of police officers and
firefighters in the field, and also from the field that we will
have the ability to share with dispatch, to share with other
public safety officials key data coming out of the field.
Ms. Eshoo. But let me just interrupt. That is a wonderful
description of exactly what many do right now, but we want to
make sure everyone does that and that they have the equipment
and the standards. What, FirstNet sets those standards, and
where is the competition with the devices? I think there are
many things that are woven into each one of these portions of
the overall net.
Mr. Kennedy. There are. There is a number of elements. I am
going to take the last element you mentioned on competition of
devices. This is something squarely in FirstNet's camp. We have
really been driving the open standards. We have been driving it
at an international level, making sure that we follow 3GPP and
the open international standards.
We have also been driving in different committees all of
the things that need to be done to make sure that we have
competition and that we have multiple devices that will be
available from multiple sources that will have band 14 and
spectrum available in those devices to be able to operate and
to give low cost in different options across the board of both
commercial devices and hardened public safety devices. So we
have very much been only trying to drive that going forward.
When it comes to your first question of the different
standards on Next Gen 911, there is still more work to be done
there. At the same point, we are working very closely with our
911 partners to make sure that all of the intersections of
where 911 is going to intersect with FirstNet that that
integration is built into what we do with the FirstNet network.
And we are also leveraging our labs at PSCR in Boulder, our
Public Safety Communication Research Labs, to make sure that we
are looking at the different elements of 911 and where the
intersections with FirstNet will occur.
Ms. Eshoo. What about the states?
Mr. Kennedy. When it comes to the states, one of the things
that we have done and we have learned to your point that
multilayered approach, is we have gone out and met on
consultations. We have realized that there are multiple layers
of how we need to interact with states and interact with
locals, through the state and along with the state, to make
sure that they have lots of opportunity to your point local
control.
We have actually brought in our Public Safety Advisory
Committee, the PSAC, which makes up 42 different state and
local and public safety associations, to take on this exact
issue of local control and to work with different associations
across the country and come back with advice for FirstNet on
how best to address the local control issue and meet the needs
of each state.
I want to defer to David on the cyber question.
Mr. Furth. If we have time. I know I can answer it, but I
will defer to you.
Mr. Walden. Why don't you go very quickly because I know it
is a concern of other members on the committee.
Mr. Furth. If I could just very briefly address the
cybersecurity question that you asked. You mentioned the task
force that the FCC convened. We convened a task force about a
year ago on PSAP optimization in the NG911 environment, and one
of the working groups in that task force was specifically
assigned to look at cybersecurity for PSAPs. We recognize that
this a critical issue and we are concerned that many PSAPs
particularly smaller ones around the country are not adequately
prepared.
That task force has just come back to us as of last week
with a series of very detailed recommendations on how to move
forward with cybersecurity for PSAPs in the NG world, and we
are going to be working with FirstNet to make sure that those
recommendations sync up with what FirstNet is doing so that
both ends of the communications chain are secure from cyber
attack.
Mr. Walden. All right, thank you. We will now turn to the
gentlelady from Tennessee, Ms. Blackburn.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I appreciate
Ms. Eshoo bringing up the cyber issue. She has focused on this
repeatedly, and I want to pick up right there and kind of go to
the next part of this question on cyber.
We will start there, Mr. Kennedy, with you, and look at
FirstNet's system design and talk a little bit about where you
are in that system design, just not the recommendations that
you have just said you all now have a set of recommendations,
but I want to know where you are and then kind of what you see
as a timeline on this.
Mr. Kennedy. So, a couple of things. We actually have put
out a public notice in some key RFI documents related to cyber.
We received comments back from industry and from states and
public safety this past fall. We have incorporated those into
our final section in the RFP on cybersecurity. As part of that
we have always envisioned that we are building in security from
day one. We are not just tacking it on at the end. We also want
to leverage the best practices from the private sector as well
as within government to make sure that we are taking more----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK, let us stop right there----
Mr. Kennedy. Sure.
Mrs. Blackburn [continuing]. Because government networks,
obviously, OPM breach, NASA, they are not secure. And whether
it is an encryption issue, whatever, we know that there are
some gaping holes, if you will, that are there. So I don't
think that is the standard that we want to hold up, so I will
yield my time back to you to continue.
Mr. Kennedy. So on that front we are really looking for
industry as part of the responses to this RFP to bring forward
private sector best practices as part of their solution that
will be judged against our standards that we have put forward
in Section J of the RFP to be able to make sure that they meet
the highest standards that public safety will need to meet, and
make sure that we ensure the security of all the data related
to emergency medical services, law enforcement, and the fact
that we are going to have all this data operating across the
FirstNet network.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. We are going to be watching that very
closely. We fully understand and appreciate the need for the
data security. We also understand that you have data transfer
that needs to be considered. All of these things are going to
have to be taken one at a time. We appreciate that and we just
work forward to working with you on it.
Mr. Furth, I want to come back to you on this opt-out
process. You talked about that in your testimony a little bit.
In 2013, in response to a question for the record, the Public
Safety Bureau stated, and I am going to quote, ``the Commission
will coordinate closely with FirstNet to ensure that the review
process by the FCC of state alternative plans is conducted in a
timely manner, consistent with FirstNet's deployment plans and
associated time frames.''
OK, so here we are in 2016 and it sounds like you are going
to do a rulemaking to establish a process; is that correct?
Mr. Furth. That is correct.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Now looking at timelines again, how
long do these rulemakings generally take with the FCC, and do
you think there is any validity to the concerns that many
people have that the FCC is slow-walking, intentionally slow-
walking this process in order to frustrate some of the state
opt-outs?
Mr. Furth. Thank you for the question. We certainly have no
intention to slow-walk this process. We think it is very
important that the states, at the point where they are going to
have to make that decision about whether to opt out, understand
what the process will be that the Commission will use to review
those requests.
And we have, in fact, as we indicated in 2013, been working
with FirstNet and consulting with them on their timeline. The
critical point in their timeline is that they are saying at
this point once the RFP process is completed that the state
plans will be delivered to the states in the second quarter of
2017.
So that is our target. We have to have our rules in place
before then, and therefore we are not going to delay. We want
to initiate a rulemaking in the near term to make sure that we
have the flexibility that we need to get those rules done in a
timely manner.
And you asked about the speed with which the Commission
conducts rulemakings. The Commission is capable of conducting
rulemaking very quickly, and particularly on an issue like this
we are really focused on one piece of the statute and the two-
prong test that the statute gave us for how we are going to
administer this review process of the opt-out requests.
So our focus is going to be on that statute and how we
implement it, and that is why we intend in the near term to get
public comment so that we can reach a timely conclusion on that
in time for the process that FirstNet will undertake in 2017.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Just bear in mind, to us it seems like
it is taking you a mighty long time to get around to doing it.
Mr. Furth. Well, I would actually suggest that this is the
right time to do it because now we have the RFP. It would have
been difficult, I think, to initiate this rulemaking before the
RFP had been released by FirstNet, because that is one of the
things that those who look at our proposals are going to need
to make reference to, and we think it will actually build a
better record to put this rulemaking out now that the RFP has
been released by FirstNet. So we think the timing for starting
this is right. Thank you.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK, yield back.
Mr. Walden. The gentlelady yields back. The chair
recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Doyle.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Kennedy, Mr. Furth,
welcome. We appreciate you both being here.
In my district, the city of Pittsburgh, as well as
Philadelphia and 11 other major cities around the country,
first responders will need to give back spectrum located in the
T-band that they currently use for communications. What
assurances can you both provide me that the first responders in
these affected cities that are losing access to this band that
will not affect their ability to accomplish their mission? Do
either of you see any potential problems with this transition?
Mr. Furth. Let me take that since that provision in the
statute is really the Commission's responsibility to implement.
And the statute specifically gives us a long timeline to deal
with the T-band issue, the initial deadline to reallocate
spectrum and begin the auction process, which is not the
relocation process but simply the beginning of the process for
setting up an auction. That deadline is 2021, so that is still
5 years away.
Nonetheless, we are very cognizant of the situation that T-
band licensees are in, and at the point where we look at how to
implement the statute we want to make very sure that there is
no loss of service, no loss of continuity in whatever
transition mechanism there is to ensure that the citizens of
those 11 markets, those 11 communities, are not left without
public safety services as a result of that transition.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you. Mr. Kennedy, in creating a
sustainable funding stream for FirstNet, the private partner
you choose will need to monetize your 20 megahertz of spectrum
in band 14. First, how soon will the spectrum be available once
FirstNet chooses a private partner; second, what steps has
FirstNet taken toward ensuring that consumer devices will
include band 14 chipsets; and finally, based on the previous
examples of this type of spectrum becoming available, how long
do you think it would take for devices and services using this
band to become available?
Mr. Kennedy. One of the things we have laid out is an
aggressive plan to work with the incumbents that are on band 14
today to make sure that they are moved to other narrow band
public safety spectrum. And we have been talking to all of
them. A few of them have already moved off proactively. All of
them have been under notice for a number of years that this was
going to happen, and so they are very much prepared to go
there.
We are working with them to have all that spectrum cleared
before we actually get through to the state plan process, and
we are trying to move very quickly to make sure that that
happens by the middle of 2017. This would allow a partner to be
able to have encumbered spectrum shortly after contract award
and be able to deploy the network knowing that that spectrum
was immediately available, which we think is a very important
piece.
When it comes to having devices, one of the things that we
have written into the RFP is we are asking proposers to come
forward with an entire ecosystem of band 14 devices that they
are going to proffer as part of their solution. And because
industry itself has the greatest amount of size and scope that
will be able to drive device manufacturers to include band 14
in their devices, they can actually drive a bigger ecosystem
than public safety can alone.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you. Mr. Kennedy, some of the critics of
FirstNet have repeatedly said that only the largest wireless
telecommunication companies would be capable of taking on a
project of this size. When you were crafting the RFP what steps
did you take to broaden the group of entities capable of
partnering with FirstNet, and do you believe that there are
entities out there other than the large telcos interested and
able to fulfill the terms of the RFP?
Mr. Kennedy. That is a great question. One of the things we
did through all of the different RFIs and our consultation with
states and with industry was try to come up with a way that was
driven by objectives, the objective for public safety in a
performance-based acquisition. This is different than the
typical 10,000 lines of specific requirements that we often see
in government procurements. The reasons we did that was to
drive more competition and not less. We wanted to have an
objective-based procurement that allowed everybody to address
the procurement in a different way as long as they were meeting
all of the objectives of public safety. We believe that this
will actually drive greater competition and not less
competition at the end of the day.
We also did a number of notices on different sizes and
scopes, whether we should look at this regionally or nationally
and what was the best approach to that. After that we went
forward with a nationwide objective-driven RFP that we believe
through teaming will make sure that it brings the greatest
amount of opportunity to the table for the different offerers
that come together.
We also believe that there are other folks outside of the
major telco providers that could bid and win this opportunity
and we believe there is interest out there. We believe that
there are multiple ways that folks could come forward with the
different assets that have been put forward in this partnership
that could actually make this work in a way that will be very
beneficial to public safety.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you. I see I just have one second. With
regards to the opt-out issue do you have any thoughts on how
many states you think will opt out?
Mr. Furth. No. We will be prepared for any contingency in
terms of the number of states that opt out.
Mr. Doyle. OK. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Walden. You are welcome. We will now go to the former
chairman of the committee, Mr. Barton.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Chairman. Mr. Kennedy, have you ever
heard of a radio talk show host in Texas named John Grady
Wells?
Mr. Kennedy. I have not.
Mr. Barton. You sound exactly like him.
Mr. Kennedy. I will be Googling him right after this.
Mr. Barton. If you close your eyes it sounds like I am on
the John Grady Wells Show or I am listening to the John Grady
Wells Show. That was not a trick question.
Mr. Walden. It is how we are helping pay for FirstNet,
moonlighting.
Mr. Barton. He is very, very conservative. Anyway, my first
question to you Mr. Kennedy would be, and it was just asked in
a different way. How many states have indicated that they want
to opt out and create their own network?
Mr. Kennedy. So on this question, the timing of when the
opt-in/opt-out decision actually occurs is post our acquisition
and the contract award and post a state getting a state plan.
The reality is having the ability to compare how good that
state plan meets the needs of the state is one of the key
considerations that will need to be looked by each and every
state when they look at this consideration for opt-in and opt-
out. We also believe that it is going to be incumbent on those
offerers who are coming forward to bring a very compelling
offering, because they will want to bring in as many states as
possible to make this a very successful solution for public
safety and to make it so that there is less integration or risk
in the overall project.
As part of that they are going to have to have a very
compelling offering that goes into each of these state plans,
and with that we will then have a feeling for who would
consider opt-in, who would consider opt-out. We do believe
though that it is important that we have been continuing to
build through our consultation, open dialogue, open
relationships, open discussions about the benefits of opt-in,
about the benefits of the FirstNet network overall, and at the
same point preserving the rights for states to go through that
process and to work forward.
Mr. Barton. Well, my guess is, and it is purely a guess, is
that there will be a number of states. Some of them are pretty
obvious--Alaska, Hawaii--because they are almost self-contained
by geography and conditions. And then there are some that have
a history of independence. Just out of the blue, Texas, we have
our own electric grid.
So I would assume that there will be a number and that is
something that I would hope that there is some planning,
because even if you opt out to have your own state network it
certainly has to be interoperable within the state with
everyone, and it has to be interoperable with the other
networks and the national network. Has there been any
interaction with Texas so far about that? I know that Harris
County has a local network that we tried to make sure was
acceptable.
Mr. Kennedy. We actually just held our most recent board
meeting down in Houston. And the FirstNet team and the board
visited the Harris County project again and had great
interaction with the team and the significant progress that
they have made on that early builder project and the lessons
learned, both key lessons learned that were in the spectrum
lease agreement, but also the unofficial lessons learned from
deploying that network so far and the growing pains as they
work through continuing to grow that network.
On a lot of discussions with the State of Texas who are
involved from the SMLA perspective but also with the
consultations throughout Texas, as you know the thousands of
public safety agencies in Texas, a huge amount of key
constituents for Texas to visit with. Todd Early and his team,
and Skylor Hearn from the Texas Department of Public Safety
have been crisscrossing the State. They have a tremendous team.
They have actually built an online web portal and key training
for public safety responders throughout the state to make sure
they are informing them about the network.
We have been working very closely with them and even met
with key officials in Austin to make sure that they understand
both opt-in and opt-out and all the opportunities that will
become available with having a public safety network for first
responders in Texas.
Mr. Barton. OK, thank you. I guess my last question and
kind of the $64 question which is hard to answer: what is your
gut reaction when we will actually have FirstNet up and
running? Not just talking about it and making significant
progress and moving forward and all this, but actually have a
network that is functional and that is usable?
Mr. Kennedy. It is going to occur after the opt-in and opt-
out decision. And after a key opt-out and opt-in decisions we
will have the ability to move forward with deployments in
states. Right now we are anticipating that those state plans,
much of what was mentioned by David earlier today, will be
occurring in mid-2017 and that they will be coming out after
this contract award. We then have that 90-day period for opt-in
and opt-out.
So as early as late 2017, the network would start being
deployed. Operations will depend on the size of a state, even
the size of the region and so forth for how that will be
deployed. In some cases that will take a number of years, but
trying to make sure that we get the network up and running as
quick as possible.
Mr. Barton. So in the reasonable future. We are not talking
10 years, we are talking----
Mr. Kennedy. No, no, very reasonable future.
Mr. Barton. OK, thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. Gentlemen, I appreciate your comments. We will
now go to the gentlelady from Colorado, Ms. DeGette, for
questions.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, I know that
some of my questions have been asked but they haven't been
asked by everybody, but I am still not going to ask them. There
was one topic I wanted to talk to you about though, and that is
the topic, Mr. Kennedy, we talked about last year when you were
here when we discussed NIST, which of course has facilities in
Colorado.
At that time you told the subcommittee that FirstNet had
just started to work with NIST on a number of technical
questions. I was wondering if you could give me an update on
that work and let me know how that has helped inform the recent
RFP.
Mr. Kennedy. The work being done by the Public Safety
Communications Research Lab at NIST has been invaluable to
FirstNet. We have a very close relationship, and actually our
technical team is also headquartered in Boulder so that they
can have close proximity to the NIST team. This team is working
on key issues like priority and preemption. They have been
literally testing and loading networks to make sure that the
priority features and these preemptive features that are going
to be critical to this public safety network to always have the
on-demand resources they need for big emergencies has come
because of the tremendous work by PSCR.
Another key element is looking at standards work. PSCR is
part of all the third generation partnership project standards
meetings. These are critical, because we need to not only build
to a nationwide standard, but also to international standards
to make sure that we keep open networks and open standards and
also have a variety in ecosystem of devices and equipment that
will be cost effective. That work is very much being driven by
NIST.
A third element really goes into cybersecurity and making
sure that we look at the best practices and that they are also
doing key testing. And so, tremendous amount of work being done
by NIST and PSCR.
Lastly, they are actually setting up right now task teams
with our Public Safety Advisory Committee, who is going to be
working on advising PSCR and NIST on leveraging the R&D money
that is in our act to make sure that we look at key interfacing
of LTE going forward and what we are doing in LMR systems and
also making sure that we meet all the mission-critical needs
for public safety. So it is a tremendous ongoing relationship
and we couldn't be more pleased with the work by the PSCR team.
Ms. DeGette. Thanks. I guess I will yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Walden. We now turn to Mr. Latta, the vice chair of the
subcommittee for questions.
Mr. Latta. Well, thanks, Mr. Chairman, and thanks again for
having today's hearing. And gentlemen, thanks very much for
being with us today. We have had multiple hearings on this
issue and it is very, very important. And I know that I was
contacted early on in the process, and there is a question out
there about making sure that the states were being heard.
And so I think that what we are hearing today and also from
your testimony, Mr. Kennedy, I see you stated that you received
data from over 1,160 public safety entities representing 1.6
million public safety personnel from 54 states and territories
and seven federal agencies. And that is important, because
again, that is one of the things that the folks out there
wanted to make sure that they were being heard as this was
being put together, since it is vital not only to the folks
back home for making sure that all their security needs are
being taken care of, or when there is an emergency or
ambulances are being called, but that is across the entire
nation. And also it is important that as we go forward that we
keep that up.
And if I could, I would like to start, Mr. Kennedy, with a
question. I appreciate again FirstNet's inclusion of the
partnerships with the rural telecom providers within the
proposal evaluation criteria, thereby attempting to ensure
small rural carriers are not left out of the FirstNet solution.
And that is important to a lot of us because my district is
very--like a lot of the people here, I have very, very, very
rural areas in my district and a few go to urban. And so we
want to make sure that everyone that is out there has that
ability for those small FirstNet tests for that solution.
Can you tell me how FirstNet will define the rural telecom
provider?
Mr. Kennedy. Sure. The rural telecom providers actually
includes all of those that are providing telecommunication
services in rural areas. And we know that some of them do and
don't provide wireless service, for instance, today, others are
providing key backhaul, and we want to make sure that they are
all included as part of this infrastructure that has to be
leveraged.
We also believe it is important that we put some minimums
in the RFP to help ensure that there is a good conversation
that is going on between rural providers and others who are
aggregating a team to bid on the nationwide network.
Lastly, as I mentioned a little bit earlier in response to
a question, we are also continuing to look at the minimums that
are happening at each phase of deployment. And we have actually
upped some of those from our initial draft RFP in the final RFP
to ensure that rural deployment is first and foremost on folks'
minds and to be able to deploy quickly in the way that we have
put forward in the RFP. The way that we think that that can
best happen is leveraging the infrastructure that is out there
today.
Mr. Latta. OK. You touched on it a little bit earlier, but
I am also interested in hearing what FirstNet has to say
regarding how you are going to manage the security on mobile
devices so that other adjacent systems aren't breached. Are you
looking at technology solutions to ensure that mobile devices
are authorized and that the access will be restricted?
Mr. Kennedy. We are. And we are also looking at really
driving industry to be very innovative in their responses that
are part of this. We know that identity and credentialing and
access management and that human factors are often one of the
weakest links when it comes to a network. And so understanding
which device is tied to which first responder and also who is
using it at that particular time is very critical.
We actually set up an advisory committee within the Public
Safety Advisory Committee for FirstNet to look specifically at
this ICAM, the Identity Credentialing and Access Management. It
is such a huge issue across major agencies today. And also
making sure that we do it in an innovative way for public
safety to still make sure that accessing these devices is very
usable and that they can use it in the environment in which
they operate.
One of the unique things about public safety, firefighters,
for instance, operate with heavy leather gloves and other
things on, EMS personnel have latex gloves. And being able to
interoperate and use devices in the harsh environment that
public safety uses is critical. So it has to be very usable but
it also has to be very secure, and we are looking at that all
the way down to the device level.
Mr. Latta. When you are talking about that let us just
follow up on the security end of it. What are you finding as
you are going through all these meetings and with your group
there? What are you finding? Because this is something that we
talk about all the time, across the board here.
When you are talking about cybersecurity how are we going
to do that and make sure that we don't have some kind of a
massive emergency and all of a sudden find that they are
getting hacked or that there is a cyber attack at the exact
same time?
Mr. Kennedy. I think we are all finding that cyber is a
very active process. It is not a one and done solution. We know
that we have to build it in from the very beginning, but we
also know that we have to have an ongoing process to deal to
the evolving threat. And to do that we are maintaining a number
of key issues as we talked about earlier, leveraging what is
being done with NIST and PSCR, but also from industry. And I
think it is critical that we really leverage what is coming out
of industry, and there is more to be done. There is no one
silver bullet.
Mr. Latta. OK. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. My time
is expired and I yield back.
Mr. Walden. The gentlemen yields back. The chair recognizes
the gentleman from California, Mr. McNerney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Chair, for holding this hearing. I
just want to say my district includes Contra Costa County, part
of the San Francisco Bay area, and back when we had earmarks I
got involved with interoperability efforts in that county and
they were successful. But I have to say I was pretty surprised
at how difficult it was, how expensive it was to get this done,
so I am glad you have done all the work that you have been able
to do. Are you able to learn much from those early attempts at
interoperability?
Mr. Kennedy. Yes, we have been. We have been very much
trying to take the lessons learned on both the land mobile
radio side of interoperability and now on the LTE side looking
at both voice and data interoperability. Voice interoperability
has been a longstanding issue. I personally have had a lot of
experience in leveraging how do we get these disparate systems
to work together. Our country has spent a lot of money trying
to make sure that that occurs.
One of the unique things about FirstNet and something that
Congress did as part of this act is making sure that we will
all be operating on the same spectrum and on the same key
standards, international standards related to LTE, and I think
that is really a huge part of making this a success.
Mr. McNerney. Well, it is clear that consultations with the
states is an important part of the process. Are you done with
that phase or are you still in the consultation process?
Mr. Kennedy. So we have gone out as part of the
consultation process and met with 55 states and territories so
far. Many of these states we have had more than one engagement
with and we are going to continue to engage in 2016 and beyond.
We don't believe that consultation just has a magic end to it.
We believe that we will need to continue to consult up until
state plans and then even during the deployment of the network.
That consultation is going to get much more specific this
year in that we are actually going to have consultation task
teams, and we are also looking to have key executive meetings
with each state to make sure that key decision makers are
informed before we get to the state plan process.
Mr. McNerney. So were the states pretty engaged and
enthusiastic about this?
Mr. Kennedy. They were very engaged. And every state has a
different way of how they approach their different key public
safety stakeholders, but we were amazed at the amazing turnout.
Some states had well over 100 and 150-plus people who were
engaged in an all day consultation session. Many of the states
even involved neighboring states to make sure that they had
good cross-communication across states. So a terrific turnout.
And one of the great things about these state consultation
efforts was that we learned so much about the unique
differences that occur in each state. We learned what is very
important to them. And they also presented use cases, and each
and every state actually came out and presented use cases on
major disasters that have either occurred in their state--take
the state of Minnesota, talked about the I35 bridge collapse--
and what kind of communications could have happened and occur
if they would have had a broadband public safety network that
they could have utilized during that kind of a disaster.
That kind of real-world thought process and discussion that
was an ongoing discussion throughout that consultation just
shows you briefly what we had at each and every state, and
really being able to understand how they operate to make sure
that the state plan that we can bring forward for that state
understands their unique needs.
Mr. McNerney. So how much interest did you see from small
businesses and carriers in this outreach process?
Mr. Kennedy. We have seen a lot of interest from both small
business and carriers. Many of them showed up at different
consultations in different states. More importantly, huge
turnouts for our industry days.
When we released the RFP recently, we actually held a call
with over 600 participants from industry, both big and small,
who actually came to that call for a briefing on the RFP
release. As a part of that process we have actually set up on
our Web site and on the FedBizOpps Web site, which actually has
the opportunity for the FirstNet RFP, a teaming portal so that
small businesses can put themselves out there and their key
capabilities so that they can help join with teams and make
sure that they are being seen for what kinds of things they
could bring to the table.
Mr. McNerney. Well, thank you.
Mr. Furth, clearly one of the controversial issues is state
opt-out. What information would be helpful for the FCC to have
in order to do the best job in producing opt-out rules?
Mr. Furth. Well, primarily it will be information that
relates to the test that is set forth in the statute. But that
is one of the reasons that we feel it is important to do a
rulemaking on this process, because that way we can seek
comment from all interested parties to determine what is the
information that we will require states to provide us.
The two-prong test in the statute is simply phrased, but we
need to make sure that we have a full understanding of what is
behind those phrases so that states know, if they are making
the choice whether to opt out or not, what the choices are both
in terms of what FirstNet has presented them and what they
would need to present to the Commission if they were to elect
opt-out.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, sir. We will now turn to the
gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, for questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to just follow
up a little bit with Chairman Walden on the 25-year RFP issue.
It was 8 years ago that the first iPhone rolled out. And I
remember, other than Courtney and Darrell Issa, they were like
the first adopters, now we have not just Apple, but Nexus,
Samsung, LG, Motorola, HTC. Who does not have one? And I think
that is the concern of a 25-year RFP locking folks in when the
tech community can go crazy in a short amount of time. So I
just wanted to weigh in on that.
And staying on the RFP questions, we also are concerned
about we had challenges in 2007 with the D block because--the
argument was it was encumbered by other issues that cause it
not to be valued by people who would bid. Some people are
raising that concern with the RFP. Have you looked at that, Mr.
Kennedy?
Mr. Kennedy. We have. We have looked at encumberance and we
have also looked at how this compares to other auctions both
past and present that are occurring. The encumberance of many
of the recent auctions, even theAWS-3 auction and others, many
of them have some encumberance related to either military
personnel or other agencies that are still on some of that
spectrum. We also know that with the broadcast incentive option
a certain amount of time, 39 months, to be able to be moved off
of that and some of those key considerations.
In the public safety case we are talking about 5 million to
10 million to 13 million first responders and key personnel
that will be leveraging the network depending on really trying
to make sure that we meet all the needs of public safety. And
we know today that the major networks that already exist have a
huge number of customers. We are talking about hundreds of
millions of folks out there today. And if we look at similar
spectrum, similar spectrum that is being leveraged by
commercial carriers today, 20 megahertz of 700 megahertz
spectrum is going to be leveraged for capacity, we believe, in
ways that are still quite valuable and are not over encumbered
to be able to get great value out of that.
We have also done a lot of market research and a lot of
discussions with industry leading up to this and we have seen
great interest in that spectrum and that they think there is
value there.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. Let me talk about the penalty
mechanism real quick. There is a penalty for failing to hit
these targets. It is our understanding that the targets are set
by the contractor. If that is the case, do you think that they
kind of lowball the targets to make sure they meet their
contractual obligations?
Mr. Kennedy. There is always the chance that that can
occur. One of the things that we have tried to do is to balance
the needs of public safety in making sure that we can ensure
great adoption by public safety. We put public safety first and
foremost in both these penalties and also in the objectives
that are driving the RFP. At the same point we want to make
sure that they are achievable, and we believe through
competition and in competition in the RFP that different
offerers will provide and have to step up to the plate with
good adoption targets that we are going to compare against each
other, and I think that is important.
Mr. Shimkus. And I missed the discussion a little bit on
PSAPs. I was walking in from another hearing. But we know that
one of the board members opined about the changing role for
PSAPs. Does that mean that there is actually discussions by you
all about functionalities provided by PSAPs or you all
providing guidance to PSAPs?
Mr. Kennedy. I certainly think that the enhanced
functionality of FirstNet is going to provide new and different
ways of communicating for PSAPs to and from the field to police
officers, firefighters and EMTs. I do believe that that is an
opportunity for 911 centers to continue to grow and leverage
that new technology.
I will defer some time to David to answer this though from
the PSAP perceptive in the FCC.
Mr. Shimkus. That would be great. Thank you.
Mr. Furth. And in fact we have encouraged 911 authorities
and PSAPs to get involved with the FirstNet state consultation
process for precisely that reason that both these elements are
very interconnected. And we are also very focused on our
efforts with our PSAP task force and with some of our efforts
at the Commission to advance Next Generation 911 in making sure
that the PSAPs evolve in parallel with the intended deployment
of the FirstNet network so that there will be, in fact, true
interoperability all across.
Mr. Shimkus. Well, thank you. Because as you know, Ranking
Member Eshoo and I, we have been really focused on the PSAPs'
evolution over the time and I am sure we will be looking at it
closely to make sure that we are not stumbling over each other
but were very helpful in providing the network that we are all
looking for.
Mr. Furth. And if I might add, we have also--I don't know
if T.J. mentioned it--but they have actually hired a Next
Generation 911, a 911 specialist that will be working with us.
We were going to have a meeting, but I think it was postponed
by the snowstorm. But we are looking forward to starting that
relationship very shortly.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
Mr. Walden. OK. We will turn now to the gentlelady from New
York, Ms. Clarke, for five minutes.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I thank
our ranking member. Good to see you again, Mr. Kennedy. I have
a couple of questions and it has to do with the whole opt-out
piece, because you mentioned that this construct is geared
towards a state opting out.
Have you taken into consideration perhaps a part of a
jurisdiction of a state, and have you also taken into
consideration maybe a grouping of states so that there is a
tri-state opt-out? And what would be the tipping point for a
national system network if the opt-out provision is utilized by
50 percent of the jurisdictions in the nation, right. How have
you envisioned managing cybersecurity given the variability of
systems that can be established, and what would be the sort of
management maintenance standards that could be put in place to
make sure that we have a standard across the board for robust
and impenetrable network, if you will?
Mr. Kennedy. A number of very good questions. First off, I
think on the opt-out question the act is fairly prescriptive on
what it says on the opt-in/opt-out decision related to the
radio access network portion of the network. The good news is
the core network and the nationwide backbone of this network
are nationwide, and they are something that everyone will need
to connect into and leverage both the integration, the network
policies that we put forward, and in an opt-out scenario they
would work both through the FCC and the NITA process and
FirstNet to make sure that they will be interoperable. And I
think that that is absolutely critical to make sure that we
have a successful network.
As far as different sizes and scopes, the act did not
anticipate either a substate or multi-state way of doing that.
And so the process we have to go through is very much state
driven by each governor having that opportunity to make that
decision about that radio access network.
Ms. Clarke. So where you may have a tri-state authority
that has the infrastructure already in place for whatever they
do in terms of deployment of emergency, they may see it
necessary to make sure that their interoperability is at a
certain standard. Couldn't they come in with an opt-out plan
from a tri-state perspective?
Mr. Kennedy. Right now the plans are very much driven at a
state-by-state level based upon that governor decision. We have
seen states certainly being very open in talking to each other
and sharing best practices and talking about future solutions.
The good news, because we will be operating all under the same
network policies, not only will those three states be
interoperable, but all 50 states, five territories and the
District of Columbia have to be interoperable. So we all will
be operating on the same standards. We will all be operating
off the same core network for public safety users. This is a
critical baseline to make sure that we maintain that
interoperability.
Ms. Clarke. So it may be just a matter of utility then what
type of instruments are being used, and that is where the
vulnerabilities could ultimately lie when you are talking about
cybersecurity. So what, are we looking at a standard in terms
of--you are not going to govern what companies they decide to
go with if they opt out, but not all companies are equal
either. So how do we get to that floor where--because anyone
who is vulnerable in the system, whether it is an instrument or
something else, makes the entire system vulnerable, right?
Mr. Kennedy. Absolutely. And your point is valid that the
weakest link is always the issue, and often we see that as even
a human link. To your point about being impenetrable, I think
most impenetrable networks are also not very useable, and so we
also have to have both pieces of that to make sure that we are
having great security and also good use for public safety
needs.
One of the things we have done is set forward a number of
key elements within our cybersecurity part of the RFP to make
sure that we are driving those cyber best practices. And we are
really leveraging industry to respond to that RFP and anything
that would come in from an opt-out perspective would have to
meet or exceed those same standards. So we believe that this is
going to ensure that we have ongoing cybersecurity, and also
that we have as part of our partner a key security operations
center. Security is dynamic. It is not something that is static
and doesn't change.
Ms. Clarke. Absolutely. And any company that has a weak
link within them, so, right, could be human, could make the
infrastructure vulnerable. So I just want to try to look at
maintenance as well and how we build that standard out. I yield
back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much. The gentlelady yields
it back. And the gentleman from Kentucky is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for the
witnesses for being here. And Mr. Furth, in your testimony you
mentioned that the public notice regarding relocation of
current users of FirstNet spectrum. When can the committee
expect to see a resolution?
Mr. Furth. We released that public notice in November. We
obtained comments from interested parties in December. FirstNet
submitted an ex parte to us a couple of weeks ago, so we are
working very actively on that again cognizant of FirstNet's
timeline because they are setting up a funding program and they
have given us a requested date for when they would like to see
the spectrum cleared. So with all of those elements in place I
think that we can move forward quite quickly to reach a
resolution on that.
Mr. Guthrie. That sort of answered my second question. I
was going to ask Mr. Kennedy if your timeline is, if FirstNet
is able to move forward with the timeline that you offer. But I
guess you all have agreed upon a date, and you are going to
meet the date they have agreed upon? I guess that is the
question.
Mr. Furth. I wouldn't say we have agreed upon a date. They
have given us a date. Their request is that the licenses be
modified so that any incumbent could not stay on the band past
July of 2017 without FirstNet's consent. But they have also set
up a funding program and a relocation program consistent with
that timeline. And as T.J. said, I think their intent is to try
to move as many of those incumbents as they can off the band
well in advance of that date.
So what they are asking us to do is simply to make the
necessary licensing changes that would commemorate the fact,
licensees are no longer entitled to operate on the FirstNet
spectrum. There is other spectrum in the 700 megahertz band
that is available for them in the narrow band spectrum and so
that is where they would be reassigned to.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. So my question was how will this timeline
impact your ability to move forward, but since you are working
that out so----
Mr. Kennedy. Yes, our suggestions and requests that have
been made to the FCC are still working through the final NPRM
process, but so far we believe that we are in sync in what we
have discussed with them and look forward to that happening.
Mr. Guthrie. Are there any other FCC proceedings or FCC
actions that FirstNet needs to be resolved before you can move
forward?
Mr. Kennedy. Not related to spectrum relocation in the 700
megahertz band.
Mr. Guthrie. OK, thanks. And also Mr. Kennedy, this is a
different topic. The crux of the RFP is the ability of the
winner to monetize the spectrum. Can you elaborate on the
quality of service, priority and preemptive parameters for
public safety traffic on the network and how this is factored
into your valuation of the spectrum?
Mr. Kennedy. For us the key quality of service parameters
that are required by public safety to be able to operate are
something that both our technical team in Boulder as well as
the Public Safety Communications Research Lab have been testing
of equipment for years. It is something that we consider to be
table stakes for what must occur to be able to have public
safety and commercial users operating on the same spectrum.
And so having that ability to have preemption and to have
priority and provide that mission critical quality of service
that we are looking for public safety is something we are
requiring of all offerers. Our technical team will be greatly
involved in the evaluation of those proposals. It is a key
thing that we have to have to make sure that this network will
provide that priority and preemption whenever it is needed.
Mr. Guthrie. So you have to make sure the winner is
financially successful. That is what its base stability to move
forward is. But also, so how does FirstNet plan to ensure that
the winning bidder only gains access to the market at
competitive rates? I know part of the previous question was the
winning bidder and they have to be financially viable to
monetize the system. What about FirstNet's ability to make sure
they maximize financial ability?
Mr. Kennedy. Yes, as far as maximizing the bids that come
in and that we receive, we believe by having an objectives
based procurement that allows innovative solutions and industry
to come together with the best solutions. And through
competition we believe that we will make sure that public
safety gets the ultimate best deal that can come forward.
Competition is by far the best thing that we can have to ensure
that there is not value being left on the table that is not
being leveraged by public safety to get the best network
possible.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. And I am meeting with some of my
public safety people today. So I know it is important in
Kentucky, it is important everywhere, and I appreciate the work
you guys are doing.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you.
Mr. Guthrie. And I yield back.
Mr. Latta [presiding]. Thank you. The gentleman yields
back, and the chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas for
5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the chair, and welcome Mr. Kennedy and
Mr. Furth. I am from the greater Houston area. We have seen our
fair share of natural disasters, the worst disasters in
American history. For example, the worst hurricane. Galveston
1900, over 6,000 people, the low end, maybe 8,000 were killed
in 24 hours. The worst industrial accident, Texas City 1947. A
ship exploded, almost 600 people were killed. Every firefighter
except for one died trying to put out that fire.
A mere tropical storm, Claudette, set the American record
for rainfall in a 24-hour period in 1979 in the city of Alvin,
Texas. Forty three inches of rain fell within one day. I was
living 10 miles away from Alvin, Texas when that happened,
staying up all night with my dad preparing for our first floor
becoming the wading pool we never dreamed of having down below.
But those problems we face in Texas are much different than
problems they face in California, North Dakota, and
Pennsylvania, for example. FirstNet must be able to adapt to
those challenges, different challenges. It can't fail,
especially in a time of crisis. In Houston we say failure is
not an option.
My first question to Mr. Kennedy is, in the worst case
scenario how should we measure failure with regard to the RFP?
What is failure? When does it fail? How do you measure that?
Mr. Kennedy. As far as the network or the RFP itself?
Mr. Olson. RFP itself and the network. Throw them all in
there.
Mr. Kennedy. OK. From the network perspective, and I am
just going to go off of your explanation on being mission
critical and public safety grade. I think it is very important
that everything we do is trying to focus on making sure that we
can meet that public safety grade capability. What we have done
with the objectives you will see that public safety grade and
that reliability and resiliency are key objectives that are
part of the RFP and we will be measuring what is coming in in
those RFP responses.
Also, it is absolutely critical as we go forward that we
know that just terrestrial networks and just hardening won't
solve every problem, so the network design is going to be
looked at for what kind of reliability and redundancy by having
capacity that will allow us to have ongoing network capability
after a disaster hits.
Also, we have leveraged our Public Safety Advisory
Committee to look at public safety grade and make
recommendations. Your point about different parts of the
country, the kinds of hardening that they need in Florida are
sometimes different than what they need in Texas versus Alaska,
different kinds of issues. Some parts of the country have
issues with earthquakes, other parts have issues with
hurricanes and flooding. And so those kind of issues really
demand a different type of network infrastructure in different
parts of the country.
Also, it requires other ways to reconstitute a network.
There are some things when we look at a tornado and a direct
hit that there is no building of a cell tower that necessarily
will----
Mr. Olson. Joplin, like Mr. Long's district. Joplin,
Missouri, direct hit. Yes.
Mr. Kennedy. Joplin is a great example of that. And so you
have to have other things that can reconstitute a network
during that kind of very focused disaster, and that comes down
to leveraging deployables. Deployable networks have been
something that we have looked at both for major events, but
also for response during that kind of reconstitution of a
network.
There are aerial platforms and other things that are now
having the ability to bring networks to where networks have
been decimated very quickly, and also having the ability like
we have seen with the New Jersey project to be able to look at
how do we have deployable networks after a storm like a
Hurricane Sandy, and how can that go ahead and reconstitute a
network where a network has been wiped out.
So it is not just the permanent physical infrastructure, it
is also having a network and a network operations center and
that design built in, so that we are able to prepare for and
respond to those emergencies in every state and have assets
that could actually move between states when needed to make
sure that they are responding to those big events.
Mr. Olson. You get all these RFPs, you look at them and you
go, man, these don't hit these targets. They are short, they
are falling short, doesn't handle the needs, it is a failure.
What is Plan B? How do you move forward from that? Like Apollo
13, how did you bring those guys home? What is Plan B if there
is a failure, proposed or viable, any plan for that or you just
going to wing it after that happens?
Mr. Kennedy. No, no. We certainly have considered that
there can always be issues with RFPs. There could be amendments
that are issued to deal with a deficiency or something that
will not work. Part of the thing we are doing right now is we
are waiting for questions to come in from potential offerers.
Questions will often drive to make sure whether we have hit the
right targets or whether there are things or issues that would
require changes.
We are very open to knowing that we need to be agile and be
able to respond to what comes back, and so we have left those
options open. At the same point, we are trying to move with
urgency to make sure that this network gets built and gets in
the hands of public safety.
Mr. Olson. Thank you, I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. The gentleman yields back, and the
chair recognizes the gentleman from southeast Ohio for 5
minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I also want to
thank the panel for being with us today. I serve an area of the
nation that struggles with network access and availability,
rural Appalachia, so these are topics that are very much a
concern to me.
Mr. Kennedy, this subcommittee is working on a bill to help
streamline access to rights of way so that communities will see
both better broadband services and more competitors. We know
the more competition the lower the cost, the quality goes up,
we know how that works. Is it safe to say that the winner of
the contract is likely to need to deploy new infrastructure to
satisfy the objectives of the RFP?
Mr. Kennedy. First off, I encourage the efforts that you
are doing because I think that will help both FirstNet and
wireless providers nationwide to provide better broadband
service to the entire country. I think specifically we believe
that the majority of this network will be initially deployed on
existing infrastructure, but there will be a need to fill in
some holes which could mean some additional sites that have to
be made. So it is a mixture, but a lot of it will be leveraging
existing infrastructure where it already takes place with only
building when there is no existing infrastructure that can
serve that need.
Mr. Johnson. OK. So do you believe that streamlining access
to rights of way could facilitate the deployment of the network
especially in rural areas either directly or indirectly? Do you
think that will help?
Mr. Kennedy. Yes, I do.
Mr. Johnson. OK, great. Great. Also, Mr. Kennedy, FirstNet
has established 16 key objectives which the offerers must meet
in its RFP. Among the set of 16 what are some of the most
important objectives FirstNet will be considering when
reviewing the submitted proposals, and can you give us any idea
as to how the winning bidder will be decided? In other words,
pull back the cover and give us the secret formula.
Mr. Kennedy. As you know, with all open and competitive
procurements there are rules and regulations in the evaluation
thereof. And so from that I think it is really important that
every offerer look at all 16 objectives.
As you have mentioned, there are some objectives that we
have talked a lot about here today, cybersecurity, looking at
the public safety grade, looking at coverage, all those kinds
of things that are so obvious, looking at applications and
devices, but they are all important. We really want to see how
each and every offerer can provide the best solution
competitively across that entire gamut of the 16 objectives.
Mr. Johnson. Yes.
Mr. Kennedy. One of the things that we think we have done
very well is those same 16 objectives have remained the same
since April of 2015, and have remained virtually unchanged
since September of 2014 when we put out the first 15
objectives. And it has given industry a lot of time to ask
questions. It has given public safety and states a lot of time
to discuss are those the right objectives and will they help
meet the network that they really want to see?
So we believe that we have the right 16 objectives. We
believe that industry understands what those objectives really
mean. And at the same point we are not telling them how to
respond individually. We are telling them to do the best that
they can to meet those objectives in a cost effective and
sustainable way.
Mr. Johnson. Have you communicated to the offerers any idea
of the weighting? I mean, are any of the objectives weighted
more than others? For example, accelerated speed to market
versus financial stability, or device ecosystem versus life
cycle innovation? Have you got any weights in there and do they
know what they are?
Mr. Kennedy. Yes. There is a specific writeup in Section M
of the RFP under the evaluation factors, and we really drive
any offerer to read that very carefully. It is specifically
written and approved by our contracting officer which tells
which elements are more important than other elements.
Mr. Johnson. OK. All right, based on the input that you
have received from all of the various stakeholders, have any of
the objectives emerged as the main target? Is there one
objective that you are focused on more than any of the others?
You have probably pretty much answered that. They are all 16
pretty important.
Mr. Kennedy. All 16 are very, very important to public
safety.
Mr. Johnson. OK. All right. Well, thank you. And with that
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. The gentleman yields back, and the
chair now recognizes the gentleman from New York for 5 minutes.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I find this
interesting, a couple things, and I am going to look for a
little input here only because it seems like the train has
already left the station here.
But I was the county executive of Erie County back from
2008 through 2011. The first thing I found when I came to
office in New York State, in my county, Erie County, the
largest upstate county, we had 22 PSAPs, 22 PSAPs in one
county. Pretty much all our first responders are volunteer fire
and the like. They were on using radio's low band. We pretty
much had standardized on 400 megahertz.
And the first thing I walked into was SWN, the state
wireless network in New York. What a debacle. I was the one
that killed it, because they were going to move everyone from
400 to 800 megahertz. And I met with all the first responders
and they said we don't have any money. Hey, we are still on low
band. We are hanging our radios out the door as we are driving
up and down hills. And we had moved to 400. They said, hey,
show me the dollars. Where are the dollars to go from 400 to
800 if it would even work?
They weren't there so I pulled our county out, the largest
upstate county in New York, and a month later SWN was dead in
New York, because if Erie County at the far western part
wouldn't participate it wasn't going to go. And I felt very
good about that.
So now here we are. It is 5, 6, 7 years later talking about
FirstNet, and I can't disagree with the thought process. But I
would say again, maybe thank God we pulled out of the 800
megahertz they gave in New York because that would be obsolete.
And, but the billions, and I do use that, weren't there.
Because again, New York, especially who are all volunteer fire
people, 22 PSAPs in one county. That is the way New York is. In
fact, the crazy thing is the land lines go to the PSAPs and the
cell phones go to a centralized one. It is insanity but that is
what it is.
So I guess I just kind of ask the question. Dollars and
cents matter a lot. Property taxes in New York actually pay for
the volunteer fire companies. We have a tax cap because we are
the highest taxed and most regulated, least business-friendly
state in the nation and we keep losing people, and we are now
the fourth largest state, no longer the first, second, or
third.
Tell me about the dollars and cents. If I am bidding on
this I don't know that I am going to have any customers in New
York because no one has got any money. The state doesn't have
any money. The counties don't have any money, so is that a
concern? Is it a worry? Are we just charging down the road? But
talk to me a little bit about if I am a bidder aren't I worried
about am I going to have any customers?
Mr. Kennedy. So I will answer that and then I will defer
the PSAP question to David to follow up on that. Specifically,
I do believe based upon our consultation across 55 states and
territories over the past year that volunteer fire and
volunteer emergency medical services are eager to leverage the
FirstNet network. A couple of things in the model that we have
laid forward is there is not capital expenditure. There is not
the hundreds of millions of dollars to lay out for
infrastructure in an opt-in scenario where that is being
provided. The network would be provided.
They would make an individual decision by each agency, and
even by a volunteer firefighter as an individual, if they would
like to buy that particular cellular service at a competitive
rate that would allow them and enable them to have inoperable
voice, video and data communications across their own fire
department and also with neighboring and other agencies, both
police, fire and EMS, and even across state lines. And having
that interoperability is something that we have heard even from
volunteers is a critical issue in having the ability to be able
to communicate with others.
One of the things when we go out to rural parts of the
country we often ask: how many of you carry a cell phone today,
either personal or for work? How many of you would leverage a
FirstNet device if you had the ability to leverage that either
paid for by your agency or not? And we have received a very
favorable response.
We also believe that the lower cost commercial like devices
or hardened commercial devices that have the right case or
other things around them will provide some very cost effective
opportunities for volunteer firefighters and others to leverage
in addition to the radio systems that they already have. We
know that there has been a lot of investment in maintaining
systems. We are a true believer that you should maintain your
land mobile radio systems. They are key components of the
public safety ecosystem. But at the same point we think this
brings a different and new opportunity.
And with time running out, I want to turn it over to David
on the PSAP part of the question.
Mr. Furth. Well, I was struck by what you said about 22
PSAPs in the county, and that is something that we see around
the country. There are many different arrangements in terms of
how PSAPs are structured from state to state and county to
county, and that is a state and a county decision.
What we are trying to do as we all face the challenge of
moving to Next Generation 911 is to provide a set of tools and
options for Erie County and for every other state and county in
the country for how to configure those PSAPs with Next
Generation technology and with protection for cybersecurity. It
makes no sense to try to individually defend each of those 22
PSAPs.
Mr. Collins. You can't defend them. You can't.
Mr. Furth. Not only can you not afford it, even if you
could, it wouldn't be the most effective way to do it. So in
fact, the recommendations that our task force has come up----
Mr. Collins. My time has run out, but just remember there
are people who work in each of those 22 PSAPs. Hence, you
understand the pressure of not eliminating those 22 PSAPs which
I tried to do as county executive.
I am going to watch this with a lot of interest. I thank
you for your testimony, and you have also given me a reason to
sit down with my first responders in Erie County and get some
input from them, which I have not done prior to today's
hearing. So thank you for bringing this up. I yield back.
Mr. Latta. The gentleman's time has expired, and the chair
now recognizes for five minutes the gentleman from Missouri.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Kennedy, when
explaining the payment of funds by FirstNet, or to FirstNet by
the contractor, you state the minimum payments reflected in the
request for proposal may be higher if driven by competition, or
if the partner wants FirstNet to take on more responsibility
for key functions. Could you explain that statement? And does
that mean that after the contract is awarded the contractor
could change the terms of its performance, do less by paying
FirstNet more?
Mr. Kennedy. That particular element is geared to make sure
that competition could drive payments that are above the
minimum, first of all, all by itself. Number two, we have laid
out in the objectives what are the roles of FirstNet and what
are the roles of the proposers that are offering the service.
If as part of that they would like to make assumptions that
FirstNet take on additional roles, they should calculate into
the fact that their payment would need to be higher to cover
the cost of that role. So at the end of the day it is
sustainability of the overall network. There is not additional
funding mechanisms from Congress that would pay for that in a
change-order process, and there is also not a way to shift
those responsibilities from the contractor to FirstNet without
taking that into account when they look at their overall
economic offering.
Mr. Long. So that has all been done up front before the
contract is awarded.
Mr. Kennedy. Correct.
Mr. Long. They can't change later.
Mr. Kennedy. No, the goal is to have that all as part of
that process before award.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. How did FirstNet arrive at the 15 percent
target for partnerships with rural telecommunications
companies, and does the 15 percent refer to geographic or
population coverage?
Mr. Kennedy. Sure. There are actually two elements with the
coverage versus the 15 percent of rural infrastructure
providers. So I will go through currently in the RFP at IOC2
there would be 20 percent of rural coverage, IOC3 60 percent,
IOC4 80 percent, IOC5 95 percent. That particular percentage is
of the rural build-out milestones. So it is not necessarily
just geographic, it is what milestones will actually be in that
state plan to be very state specific to each part of that.
The other element is we added, based upon consultation and
the responses we received to the draft RFP, an additional
requirement. There was no requirement in the draft RFP for a
minimum percentage to be from rural telecom or rural
infrastructure as part of that build-out. We added a 15 percent
minimum, to your 15 percent question, to ensure that----
Mr. Long. Fifteen percent of what though? I am still a
little confused on what----
Mr. Kennedy. Yes. The 15 percent is that they are
leveraging rural infrastructure for that rural build-out
versus, for instance, other infrastructure or commercially
available infrastructure. They are leveraging that from rural
telecoms or rural infrastructure providers.
Mr. Long. OK. And I understand FirstNet's excess capacity
is a key to the financial sustainability of the network. How
does FirstNet plan to ensure that the winning bidder only gains
access to the spectrum at a competitive rate? FirstNet
shouldn't accept a lowball offering for its spectrum under any
circumstances even if the proposals of other elements are
strong, I wouldn't think. In other words, for the sake of
FirstNet's financial stability and solvency, how do you plan to
ensure that FirstNet fully monetizes its spectrum?
Mr. Kennedy. The absolute best way is through competition.
And in part of having that objectives based procurement is we
expect to have more competition than if it was overly specific.
One of the other things is that we think by driving industry to
be able to leverage how they would best deploy and leverage
partners and bring together the best assets to deploy this
overall network that they will have the most synergy to give
public safety more of what they deserve in a broader network
that will really give public safety the best deal.
We believe that competition is absolutely critical to make
that happen, and we also believe that going down a best value
approach just looking at what is being provided as the network
in addition to the financial side of the equation.
Mr. Long. So how do you plan to ensure that the winning
bidder only gains access to the spectrum at a competitive rate,
coming back to my original question.
Mr. Kennedy. So part of that is really trying to drive that
we have multiple bidders, and we believe that the approach that
we have taken should drive multiple bidders that will come to
the table to compete with each other.
Mr. Long. OK. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. The gentleman yields back, and the
chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate it
very much. And I want to thank both Mr. Kennedy and Mr. Furth
for their testimony.
As a former chairman of the Emergency Preparedness,
Response, and Communications Subcommittee under Homeland
Security, this issue I follow very closely. I have reached out
to our friends at Florida Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles, or
the state point of contact for FirstNet, termed FloridaNet, in
our state. They are excited with the current direction of the
working relationship between the state and the federal
entities.
Mr. Kennedy, first question. It seems that with the
deployment of FirstNet and the ever-growing dependency of
public safety on wireless broadband, the need for interference
protection and remediation will increase in importance.
Chairman Wheeler recently reduced the size of the FCC's
Enforcement Bureau's field presence, the function of the FCC
that handles interference to public safety communications. Did
the FCC or its consultants approach FirstNet to discuss the
threat, if any, of downsized FCC field operations to FirstNet's
operation today as well as going forward as the network
expands? Again, for Mr. Kennedy.
Mr. Kennedy. We have not had recent discussions that I am
aware of about specific changes in the size of the workforce
that is focused on that. I will be more than happy to have--I
don't know if David has any follow-up.
Mr. Furth. I am not aware of whether there were contacts
with FirstNet. I can certainly find out. We can check with the
Enforcement Bureau.
Mr. Bilirakis. Please do so, yes. We would like to see if
there were any notes or many meetings, what have you, with
regard to that. I think it is so very important.
Mr. Kennedy, how would you ensure that the spectrum is used
primarily for public safety and not at the expense of public
safety? Again, please clear this up, again the unique RFP.
Clear that up for me. Are there safeguards or mechanisms in
place to guide the use of the spectrum? How can we ensure that
the spectrum we have set aside is used to its fullest
capability, of course, knowing that this 25-year relationship
will evolve over time with technology and advancements?
Mr. Kennedy. We believe the incentives are aligned both for
public safety and the offerer to build a network that is very
robust in both coverage and in capacity. We believe that these
networks are not static, that they will continue to add
capacity over time. It is something we are seeing very common
today with networks, is they want to leverage that very
valuable spectrum as much as possible to continue to add
capacity, sometimes in rural areas, certainly in highly
populated areas. So we believe that the capacity needs for
public safety will be met.
We do believe that having the ability to have priority and
preemption across the entire network is one way to ensure
during not just every day operations, but during major
disasters like we discussed earlier in the hearing that those
things will certainly be able to be addressed in those big
emergencies due to that capacity to have priority and
preemption across the entire spectrum of the network.
Mr. Bilirakis. Very good. Very good. Third question for Mr.
Kennedy. As you know, Florida is a large, flat state with major
ports and unique public safety challenges. Can you describe how
my rural constituents will benefit to the same extent as my
constituents that live in the Tampa Bay area, metropolitan
areas, from this public safety broadband network?
Mr. Kennedy. I think rural constituents in public safety
will benefit from that enhanced coverage in having the
capability to have coverage where they need it and where they
respond on a regular basis. One of the things we very much
focused on during our data collection process and during our
state consultation efforts is trying to make sure we understand
where 911 responses are, where the calls are coming in from,
where the public safety stations are and how they respond to
those calls.
So if we are looking at everywhere from where public safety
sits before a call, where they respond on highways, freeways,
county roads and other locations and also where the incidents
are, every state responded to that differently based upon
different data that they could present and put forward.
But we have actually placed all of that data into a reading
room that you can access through the FirstNet Web site to make
sure that all potential offerers understand the needs of rural
constituents and understand where those calls are so that they
have the ability to really plan for those needs. We also
believe that having a very competitive option to be able to
provide service and have that known capability for priority and
preemption will ensure that public safety will want to leverage
this in rural areas as well. But that additional coverage is
really a huge part of that in having the public safety
application ecosystem.
Many rural departments are very small. If we go to very
large departments that have 30- or 40,000 members, they
certainly have access to unique public safety applications and
tools and wireless tools today. But one of the great things
about having a nationwide ecosystem is those same tools can be
made available to very small rural departments and allowing
them to leverage that application innovation that is occurring.
Mr. Bilirakis. Very good. Sir, do you have anything else to
add? Mr. Furth?
Mr. Furth. No, thank you.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK, very good. Thank you very much. I yield
back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. And seeing
no other members to ask questions, I would just like to say on
behalf of the chairman of the subcommittee the gentleman from
Oregon, and the ranking member the gentlelady from California,
and myself, we appreciate your testimony today and for the
answers you provided the subcommittee. And if there is no other
business to come before the subcommittee today, we will stand
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:07 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
