- OVERSIGHT OF THE CONSUMER PRODUCT SAFETY COMMISSION

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF THE CONSUMER PRODUCT SAFETY COMMISSION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, MANUFACTURING, AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 19, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-45

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

22-286 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

_____

Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade

MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
Chairman
JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey              Ranking Member
Vice Chairman                      YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi                Massachusetts
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              TONY CARDENAS, California
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             PETER WELCH, Vermont
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana                 officio)
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Janice D. Schakowsky, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Illinois, opening statement...........................     4
Hon. Marsha Blackburn, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Tennessee, opening statement..........................     5
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, prepared statement........................     7
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................    98

Witnesses

Elliot F. Kaye, Chairman, Consumer Product Safety Commission.....     8
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Answers to submitted questions \1\...........................   128
Ann Marie Buerkle, Commissioner, Consumer Product Safety
Commission.....................................................    17
Prepared statement...........................................    19
Robert S. Adler, Commissioner, Consumer Product Safety Commission    24
Prepared statement...........................................    26
Joseph P. Mohorovic, Commissioner, Consumer Product Safety
Commission.....................................................    31
Prepared statement...........................................    32
Answers to submitted questions...............................   129
Ronald Warfield, Chief Executive Officer, ATV/ROV/UTV Safety
Consulting.....................................................    56
Prepared statement...........................................    58
Heidi Crow-Michael, Winnsboro, Texas.............................    61
Prepared statement...........................................    63
Cheryl A. Falvey, Co-Chair, Advertising and Product Risk
Management Group, Crowell & Moring, LLP........................    78
Prepared statement...........................................    80
Erik Pritchard, Executive Vice President and General Counsel,
Recreational Off-Highway Vehicle Association...................    85
Prepared statement...........................................    87

Submitted Material

H.R. 999, the ROV In-Depth Examination Act, submitted by Mr.
Burgess........................................................    99
Statement of Marietta S. Robinson, Commissioner, Consumer Product
Safety Commission, May 19, 2015, submitted by Mr. Burgess......   104
Letter of February 25, 2015, from Mr. Olson to Elliot Kaye,
Chairman, Consumer Product Safety Commission, submitted by Mr.
Olson..........................................................   121
Letter of March 30, 2015, from Elliot Kaye, Chairman, Consumer
Product Safety Commission, to Mr. Olson, submitted by Mr. Olson   123

----------
\1\ Mr. Kaye's answers to submitted questions have been retained in
committee files and also are available at  http://docs.house.gov/
meetings/IF/IF17/20150519/103481/HHRG-114-IF17-Wstate-KayeE-20150519-
SD005.pdf.

OVERSIGHT OF THE CONSUMER PRODUCT SAFETY COMMISSION

----------

TUESDAY, MAY 19, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:20 a.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Michael C.
Burgess (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Burgess, Lance, Blackburn,
Harper, Guthrie, Olson, Pompeo, Kinzinger, Bilirakis, Brooks,
Mullin, Schakowsky, Clarke, Kennedy, Butterfield, Welch, and
Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Leighton Brown, Press Assistant; James
Decker, Policy Coordinator, Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade;
Graham Dufault, Counsel, Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade;
Melissa Froelich, Counsel, Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade;
Kirby Howard, Legislative Clerk; Paul Nagle, Chief Counsel,
Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade; Olivia Trusty, Professional
Staff Member, Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade; Michelle Ash,
Democratic Chief Counsel, Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade;
Christine Brennan, Democratic Press Secretary; Jeff Carroll,
Democratic Staff Director; Elisa Goldman, Democratic Counsel;
Tiffany Guarascio, Democratic Deputy Staff Director and Chief
Health Advisor; Brendan Hennessey, Democratic Policy and
Research Advisor; and Adam Lowenstein, Democratic Policy
Analyst.
Mr. Burgess. Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and
Trade will now come to order. The Chair will recognize himself
5 minutes for the purpose of an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

The Consumer Product Safety Commission was established in
1972 by Congress to protect consumers against unreasonable
risks of injuries associated with consumer products. This
statutory mission is a serious responsibility for the
Commission, and it is critically important that Congress
conduct oversight to ensure that public confidence in the
Commission's adherence to its responsibilities and stewardship
of the taxpayer's dollar. I would like to thank Chairman Kaye
and Commissioners Adler, Buerkle, and Mohorovic for their
testimony today.
We will also hear from a second panel of witnesses about
Representative Pompeo's bipartisan legislation, H.R. 999, the
ROV In-Depth Examination Act, and the open ROV rulemaking that
has garnered substantial bipartisan concern from members on
both sides of the dais, and both sides of the Capital. Consumer
safety is a top priority for this subcommittee, and at a time
where difficult budget decisions are being made across the
Government, it is critical that all agencies are held
accountable for their prioritization decisions, particular
concern about the role of sound scientific principles at the
Commission, the interaction between the Commission and its
regulated industries, the rulemaking agenda, and the execution
of Congressional mandates for third part test burden reduction,
and the Commission's continued request for new authority to
impose user fees. There is a fundamental Constitutional issue
with moving the power of the purse from Congress to a
regulatory agency with no experience in disbursing fees.
A wide range of open agenda items at the Commission require
significant scientific evaluation and testing, from thiolates,
to nanotechnology, to window coverings, and recreational off-
highway vehicles. Consumer confidence is rooted in the belief
that the Commission has the capacity to base its decision on
supportable scientific findings. It is dangerous and short
sighted for a safety agency to move away from science and
scientific principles, as may have happened with the Chronic
Hazard Advisory Panel report regarding thiolates, where even
the Office of Management of the Budget guidelines for peer
review were ignored.
The Commission's authorizing statute is based around the
presumption that voluntary industry standards and cooperative
relationships with the regulated industry are the preferred
method of regulation for product safety. Safety is a strong
incentive for both parties. There are a number of open
rulemakings that fundamentally change the relationship between
the Commission and the regulated industry. In an area where it
is said that 90 percent of the threats to consumer safety are
created by 10 percent of the participants, it seems
counterintuitive to put additional barriers between the
Commission and the regulated industry when the common ground is
consumer safety.
This is especially so where resources are always going to
dictate the Commission will need help from industry in
identifying problems. One open rulemaking fundamentally changes
the fast track voluntary recall process, an award winning
program established 20 years ago to address long recall
processes, which has produced tremendous results. Under this
program last year, 100 percent of fast track recalls were
initiated within 20 days. The positive impact for consumers is
real when potentially dangerous products can be taken off the
shelves in days, instead of weeks or months.
Finally, there has been a bipartisan--there has been
bipartisan support to reduce third party testing burdens for
small businesses around the United States. In 2011 Congress
passed H.R. 2715, with explicit instructions to the Commission
to evaluate the testing burden relief in good faith, but the
Commission has struggled to carry out the statutory
requirement, even with additional funding. Three and a half
years later, small businesses are reporting they still have not
seen any real burden reductions, and are facing seemingly
endless comment rounds, but no real solutions.
We are here to make certain that we are doing what we can
to prevent tragic and unfortunate injuries from consumer
products. However, additional funds for the Commission are
difficult to justify when there are so many questions about the
scientific methodology used by the Commission to support its
regulatory agenda, and how the Administrative Procedure Act
solicited comments are incorporated through the rulemaking
process, and how the Commission operates without bipartisan
support from any initiative.
The Consumer Products Safety Commission's mission must
remain a touchstone for its important work, and not a launching
pad for an active estate driven by headlines, rather than
science and economics. Such an approach compromises the trust
in an agency that has successfully removed thousands of unsafe
consumer products from the economy, from product--from consumer
shelves, as well as the voluntary safety standards that build
safety into the products on the front end.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Burgess follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Michael C. Burgess

The Consumer Product Safety Commission was established in
1972 by Congress to protect consumers against unreasonable
risks of injuries associated with consumer products. This
statutory mission is a serious responsibility for the
Commission, and it is critically important for Congress to
conduct oversight to ensure public confidence in the
Commission's adherence to its responsibilities and stewardship
of taxpayer dollars.
I would like to thank Chairman Kaye and Commissioners
Adler, Buerkle, and Mohorovic for testifying today. We will
also hear from a second panel of witnesses about Representative
Pompeo's bipartisan legislation, H.R. 999, the ROV In-Depth
Examination Act and the open ROV rulemaking that has garnered
substantial bipartisan concern from Members on both sides of
the Hill.
Consumer safety is a top priority for this subcommittee and
at a time where difficult budgeting decisions are being made
across the Government, it is critical that all agencies are
held accountable for their prioritization decisions. I am
particularly concerned about the role of sound scientific
principles at the Commission, the interaction between the
Commission and regulated industries, the rulemaking agenda, the
execution of Congressional mandates for third-party test burden
reduction, and the Commission's continued request for new
authority to impose user fees. There is a fundamental
constitutional issue with moving the power of the purse from
Congress to a regulatory agency with no experience with user
fees.
A wide range of open agenda items at the Commission require
scientific evaluation and testing, from phthalates and
nanotechnology to window coverings and recreational off-highway
vehicles. Consumer confidence is rooted in the belief that the
Commission has the capacity to base its decisions on
supportable scientific findings. It is dangerous and short
sighted for a safety agency to move away from sound science and
scientific principles as I believe has happened with the CHAP
Report regarding phthalates where even OMB guidelines for peer
review were ignored.
The Commission's authorizing statute is based around the
presumption that voluntary industry standards, and cooperative
relationships with the regulated industry, are the preferred
method of regulation for product safety. Safety is a strong
incentive for both parties. There are a number of open
rulemakings that fundamentally change the relationship between
the Commission and the regulated industry. In an area where
it's said that 90 percent of the threats to consumer safety are
created by 10 percent of the players-it seems counterintuitive
to put additional barriers between the Commission and the
regulated industry when the common goal is consumer safety.
This is especially so where resources are always going to
dictate that the Commission will need help from industry in
identifying problems.
One open rulemaking fundamentally changes the Fast Track
voluntary recall process, an award-winning program established
20 years ago to address long recall processes, which has
produced tremendous results. Under this program last year, 100
percent of fast track recalls were initiated within 20 days.
The positive impact for consumers is real when potentially
dangerous product can be taken off the shelf in days instead of
months.
Finally, there has been bipartisan support to reduce third
party testing burdens for small businesses around the U.S. In
2011, Congress passed H.R. 2715 with explicit instructions for
the Commission to evaluate testing burden relief in good faith.
But the Commission has struggled to carry out this statutory
requirement even with additional funding. Three and a half
years later, small businesses are reporting they still have not
seen any real burden reductions and are facing seemingly
endless comment rounds but no real solutions.
We are all here to make sure we are doing what we can to
prevent tragic and unfortunate injuries from consumer products.
However, additional funds for the Commission are difficult to
justify when there are so many questions about the scientific
methodology used by the Commission to support its regulatory
agenda, how Administrative Procedure Act solicited comments are
incorporated through the rulemaking process, and how the
Commission operates without bipartisan support for many major
initiatives.
The CPSC's mission must remain a touchstone for its
important work and not a launching-off point for an activist
State driven by headlines rather than science and economics.
Such an approach compromises the trust in an agency that has
successfully removed thousands of unsafe consumer products from
the economy as well as the voluntary safety standards process
that builds safety into products on the front end.

Mr. Burgess. The Chair will recognize the ranking member of
the subcommittee, Ms. Schakowsky, for the purposes of an
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
important hearing about Consumer Product Safety Commission. The
Commission, and its mission of protecting consumers from unsafe
products, is very near and dear to my heart. I began work as a
consumer advocate many moons ago, as a young mother working to
get freshness dates on food. So when you go and look at the
date on food, moi. And I know how important it is that
consumers have access to health and safety information about
the products that they purchase and use, and that they are
protected against harmful products.
In 2008 the landmark Consumer Product Safety Improvement
Act was signed into law by President Bush. The bill was the
product of broad bipartisan negotiation, and it marked the most
significant reform of the CPSC and its responsibilities in
decades. I also want to thank some of the advocates that are
here in this room, and appreciate their work. The bill passed
the committee 51 to 0, and the House by a vote of 424 to one. I
was--it was slightly amended, again, on a bipartisan basis, in
2011, and the legislation gave the CPSC additional authority
and resources so it could become the consumer watchdog that
Americans deserve, and, frankly, expect.
I am proud to have authored several provisions to the bill,
including a provision requiring mandatory standards and testing
for infant and toddler products, such as cribs and high chairs.
I also successfully added to the reform bill a requirement for
postage-paid recall registration cards to be attached to
products so that customers can be quickly notified their
products are dangers.
The CPSC has been incredibly successful in its efforts to
improve consumer protection over the last few years. There was
a 34 percent reduction in children's product recalls, just from
2013 to 2014. The 75 children's product recalls in 2014 was the
lowest number in more than a decade. Thank you very much. We
have seen enhanced proactive outreach to provide consumers with
information about the dangers and best practices associated
with everything from window blinds, to electric generators, to
lawnmowers. And we have seen rulemaking to reduce the
likelihood of preventable tragedies. I applaud the Commission
on its important work. While I am disappointed that we move
forward with this hearing on a day that Commissioner Robinson
was unable to appear, I look forward to hearing the
perspectives of the other Commissioners about the CPSC's work,
and its next steps.
The second panel today will provide analysis of H.R. 999,
the Ride Act. I am strongly opposed to this bill, which would
suspend CPSC's statutory authority to complete a rulemaking
affecting recreational off-highway vehicles, or ROVs, until
after a study is completed at the National Academy of Science.
It is not clear to me why this study is needed. After all, the
CPSC has gone through its regular rulemaking process on this
issue, taking into account the input of technical experts, the
private sector, and the public.
I am also not sure why the National Academy of Sciences
would analyze the feasibility of, among other things, providing
consumers with safety information at the point of sale. While
the NAS has a highly skilled staff, market and consumer
analysis is not its strong suit. It also makes no sense that
NAS would be required to consider the impact of a rulemaking on
ROVs used in the military. The CPSC is responsible for consumer
products, not military vehicles. The proposed rule is
irrelevant to military ROVs. I believe this legislation is a
delay tactic, pure and simple. It would delay the
implementation of the CPSC's commonsense, consumer-focused rule
to reduce ROV rollovers, enhance safety, and increase consumer
information.
It is not as if this rulemaking is moving too fast. The
risk of ROV death is not a new one, and the public comment
period for the ROV rulemaking is currently open. There is
nothing preventing the supporters of this legislation from
making their concerns, and their suggestions, known. That is
the way the process is supposed to work. What we cannot do is
usher in a long delay for the sake of delay. The 335 ROV
related deaths, and 506 injuries, from 2003 to 2013, I think it
is time to act to enhance ROV safeguards, not tie the hands of
the CPSC.
Again, I look forward to hearing from our witnesses, thank
them for coming today, and I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. Chair thanks the gentlelady. Gentlelady yields
back. The Chair recognizes the vice chair of the full
committee, Ms. Blackburn, 5 minutes for an opening statement,
please.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to say
thank you to our witnesses. We appreciate that you are here.
You know, 2008 was really the year of the recall, and since
that point in time we have been very interested in the work
that you are doing, and have looked at your deliverables, and
your outcomes.
Now, one of the things that is of tremendous concern to
us--and I have got to tell you, I heard a lot about this during
small business week, which was just a couple of weeks ago. And
I was out and about in my district, visiting with small
businesses, visiting with some retailers, and there are a lot
of complaints that are coming about the way you all are going
about your task, and some of the unnecessary burdens that are
being put on retailers, and on businesses, and changes in
reporting requirements. And I have got to tell you, I think
there is a lot of unhappiness with the American public in how
you are doing your job. I would say too there is probably some
confusion as to what your mission statement is, and you are
meeting that.
Now, I think it is fair to say that, as we look at the cost
to business, and the cost to consumers, and a cost-benefit
analysis, what we want to do is drill down with you a little
bit. We share the same goal, being certain that the supply
chain is safe, that products are safe when consumers get those
products. There are different ways to go about this, and we
want to make certain that there is an accountability issue, a
transparency issue, and a fairness issue, or standards, that
are being met. So we will have questions, and will move forward
with those--so want to take a moment and welcome our former
colleague. Commissioner Buerkle, it is wonderful to see you
back in these halls, and it is wonderful to see you back in a
hearing room, and we appreciate the work that you are doing.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I am going to yield the balance of
my time to Mr. Pompeo for a statement.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you, Madam Vice Chairman. Look, we have
a--thank you all for being here, Chairman Kaye, and your
colleagues, for coming today. We have this obligation, just as
you do, to make sure that the CPSC statutes are implemented in
a way that is both legal, and appropriate, and useful, and gets
the economics and the safety balance just right. I think with
respect to the ROV rules that you all have put forward, there
is a lot of work that could be done. I think industry is
prepared to try and get to a really good outcome that is a
better place than the rulemaking that is proceeding will end
up.
I was out last week too. I was actually on an ROV vehicle,
out in Kansas in the woods. Wore my helmet, did all the things
right, and I am here today to tell about it, which is good. I
hope we can get this right, and the legislation that I have
proposed isn't aimed at delaying. It is aimed at getting to a
good outcome. It may cause a little more time, and a little
more thoughtfulness, and a little more work to be done, but I
hope we can get that right, that we can get the best science,
and the best engineering associated with getting these rules in
the right place, and get a voluntary standard put that industry
can do the right thing, and get these vehicles in a safe place,
to the right people. And I hope--and look forward to working
with you to see if we can't achieve that. With that, I will
yield back my time.
Mrs. Blackburn. I thank the gentleman, and does any other
member seek the balance of my time? None so doing, I yield
back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Burgess. Chair thanks the gentlelady. Gentlelady yields
back. Chair recognizes Democratic side for an opening
statement.
Ms. Schakowsky. Mr. Chairman, if I could just submit for
the record Mr. Pallone's opening statement?
Mr. Burgess. Without objection, so ordered.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Thank you, Chairman Burgess, and welcome to the
Commissioners.
While I know this is a rescheduled hearing, and we face
time constraints, I want to start by saying that I am sorry
that Commissioner Robinson is unable to be here due to prior
commitments. This is particularly true today, as she has raised
concerns about the length of time it takes to get a mandatory
standard passed when the voluntary standard is inadequate. Her
views would have been of value to the subject of today's second
panel, since the potential delay of a proposed rule for
strengthening the safety of Recreational Off-Highway Vehicles
(ROVs) is being discussed.
The first part of today's hearing examines the ongoing work
of a relatively small, yet essential Federal agency--the
Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC).
After years of CPSC being ineffective and reactive, members
of Congress worked together and produced landmark bipartisan
legislation, the Consumer Product Safety Improvement Act of
2008 (CPSIA). In 2011, Congress again passed bipartisan
legislation, giving CPSC additional flexibilities in
implementing CPSIA (C*P*S*I*A). As a result, CPSC is now both
an effective and proactive agency.
Passage of CPSIA was a tremendous victory for consumers and
improved the safety of products sold in the United States.
CPSIA's successes include getting lead and toxic phthalates out
of children's products and toys, strong safety standards for
infant and toddler products such as cribs and high chairs and a
publicly accessible database of reported unsafe products.
As the Product Safety Commission finishes implementing
stronger safety standards for products such as cribs, walkers,
bath seats, toddler beds, and infant swings, we see the number
of dangerous products on the market falling, the number of
recalls falling, and the number of injuries falling.
The Product Safety Commission now is moving beyond CPSIA
implementation, and there is still a lot of hard work ahead.
The Commission has worked aggressively to engage industry in
the process of setting voluntary safety standards. And while
that is essential, sometimes voluntary standards are not
enough.
That is why I am pleased it has begun the rulemaking
process to protect children from the preventable strangulation
hazard posed by cords in window blinds. In addition, the
Product Safety Commission should ensure that any new Federal
requirements regarding upholstered furniture flammability offer
real public safety benefits and do not require or drive the use
of harmful flame retardants.
Unfortunately, some of the efforts of the Commission to
protect consumers are being met with opposition by industry and
members of this committee. Today's second panel will focus on
legislation that would unnecessarily delay the implementation
of important safety standards for ROVs that would save lives.
ROVs can be very dangerous, especially when they are built
without key safety measures. These vehicles, which look like
something between a car and a go-cart, can rollover on top of
the driver or passengers, badly hurting or killing them. In
other cases, people have lost limbs when ejected from the
vehicle or when a foot or arm struck an object outside the
vehicle.
This is another case in which voluntary standards are
simply not providing adequate protection for consumers. CPSC
found that between 2003 and April of 2013, there were 335
reported deaths and 506 reported injuries related to ROV
accidents.
The reasonable standards being proposed by the Product
Safety Commission require manufacturers to build certain safety
measures into ROVs, including a minimum level of resistance for
preventing rollovers and minimum protection to keep occupants
inside the vehicle.
We are very fortunate to have Heidi Crow-Michael, who has
travelled all the way from Winnsboro, Texas, to join us today.
In 2007, Ms. Crow tragically lost her 9-year-old son, J.T., in
a ROV accident. I believe that her story is an important one
for everyone on this subcommittee to hear.
Ms. Crow-Michael has been advocating for the type of safety
standards included in the Commission rule, so that the same
tragedy does not befall another family. Unfortunately, the fact
is that preventable deaths continue to occur because important
safety features are not being built into ROVs.
The time to get this done is now-no more delays.
Thank you, and I yield back the balance of my time.

Mr. Burgess. That concludes member opening statements. The
Chair would like to remind members that, pursuant to committee
rules, opening statements will be made a part of the record.
We will now hear from our witnesses. I want to welcome all
of our witnesses, and thank you for taking time to testify
before the subcommittee. Today's hearing will consist of two
panels. Each panel of witnesses will have the opportunity to
give an opening statement, followed by a round of questions
from members. Once we conclude questions with the first panel,
we will take a brief--underscore brief--recess to set up for
the second panel.
Our first panel today, we have the following witnesses,
testifying on behalf of the Consumer Product Safety Commission.
Chairman Elliot F. Kaye, Chairman of the Consumer Product
Safety Commission, thank you for your attendance. Commissioner
Robert Adler, and we welcome you, sir, to the subcommittee.
Commissioner Ann Marie Buerkle, thank you for--it is good to
see you again. You give me confidence that there is an
afterlife. And Commissioner Joseph P. Mohorovic, thank you so
much for your attendance today. We are honored to have all of
you today. Chairman Kaye, you will begin the first panel, and
you are recognized for 5 minutes for the purposes of an opening
statement, please.

STATEMENTS OF ELLIOT F. KAYE, CHAIRMAN, CONSUMER PRODUCT SAFETY
COMMISSION; ANN MARIE BUERKLE, COMMISSIONER, CONSUMER PRODUCT
SAFETY COMMISSION; ROBERT S. ADLER, COMMISSIONER, CONSUMER
PRODUCT SAFETY COMMISSION; AND JOSEPH P. MOHOROVIC,
COMMISSIONER, CONSUMER PRODUCT SAFETY COMMISSION

STATEMENT OF ELLIOT F. KAYE

Mr. Kaye. Good morning, Chairman Dr. Burgess, Ranking
Member Schakowsky, and the members of the subcommittee. Thank
you for the invitation to come speak about the work of the
United States Consumer Product Safety Commission, and our
proposed budget for fiscal year 2016. I am pleased to be joined
by my friends and colleagues from the Commission, Commissioners
Adler, Buerkle, and Mohorovic, and I bring regrets from
Commissioner Robinson.
CPSC's vital health and safety mission touches us all in
some way every day. From the parents of the baby, who gently
moves his or her child throughout the day from crib, to baby
bouncer, to stroller, and back again to the crib, or the self-
employed millennial who, on a warm spring day, relies on a room
fan to stay cool, and an extension cord to power a computer, to
the baby boomer who purchased adult bed rails to help care for
an aging parent, the products in CPSC's jurisdiction are
inseparable from our lives.
We believe we provide an excellent return on investment for
the American people. We run a lean operation, and we cover
thousands of different kinds of consumer products, with a
budget in the millions, not the billions. We are very
appreciative of the continued bipartisan support for the
Commission and our work. We saw this support in the
overwhelming, nearly unanimous vote to pass the Consumer
Products Safety Improvement Act of 2008, and the near unanimous
passage of an update to CPSIA in 2011. Your support has allowed
our dedicated staff to drive standards development, to make
children's products safer, to increase our enforcement
effectiveness, and to better educate consumers about product
related hazards.
Our staff has also been hard at work trying to reduce costs
associated with third party testing, while also assuring
compliance with the law. Congress' inclusion of the $1 million
as part of our funding for the current fiscal year has enhanced
those efforts. I have emphasized priority--prioritizing those
actions most likely to provide the greatest amount of relief,
especially to small businesses. We are set to consider at least
three different regulatory changes to provide relief this
fiscal year, with more in the works.
While the burden reduction, assure compliance work
proceeds, our continuing efforts to carry out and enforce CPSIA
driven enhancements to consumer product safety are reflected in
our proposed budget. Unfortunately, not all of those priorities
and requirements are achievable at our current levels. For that
reason, we were pleased to see the President include in his
budget two important consumer product safety initiatives. Both
initiatives, if funded, will advance consumer safety and
provide real value to those in industry making or importing
safe products.
First, we are seeking a permanent funding mechanism to
allow the agency to comply with the Congressional charge in
Section 222 of the CPSIA. Section 222 called on the Commission
to work with Customs and Border Protection and develop a risk
assessment methodology to identify the consumer products likely
to violate any of the Acts we enforce out of all the consumer
products imported into the United States.
To meet our mandate, in 2011 we created a small scale pilot
that has been a success. However, a pilot alone does not
fulfill the direction of Congress, and without full
implementation, we will not be able to integrate CPSC into the
much larger U.S. Government-wide effort to create a single
window for import and export filing of all products. If CPSC
can be fully integrated into the single window, we can
transform Congress' vision of a national scope, risk based,
data driven screening at the ports into a reality, a reality
that would mean faster entry for importers of compliant
products, and safer products in the hands of American
consumers.
Our proposed budget also seeks to address critical emerging
and safety--emerging health and safety questions associated
with the rapidly growing use of nanomaterials in consumer
products. In light of the questions raised in the scientific
community about the effects inhalation of certain nanoparticles
might have on human lungs, concerns that center on identified
similarities to asbestos exposure, we are proposing to
significantly advance the state of the science as it relates to
human exposure, especially to children, from consumer products.
Finally, I would like to discuss an additional priority of
mine, one that is not reflected in dollars, but to me, at
least, makes a lot of sense. How we at the CPSC do what we do
is often just as important as what we do. Since day one in this
position, I have worked daily to try to establish a certain
culture among the five of us at the Commission level. The
Commission, and more importantly the American public, are far
better served by an agency where we operate at the Commission
level in a culture of civility, collaboration, and constructive
dialogue.
Thank you again for the invitation to speak to you about
the CPSC and the life-saving work undertaken by our staff. I
look forward to answering questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kaye follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. Chair thanks the gentleman. The gentleman
yields back. The Chair recognizes the gentlelady, Ms. Buerkle,
for her question--her statement, please.

STATEMENT OF ANN MARIE BUERKLE

Ms. Buerkle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning, Mr.
Chairman and Ranking Member Schakowsky, and distinguished
members of this committee. Thank you for holding today's
hearing with regard to the Consumer Product Safety Commission.
I had the honor of serving alongside many of the subcommittee
members in the 112th Congress, and I am delighted to be back
here on Capitol Hill in my capacity as a Commissioner at the
CPSC. And I do hope that today's hearing strengthens our
partnership to keep consumers safe from unreasonable risks of
injury.
I have been a Commissioner at the agency since July of
2013, and throughout this time what has continued to impress me
is the dedication of the CPSC staff. The mission of safety is
taken very seriously. The regulated community has also
impressed me, not only with their eagerness to understand and
comply with our regulations, but also with their
entrepreneurial drive to innovate and advance safety. I am
thankful too for the tone set by our Chairman, and joined by my
colleagues. We offer--we often differ significantly on policy
issues, but those differences are discussed in a mutually
respective manner.
As a Commissioner I have stressed three general priorities,
collaboration, education, and balance. Number one, it is
crucial to--that CPSC builds strong relationships with all
stakeholders. If the lines of communications are open, we can
tap the knowledge, insight, and expertise of many outside
experts. This is especially important in the case of the
regulated community. If we inspire cooperation, rather than
hostility, we will see quicker introduction of safer designs,
as well as timely removal of defective products, all to the
benefit of the consumer. That is why I am deeply troubled
regarding the discussion of high--higher civil penalties,
changes to important programs known as retailer reporting, and
the proposals known as voluntary recall in 6(b). Without
question, I believe these undermine engagement and
collaborative efforts.
Number two, education. It is crucial to our mission. We
need to make the regulated community aware of best practices
and be honest regarding what we are intending to achieve. More
importantly, we also need to engage the consumer, helping them
to avoid hidden hazards and take advantage of safer products
that are already available to them. A prime candidate for a
comprehensive educational campaign is the issue of window
coverings. Increased awareness and education will prevent many
unfortunate injuries and death.
And number three, while consumer safety is our top
priority, I believe that that safety can be achieved in a
balanced, reasonable way that does not unnecessarily burden the
regulated community, deprive consumers of products they prefer,
or insert Government into the market where it does not belong.
Our statutes express a strong preference for voluntary
standards rather than mandatory standards. Where mandatory
standards are unavoidable, the CPSA instructs us to find the
least burdensome solution that adequately addresses the risk.
Mandatory standards have unintended consequences. They tend
to stagnate, while the world of consumer products evolves
rapidly. It makes then--sense, therefore, to revisit our rules
periodically and make sure they are effective without stifling
innovation. I am pleased that the Commission voted unanimously
last week for a retrospective review of our rules, and I do
hope it will become a more regular activity of the Commission.
Regulation is a necessary function of the Government, and
the Consumer Products Safety Improvement Act strengthened our
authority. It is clear, however, the CPSIA went too far in some
respects, forcing regulation without regard to risk, let alone
cost. This subcommittee led the way in moderating some of the
untoward consequences of CPSIA through its work on H.R. 2715,
which passed into Public Law 112-28 while I was a member of the
House. Some objectives of that law remain unfulfilled. Last
year, the House included $1 million in our 2015 appropriations,
thanks to Representative Blackburn, to kick start our efforts
on test burden reduction. There is still much more we can do to
remove unnecessary regulatory burdens in this arena, and I do
look forward to working with this committee on those unresolved
CPSIA issues.
The common goal among all of us, Congress, CPSC, industry,
and consumers, is safety. We are all people who have families
for whom we want safe products. I have six children and 16
grandchildren. I do now want dangerous products hurting them,
or anyone, however, the United States Government cannot, and
should not, try to create a zero risk society. The solutions we
seek should be balanced, and address actual problems. Consumers
should be protected from unreasonable risks, while the
regulated community is protected from an arbitrary Government.
Thank you for this time today, and I do look forward to taking
any questions you might have. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Buerkle follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentlelady. The Chair
recognizes Commissioner Adler, 5 minutes, please, for an
opening statement, sir.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT S. ADLER

Mr. Adler. Good morning, Chairman Burgess, Ranking Member
Schakowsky, and the distinguished members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear along with my fellow
CPSC Commissioners today. I am pleased to be able to testify
about an agency that I have been associated with in some
fashion since its establishment 40 years ago. At the outset, I
would point out that we are far and away the smallest of the
Federal Health and Safety agencies, with a current funding
level of 123 million, and a staff of roughly 560 FTEs. I want
to put that in perspective. For fiscal year 2016, we have asked
for an appropriation of $129 million, which is an increase of
roughly $6 million. By way of comparison, our sister agency,
FDA, has asked for roughly $4.9 billion in fiscal year 2016,
which is an increase of roughly $148 million. Or, to put it
more succinctly, FDA has asked for an increase that is larger
than CPSC's entire budget.
Notwithstanding our modest budget, our jurisdictional scope
is extremely wide, encompassing roughly 15,000 categories of
consumer products found in homes, stores, school, and
recreational settings. Given this broad jurisdiction, the
agency has adopted a thoughtful, data-based approach, using its
highly skilled technical staff to figure out which products
present the greatest risk, and we address them using our
regulatory and educational tools in a way designed to minimize
market disruption, while always making consumer safety our top
priority. We don't operate alone. We have always sought to
include our various stakeholder partners in a quest to reduce
or eliminate unreasonable risks. Included in this group are our
friends in the business and the consumer communities, as well
as the various standards development bodies that work closely
with the agency.
And I want to note, looking from the perspective of 40
years, just how much good work has been done. There has been an
estimated 30 percent decline in the rate of deaths and injuries
associated with consumer products over this 40 years. And let
me just cite a few statistics, particularly pertaining to
children. Over this period of time we have seen an 83 percent
drop in childhood poisoning, a 73 percent drop in crib death,
an 86 percent reduction in baby walker injuries, and almost
complete elimination of childhood suffocation in refrigerators.
I would also like to mention the tremendous strides the
agency has taken to implement the Consumer Products Safety
Improvement Act, which has been noted was approved by the House
by a vote of 424-1, signed by President Bush on August 4--14,
2008. And among the things we have done to implement the law,
we have enforced stringent limits on lead and thiolates in
children's products. We have promulgated the strongest safety
standard for cribs in the world. We have made mandatory a
comprehensive voluntary toy standard. We have written, and
continue to write, a series of standards for durable infant
products, like play yards and strollers, and we have developed
new approaches to catching dangerous imported products, which
we hope to expand.
Since I last appeared before this committee, the Commission
has experienced a significant turnover in members. In fact, I
am the last one standing. Although I miss my former colleagues,
I am pleased to welcome as new colleagues Chairman Elliot Kaye
and Commissioners Robinson, Buerkle, and Mohorovic. Simply put,
they are a joy to work with. They have brought new perspectives
and insights that have freshened and sharpened my thinking on a
host of issues, and they have done so in a way that has brought
a new era of civility to the agency. We certainly disagree,
vigorously sometimes, on issues, but we listen to and we trust
one another in ways I have not seen at this agency in many,
many years.
A final point, Mr. Chairman, I would like to reiterate my
concern about a set of issues that surrounds a critical
demographic that I don't think has received enough attention of
the past number of years, and that is senior citizens, a group
of which I am a proud member. CPSC data show that the second
most vulnerable population after kids is adults over 65, and I
note this is a rapidly growing group doing to--due to the aging
of baby boomers, and the greater longevity of our citizens. An
interesting statistic, there are more of us in the over 65 age
group in this country than there are people in Canada.
But what is particularly troubling to me is that seniors,
while comprising only 13 percent of the population, account for
65 percent of our consumer product related deaths, and by 2020
they, we, will be 20 percent of the U.S. population. So, given
my concerns while I was acting Chair, I worked with staff to
create a senior safety initiative, which is ongoing, and which
I hope to have the Congress include, and hope to work with you.
Thank you for your time, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Adler follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. Gentleman yields back. Chair thanks the
gentleman. The Chair recognizes Commissioner Mohorovic, 5
minutes for your opening statement, please.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH P. MOHOROVIC

Mr. Mohorovic. Thank you, Chairman Burgess, Ranking Member
Schakowsky, members of the committee. I very much appreciate
the opportunity to be here today. I will keep my opening
remarks very, very brief and focus on only one element of
evolving CPSC policy, and that is our import surveillance. This
is one area that I think we can dramatically improve both our
efficiencies and--as well as our effectiveness.
And while we are developing our strategies to better target
illegitimate inbound consumer products, I believe CPSC can and
should do more to facilitate legitimate trade through public/
private partnerships with those importers voluntarily willing,
identified, and carried down the stream of commerce without
disruption. This concept, a trusted trader program and model,
moves beyond incremental increases in targeting to more
evolved, account-based understanding of importers' demonstrated
commitment to making safe products.
But to earn CPSC's trust, traders would undergo intense
scrutiny, including thorough reviews of their supply chain
competencies. They would have to empirically demonstrate a
culture of compliance reflecting the highest standards, and
membership would have its privileges. To attract applicants,
trusted trader status would offer fewer inspections and faster,
more predictable time to market. But should a trader violate
the trust we have placed in them, the Government's response
would be swift and sure.
No discussion of CPSC import surveillance is complete
without addressing the $36 million annual funding level we
outlined in our most recent budget request, and the user fees
we hope will pay for it. I am not entirely convinced of the
legality of the user fee mechanism. Moreover, while I am
generally supportive of what we want to spend that money on, I
look forward to further discussions with our staff to develop a
more nuanced understanding of that expenditure.
However, my potential support for that spending, whether
from user fees or from appropriations, is predicated on
implementation of a properly resourced trusted trader program
that is capable of attracting robust participation. If we are
going to ask for more money, particularly if it comes from the
very importers whose shipments we are rooting around in, we
need to spend some of that money making life easier for the
good actors who voluntarily subject themselves to intense
scrutiny. If we can develop the confidence necessary to take
those good actors' shipments out of our haystack, finding the
needles will be that much easier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mohorovic follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentleman. The Chair
would note that it appears that the era of good feelings is now
settled upon the Consumer Products Safety Commission. You all
referenced how well you work together, so the Chair takes that
as a good sign as we move forward. And, again, I want to thank
you all for being in our hearing. We will now move into the
question portion of the hearing. Each member will have 5
minutes for questions.
And, Chairman Kaye, let me begin, and again, thank you for
your willingness to be here, and apologize about us having to
reschedule during the snow day. Kind of an unexpected snowfall
in March that caught a lot of us by surprise. But thank you for
your flexibility in rescheduling. The budget for fiscal year
2016 requests--the Commission requests new Commission authority
to impose undefined user fees on importers.
I think I have already shared with you I have some
misgivings about that, and would really welcome further
discussion from the Commission as to how these user fees, not
just how they are collected, but how they are disbursed. Are
these fees that are paid into the Treasury, and then subject to
appropriations by the Appropriations Committee, or are they
fees that are retained within the agency for use within the
agency? So I would like some clarification about that. And I
would just remind the members the appropriation--we are in
appropriations season. The appropriations for the Consumer
Products Safety Commission I believes comes through the
Financial Services Appropriation bill, so we all will want to
be vigilant about that and make certain that we do pay
attention to the agency during the appropriations.
But there is the risk assessment methodology, which is a
pilot program to assess hazardous imports in the Commission's
performance, budget requests to Congress to target a percentage
of entries sampled is identified through the pilot system for
fiscal year 2015 but is only labeled baseline, and fiscal year
2016 the target is to be decided. So are we on the brink of
nationalizing a pilot program where we don't know the metrics
for inspection and evaluation?
Mr. Kaye. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. No, we are definitely
not on the brink of nationalizing the program, even though the
Government is on the brink of nationalizing the single window
requiring electronic filing, which is a big reason why the CPSC
is trying to do its part. We want to make sure that, as close
as possible, by December of 2016, when the system that Customs
and Border Protection runs to receive electronic filing is up
and running, and there is truly one single window, that we are
not creating an unnecessary disruption to the market by not
being a part of that.
But, as we envision in our appropriations request, if a
permanent funding mechanism one way or another would allow the
agency to collect and retain the funds solely for the purpose
of funding this program--it wouldn't be used for any other
reason. There is a long history of agencies with border
authorities doing this. We took the time to study those other
agencies and work with the Office of Management and Budget to
come up with what was the preferred method, to not reinvent the
wheel so that CPSC could do its part with the single window.
Mr. Burgess. Yes, it is actually some of the activities of
those other agencies and departments that has been the genesis
for my concern about this. And, again, I--we are coming into
the appropriations time. I want us to be careful about how we
approach things. But on the single window issue, and,
Commissioner Mohorovic perhaps you can address this as well, I
was on the committee in the 110th Congress. That was the
committee that actually did the reauthorization of the CPSC,
and the toy safety bill.
And I became very concerned--we did hearings--Chairman Rush
was sitting in this chair at the time, but that was the year
that so many things were imported into the country, and then
found to be problematic. So there didn't seem to be a way to
stop things before they came in, and then the concern became
what happens to all this stuff in warehouses that is offloaded
by longshoremen in Long Beach, California, and then where is it
going to end up? Nobody seemed to talk about shipping it back
to the point of origin and saying, you deal with it, other
country that shouldn't have sent this stuff to us in the first
place, because your attention was lax. So are we any better off
today than we were in 2007 and 2008, as far as containing
things that come into the country that may be hazardous?
Mr. Mohorovic. Thank you, Dr. Burgess. In short, I do think
we are in a much better position today than we were before. And
one of the points that I remind folks of is the fact that I am
the only non-lawyer on this Commission. So I think in terms of
metrics for my formal education, being the only MBA, so I think
of things in terms of risk--on return on investment. And so in
applying that to the--to public service, I think about safety
return on investment. And I am committed to the fact that the
investment and the evolution of our import targeting
activities, and the sophistication of those strategies, is the
greatest safety return on investment that we can apply, in
terms of our resources and our budget. It completely bypasses
the difficulties that you mentioned, Mr. Chairman, with regards
to recall effectiveness, et cetera, and it will ensure that we
don't have to learn from that experience.
Of course, before us we have the potential to scale up into
a nationalized program a very significant program. Do I believe
that we have a proof of concept, and do we have reason to move
forward, based on the success of our pilot project, the RAM?
And the question for--the answer for me is absolutely. But,
again, I think we do have to look at more closely the
significant IT spend so it will be able to yield the kind of
targets, and the targeting effectiveness, that we hope to
achieve, as well as the operationalization.
Prior to joining the agency, I was in the conformity
assessment business, as part of the testing community, for 8
years, so I have had to scale up a massive supply chain,
testing operations, and with that you expect to see significant
economies of scale. That is something that I have yet to see in
terms of some of the operational scope that we have identified,
but I am sure further communication will identify that.
Mr. Burgess. And I am certain that it will. It may even in
this hearing. I will yield back my time, recognize the
gentlelady from Illinois, Ms. Schakowsky, 5 minutes for
questions, please.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Commissioner
Adler, like you, I identify as a senior citizen, and wonder
what you anticipate will be, or what already is part of this
Commission's senior safety initiative?
Mr. Adler. Well, thank you very much for the question.
First thing I would like to announce is that we are
participating in a 2015 healthy aging summit which is sponsored
by HHS, which will be held on July 27 and July 28, and the
Commission will be there in a listening mode. So the agency is
committed to the senior safety initiative.
One of the things that I asked the staff to do was to look
at mechanical hazards, because that seems to be the area where
seniors suffer the most. And one of the issues that we
addressed was what can you do with respect to senior citizens
when there are other citizens who are not senior citizens using
the same products?
Ms. Schakowsky. What do you mean by mechanical hazards?
Mr. Adler. Falls, sawings, cuts, lacerations, things along
those lines.
Ms. Schakowsky. Um-hum.
Mr. Adler. And so what the staff has done I think is a very
smart thing. They first look to see products that present
unique hazards, and they are intended for senior citizens, such
as bed rails, and these panic buttons that seniors wear if they
fall. The next thing they have looked at is products that
present disproportionate risks to seniors, but that also
present unreasonable risks to the public at large, and a
product there I would say would be table saws.
And then even with respect to products where the Commission
might find that there is disproportionate injury to seniors,
the staff is looking into areas where we can at least alert
seniors that they are at particular risk of harm, and their
caregivers as well. So I think it is a fairly comprehensive
program----
Ms. Schakowsky. Um-hum.
Mr. Adler [continuing]. That we are doing, and I am
delighted that the staff has taken to this with such
enthusiasm.
Ms. Schakowsky. Well, as the co-chair of the Senior
Citizens Task Force, let us stay in touch on that. I am really
interested.
I wanted to get to the issue of flammability standards.
The--I know the Consumer Products Safety Commission has the
authority, under the Flammable Fabrics Act, to issue standards.
And I know there are some promulgated flammability standards,
and as a--including some children's products that it is
possible, and it looks likely, have contributed to significant
use of flame retardant chemicals that pose health risks.
The Chicago Tribune, which was an early reporter about
this, said the average American baby is born with the highest
recorded levels of flame retardants among infants in the world.
And I know recent studies have linked flammable--flame
retardant chemicals to a wide variety of adverse health
effects, endocrine disruption, immunotoxicity, reproductive
toxicity, developmental effects, impaired thyroid, neurological
function and cancer, et cetera.
My question really is if we, one, have any studies or
information demonstrating that flammability standards
promulgated by CPSC reduce instances of fire-related injuries,
and, looking--and if you have any plans to revisit--to find out
if the issue of the flame retardants themselves is a danger?
Mr. Kaye. Thank you, Congresswoman. So, I don't know if I
can do justice to this topic in a minute 23, but I will do my--
--
Ms. Schakowsky. Yes.
Mr. Kaye [continuing]. Best. Certainly, Commissioner
Adler's point in the beginning, thanks in large part to the
fire community, and the CPSC staff, over time, and I believe
this is attributable to some of the flammability standards,
especially with clothing and children's pajamas, there has been
a reduction of fire related incidents. The issue you are
getting at, though, is flame retardants, and to what extent
those have had any impact on it.
I am not aware that flame retardants have been proven to be
effective, and I am certainly aware of the studies that you are
talking about, or at least some of the studies, that go to the
potential health concern. And I can say to you that it bothers
me even more than as a regulator, it bothers me as a parent of
two young children that there has to be this uncertainty about
products that we interact with, and the chemicals that might be
in them. And a perfect example of that is a couch.
Most people don't view a couch as a potential hazardous
product, but if it is true that the flame retardants that the
Trib pointed out, that have doused the foam in an attempt to
deal with cigarette fires, have ended up getting in the dust,
and children, as we know, go under couches, they put their
hands in their mouth, if it is true that that has had a very
negative impact on the health of children, that is a
significant concern of ours.
Ms. Schakowsky. And uncertain usefulness in reducing----
Mr. Kaye. Correct.
Ms. Schakowsky [continuing]. Flammability.
Mr. Kaye. Correct. So one of the things that I have tried
to do at my level is talk to our sister agencies, who have
overlapping jurisdictions and similar interests in this area,
to try to get the Government working more cohesively to address
this uncertainty. I think consumers deserve to know answers to
these questions as quickly as possible.
Ms. Schakowsky. What are the other agencies?
Mr. Kaye. The EPA, the FDA, ATSDR with CDC, and the
National Toxicology Program as part of the National Institutes
of Health, and the National Institute of Environmental Health
Sciences.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. Chair thanks the gentlelady, gentlelady yields
back. The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Tennessee, 5
minutes for questions, please.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Kaye, let
me come to you first. Commissioner Buerkle mentioned and
referenced the million dollars that my amendment put in to
advancing the Consumer Products Safety Improvement Act, and I
just want to ask you what you all have done to reduce that
third party testing requirement, where you are in that process?
How are you putting that million dollars to work?
Mr. Kaye. So thank you for the $1 million, Congresswoman.
It has certainly made a big difference. As soon as the $1
million was appropriated, we moved, at the Commission level,
via an amendment to our operating plan, to allocate that $1
million to seven different projects that we had identified,
primarily based on stakeholder feedback, but also with
discussions at the Commission level, to try to get to this
issue. And so----
Mrs. Blackburn. Um-hum.
Mr. Kaye [continuing]. Where we are now is there are three
projects that staff is very close to sending up to the
Commission for us to vote on to try to provide some of that
relief. And as I mentioned in my opening statement, my
direction to staff has been to prioritize those actions that
will have the widest potential benefit to small businesses.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Let me ask you this. In your letter to
Senator Thune you identified three areas for--the
determinations of lead content, finding international toy
standards, and then guidance allowing for third party testing
exemptions. So those are the three areas that you are----
Mr. Kaye. No, those are actually three separate areas that
my staff and I continue to work on, and have discussions with
Commissioner Mohorovic. So, in total, you are talking about 10
different projects.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Commissioner Mohorovic, you want to
respond?
Mr. Mohorovic. I would love to, thank you. It is perfectly
logical to wonder why, with the full commitment of the entire
Commission behind reducing third party test burden, why we have
achieved very little in terms of results. And that is because
we are replying to these proposals an unreasonable
interpretation of our statute, this language, consistent with
assuring compliance. And the problem is, very quickly, it is
inconsistent with established CPSC policy. If you looked at the
component part testing rule, which was non-controversial----
Mrs. Blackburn. So you are in a bureaucratic----
Mr. Mohorovic. We are----
Mrs. Blackburn [continuing]. Quagmire?
Mr. Mohorovic. Absolutely, yes.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Mr. Mohorovic. Absolutely, Congresswoman.
Mrs. Blackburn. So you can't get to the outcome, the
deliverable, because you are still talking among yourselves?
Mr. Mohorovic. Not until we change that standard. I
wouldn't recommend----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. What is the timeline for getting it
finished? We want this finished, so when are you going to have
it finished by?
Mr. Mohorovic. So we will have three in the next few months
to vote on, and then there is more to come after that.
Mrs. Blackburn. Give me few months.
Mr. Mohorovic. I----
Mrs. Blackburn. I mean, a month, 2 months, 3 months? What
do you mean by that?
Mr. Mohorovic. I think that within June we will have the
first up, and then two more by September.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. All right. So that is going to be your
deliverable. Let me ask you something else. I mentioned being
out, and a lot of dissatisfaction, and the way you are going
about the 11/10 rule, all the public comment, except one, was
against that. But I think what I am hearing is you moved
forward with a little bit more of a heavy hand than what you
would represent to us.
And you say you want to be engaging the industry, and you
want to be collaborative, but what I--the feedback I am
getting, it is those are your words, but your actions are much
more heavy handed, that you have determined what you want as
the outcome, thereby--you are going to let people think they
are participating, but in the end, you are the rulemaker, and
you are going to get your way. So do you feel like that is a
collaborative atmosphere, and trying to work with the industry?
And how would you respond to those type of comments that are
made about the way you all are approaching rulemaking?
Mr. Kaye. Is that for me? I am happy to----
Mrs. Blackburn. Yes, sir.
Mr. Kaye [continuing]. Answer that. And----
Mrs. Blackburn. You are the Chairman.
Mr. Kaye. And is that question specifically to 11/10 rule,
or more general?
Mrs. Blackburn. It is specifically to 11/10, but in
general, when it comes to dealing with industry.
Mr. Kaye. Sure, so I will address both. The 11/10 rule is
in a definite pause at this point. I was not the Chairman when
that came up, and that was not part of what I worked on, but as
soon as I became Chairman I engaged our staff, and I worked
with them to make sure that they were doing much more
collaborative engagement with the--with our----
Mrs. Blackburn. Are you still advancing that?
Mr. Kaye. No. It is not moving right now. It is in a----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Mr. Kaye [continuing]. Pause mode.
Mrs. Blackburn. You are going to put it completely in
pause?
Mr. Kaye. It is in pause mode. It is already----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Mr. Kaye [continuing]. Completely paused, and what we
have----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Mr. Kaye [continuing]. Been doing is working with our
stakeholder community, through an advisory panel, on the issue
of the single window in our imports. We are running a pilot
that is going to be coming out, the FR notice, in a few months,
and we are trying to get it right. And so we are having----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Mr. Kaye [continuing]. Those exact collaborations that you
are talking about.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. My time is out, and I have got one
other question, but I will submit that question to you in
writing. And I thank you all, and I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. Chair thanks the gentlelady. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Olson, 5 minutes for
questions, please.
Mr. Olson. I thank the Chair, and welcome to our witnesses.
A special welcome to a former House colleague, Ann Marie
Buerkle. Good to see you again, Ann Marie.
I want to talk about nanotechnology. As a 1985 graduate of
Rice University in Houston, Texas, we are proud that two of our
professors, Robert Curl and Richard Smalley, won the Nobel
Prize for nanotechnology. In fact, Dr. Smalley taught me
Chemistry 102, so it is very special to me about
nanotechnology.
Chairman Kaye, I wrote you a letter on February 25 about
this issue. The fact that your budget requests for $5 million
more for nanotechnology--the research center is almost 85
percent of the proposed budget increase. That caught my eye. I
appreciate your response by letter, and, Mr. Chairman, I ask
unanimous consent to enter my letter and Chairman Kaye's
response in the record.
Mr. Burgess. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Olson. Thank you. I only have a few questions to
clarify issues from your letter. You stated that the reason
that CPSC needs five million is--for a new research center is
because your work has ``identified significant data gaps
regarding exposure to nanomaterials present in consumer
products.'' Can you elaborate on what these data gaps are, more
details on the data gaps, sir?
Mr. Kaye. Absolutely, and it is not only that we have
identified, Congressman, those data gaps, it is that the larger
nanotechnology initiative, the NNI, that is the collaboration
that I think that everyone would want to see from the Federal
Government, where all the agencies that have a present on nano
are working together, actually, the NNI working groups have
identified this data gap. And it really goes to understanding
the exposure from consumer products that have nanomaterials in
them.
And so there are plenty--there is a billion dollars--more
than a billion dollars that have been--billions of dollars that
has been spent by the Federal Government on advancing
nanotechnology, but none of that, or very little of that money
has gone to understanding the specifics of consumer product
exposure, which is a unique exposure pathway.
If you have a child that is out swinging a tennis racket,
and every time that child hits that--hits a ball, some
nanoparticles fly off, and the child is breathing those
nanoparticles in, and those nanoparticles in, and those
nanoparticles supposedly mirror asbestos, these are the types
of critical health and safety questions that we want to get at,
and are behind our request.
Mr. Olson. Also in your letter you listed four categories
as criteria for success. The first one was to develop, and this
is a quote, ``robust test methods to determine and characterize
human exposure to nanomaterials.'' What defines a robust
testing method?
Mr. Kaye. That is what I leave to our toxicologists.
Certainly I think that is what this working group has been
working on, with the money that Congress has been giving us,
and that we, in conjunction with the National Science
Foundation, as well as a number of manufacturers in other
agencies, would hope to get to those answers.
I can't--I am not a technical expert. I can't decide what
reaches that threshold of robustness, but I think we have got
the technical expertise at our staff level to be able to make
that determination.
Mr. Olson. In your letter you expect to staff this research
center with 12 senior scientists, 15 technicians, 10 post-
doctoral students, and 12 graduate students. These positions
come from your current staff, or come from outside?
Mr. Kaye. I think they would come from outside. It would be
part of the funding.
Mr. Olson. How much expertise does your current staff have
on these nano-issues? Because they have been working this since
2011, I do believe.
Mr. Kaye. We have some expertise. I think we--it is thin,
though. We have a thin bench. We have a phenomenal
toxicologist, who is our representative in this space with the
other agencies on the NNI, but, admittedly, it is not a deep
bench, and I think that is one of the reasons why we are not
trying to go in the more costly way, and try to just hire
internally and procure a bunch of expensive test materials that
we might not end up needing. We are trying to do the more cost
efficient way of building off a successful model, and pursue it
through the NSF.
Mr. Olson. How about stakeholders in nanospace? What kinds
of interaction do you have with these stakeholders?
Mr. Kaye. Through the NNI working groups, there is a good
amount of interaction our staff reports back.
Mr. Olson. Anybody else--the NNI mean other agencies
working on nano with yourselves, or just--that is pretty much
the primary agency?
Mr. Kaye. So there is----
Mr. Olson. The EPA? Who else is working--what other
agencies are----
Mr. Kaye. Department of Defense, Homeland Security. There
is--there are many, many agencies as part of NNI.
Mr. Olson. OK, that is my questions. Yield back by saying
go Rockets.
Mr. Burgess. Chair thanks the gentleman, the gentleman
yields back. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Guthrie from
Kentucky, 5 minutes for your questions, please.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I was preparing for
the hearing today, and I talked about Commissioner Buerkle, and
showed up, and it is you. I am glad to have you back. I didn't
realize that you are in this row, and really enjoyed serving
with you, as Mr. Pompeo and I spent 4 years of our life in the
State of New York. It was always fun to talk about what was
going on with you back there.
So I do have a question, it is--in table saws. I guess when
we were serving together, I had table saw manufacturers in my
district, and I understand that the CPSC has begun a special
study of National Electronic Injury Surveillance System data to
obtain information about the type of table saws involved in
incidents, along with other information about incidents.
And this study began on July 2014, and it concerns me,
because it seems to me, and I am not sure, but it seems to me
that no outreach has--to members of the industry by the CPSC
was--for this study. And for years the industry has tried to
work cooperatively with CPSC, and the industry's input could
have been of value. So, Commissioner Buerkle, was there any
outreach to the industry representatives or manufacturers
regarding this special study?
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you, and it is good to be back here on
Capitol Hill. To--in fact, a specific request was made that
would--we would reach out to industry and allow them to
participate and be a part of that survey, and it did not
happen. So, you know, I think that is--goes to the point I made
earlier about collaboration and outreach. I think it is----
Mr. Guthrie. Um-hum.
Ms. Buerkle [continuing]. Incumbent upon the agency to make
sure we have these conversations with industry beforehand.
Whether it is before a survey, or before it is a proposed rule,
that we engage with them so that we go forward, and we get the
right information.
I will say that NICE is one of the--it is a data collection
system that we use, and it avails us of a lot of very helpful
information. And--so, to that end, that is an important
project. But having stakeholder engagement before the survey
goes out, I think, is crucial.
Mr. Guthrie. You know, a lot of them are concerned about
mandating certain technologies, particularly patent questions
that are mandating a specific technology in a Federal standard.
And there are patent concerns that have been raised throughout
the table saw petition discussions over the years. And is the
Commission aware that there are 140 patents related to the
proposed technology held by the petitioner to mandate this
technology on all table saws?
Ms. Buerkle. Are you referring that question to me?
Mr. Guthrie. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Buerkle. Well, let me say this. Quite frankly, and
quite honestly, my colleague, Commissioner Adler, this is his
pet project.
Mr. Guthrie. Um-hum.
Ms. Buerkle. And I don't mean to pass the buck, because
this is not a priority of mine, nor do I think it should be a
priority of the agency. But to your point about the patents,
and the concerns about that, I have tremendous concerns about
that. But it is not a project, quite frankly, that I think
should be a priority of the agency right now.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. I have one more question for you before
we----
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you. OK.
Mr. Guthrie [continuing]. You recently stated--I am sorry,
I couldn't see you through Mr. Pompeo there. You recently
stated that the sole basis for CHAP's recommendation to the ban
of most widely used chemicals was a cumulative risk assessment
which found that the majority--I guess Citizens' Health
Advisory Panel's what--recommendation, which found that the
majority of the risk associated with these chemicals was from
another chemical, DEHP. Can you explain your concerns for using
cumulative risk assessment as a basis for such regulatory
determination?
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you. The CHAP, of course, is a--and then
thiolate proposed rule is of great concern to me. It has been
of concern to me since the CHAP issued its report, because I
believe the CHAP report should have been a public--should have
been subject to a public peer review at that point. So from
that point on, to me, the system, and the whole process, has
been flawed.
The cumulative risk assessment that you are talking about
is one of my concerns, and that--it--the process that is used,
that is not well accepted in the scientific community,
cumulative risk assessment. So I think that goes to the
process, and the validity, and the integrity of the CHAP
report. More importantly, though, I think--and certainly
another grave concern I have is when the CHAP did their review,
they used very old data, that was--data that was before CPSIA,
and before the ban of those thiolates. So that study, to me,
and the CHAP report, is almost--it is, it is irrelevant because
it doesn't use timely data.
So the Commission has taken on analyzing the more recent
data, and I have constantly and consistently said, and
advocated that we put that, the findings and the analysis of
the staff on the more current data out for public comment. It
should be put out for at least 60 days, and the staff should
comment on how they are going to use that analysis relative to
the proposed rule. Because, in order to get comments from the
public, we have to include that information in the proposed--in
that opportunity for them to comment.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. Chairman Kaye, are you concerned about
cumulative data, and do you believe it should be out for public
comment?
Mr. Kaye. I agree with Commissioner Buerkle that the
staff's analysis should go out for public comment, and I was
the one who directed staff, at the beginning of the process, to
even undertake that analysis. And my hope is that we will reach
an agreement in the coming days, when the staff is ready to put
that out for analysis, for it to go out.
As far as the cumulative risk assessment, I have to respect
the work of the CHAP, because that is the statutory regimen
that was set up by Congress in Section 108 of the Consumer
Products Safety Improvement Act. That was the scientific
direction, or the policy direction, to the CHAP members, which,
by the way, were picked through the National Academy of
Sciences as the leading experts around the world on this issue.
And so, considering that that is what the statute told them to
look at, and that is what they looked at, I respect that
decision on their part.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, my time has expired.
Mr. Burgess. Gentleman yields back. The Chair thanks the
gentleman. Chair recognizes the gentleman from Kansas, Mr.
Pompeo, 5 minutes for your questions, please.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Kaye, I want to
talk about the ROV rulemaking. You testified before the
Appropriations Committee. You described the hearing as the
longest in--the hearing that was held as the longest in the
CPSC's history. Went late into the night, many panels, many
witnesses. I appreciate you all taking the time to do that. Now
I want to make sure that we don't cut short this process, that
we get the data right, the science, and the engineering, and
technology right. That is why I have introduced a piece of
legislation. Have you had a chance to take a look at that----
Mr. Kaye. I have.
Mr. Pompeo [continuing]. 999?
Mr. Kaye. I have.
Mr. Pompeo. And I didn't see your name as a co-endorser,
but I am looking forward to hearing you today say that you
think it is something that wouldn't make sense, to make sure
that industry can work alongside you, and get a chance to get a
set of voluntary standards that make sense.
Mr. Kaye. So, thank you, Congressman, and I know that you
have been particularly interested, and I appreciate that, since
the time you have been in office in the work of the CPSC, and I
think that is a good thing. I think it is important to have
this continued dialogue.
The ROV issue is one of great significance to the
Commission. We are taking it very seriously. Similar to the
work on directing staff to do an analysis on the thiolates
issue, I directed staff to redouble their efforts to engage
with the voluntary standards effort to try to reach a solution.
I think that that is the preferred solution many of us would
like to see, if they can adequately address the hazard, and it
can be substantially complied with.
As far as the bill is concerned, unfortunately, I am not
going to be able to tell you what you want to hear. I don't
have the ability to co-endorse, even if I wanted to.
Mr. Pompeo. You can just say it here this----
Mr. Kaye. Yes. I--sounds like I could say it, but based on
where we are, and our discussions, I think it is well intended,
but, unfortunately, it would have a negative impact for three
reasons. One, I don't want to call it a delay, but it looks
like a delay, even if it is not intended to be, and those
delays cost lives. Every year we are looking at getting close
to now 80 dates per year, many of them children, associated
with ROVs. So every year that this issue is not addressed,
whether it is through a robust voluntary standard, or a
mandatory standard, is more deaths, and I think that that is
something we should all be concerned about.
Second of all, there are real costs. Every time that there
is a death, you are talking about, from an impact the community
and society, about $8 million, as our staff estimates it, from
an economic standpoint. So with 100 and--if it is a 2-year
study, and you are talking about 150 deaths, that is upward
near a billion dollars in cost to society that would result
from this.
And probably in the area, from a timing perspective, and I
just had a conversation with Mr. Pritchard, who you will hear
on the second panel, before we came here, the staff and the
voluntary standards body, meaning industry, are really at a
position that I don't think they have been at for many, many
years, where they are finally engaging in a substantive
technical discussion to try to resolve these issues. If this
bill were to pass, it puts out for question for 2 years one of
the key areas that both industry and the staff are driving to
try to solve now. I just don't think that that is going to help
the timing of it.
Mr. Pompeo. I appreciate that. No one wants more deaths. I
mean, no one is advocating for delay in order to achieve that
result. I know I am not, no one on this committee would either.
Party--it is a bipartisan piece of legislation. I know industry
would want that either. I don't think it--because of that, I
think it is required. I think you have to get the data.
I am not going to go through it, but there--but I have seen
testimony from staff that says that we don't have the
engineering and technology, right? The--Bob Franklin on your
staff said we would have to look at the data, looking at
exposure over time to the different ROVs. It might be possible
to do something like that, but we have not done it.
I am thrilled to hear that you are having these discussions
with industry, and that you are making progress. That is
absolutely a preferred solution, I think, for the CPSC, and
from my perspective as well, it would be a great outcome. But I
would hope that you would be prepared to at least suspend the
rulemaking for a period of time. Put it on hold, keep it out
there as something that might happen in the event that the
discussions don't move forward in the way that--sounds like you
have at least some optimism, as do I. I would love to see you
at least consider suspending the rulemaking, or put it on hold
while those discussions were happening. If they fall apart,
industry and you can't get together, then so be it, you can
continue to proceed. Would you at least consider that?
Mr. Kaye. Well, one, I can't--I don't have the power
unilaterally to suspend the rulemaking, so that would have to
be a Commission decision. And I would say that, from my
perspective, I do think, whether industry likes it or not, one
of the reasons that we have reached this situation, where we
are at a position where everybody is trying to finally reach a
solution, I think that everyone has proper incentives. And,
from my perspective, the fact that the CPSC has taken it
seriously to this point, and is prepared to move toward a
mandatory standard, has provided the types of conditions that
have created this environment. And I so I think that it is
incumbent upon us to keep moving forward. As I mentioned, the
deaths, they do certainly weigh on me, and so that is not
something, at this point, that I think would be a positive.
Mr. Pompeo. Well, I hope you will reconsider that. I may or
may not be the incentive structure that has been achieved, but
we have a June 19 deadline now for comments to come in. Those
comments, I know, will be critical of the rule from many in the
industry. I hope that doesn't put--I want to keep it in a
constructive way, and I hope that this deadline won't
artificially create animosity where I think there is a chance
to really get it right, save lives, and get the rule right. So,
with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. Chair thanks the gentlemen, gentleman yields
back. The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Indiana, 5
minutes for questions, please.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Indiana has a large
presence of juvenile product manufacturers in the state that
make everything from strollers to car seats, and I have heard
firsthand about the challenges that they face with regards to
redundant testing requirements that might do nothing to advance
safety, while siphoning away money that could have been spent
on R and D in these companies, innovation and resources like
additional employment.
And one Hoosier manufacturer told me recently the Consumer
Product Safety Improvement Act was passed--since it is passed,
they have spent $12 \1/2\ million in testing costs alone. And
that is not--that is because they not only have to test every
platform that the products are on, but every SKU as well. So
not only do they spend an average of $8,900 to test every new
stroller or cradle design, but they have to spend an extra
$1,000 to test every paint, every new paint color as well.
And so I think we all agree that the safety of our children
is of utmost importance, and shouldn't be compromised, however,
I think we have to draw the right balance, and--to ensure that
the companies have the needed resources to do further R and D
to ensure their products are safer. And so, Mr. Chairman, I
have a question to you that--with this in mind, what actions
have you taken in the past year to provide relief to companies
with respect to these--cost of these third party testing
requirements?
Mr. Kaye. Thank you, Congresswoman. One of the areas that
we found really interesting, and this has been discovered by
our small business ombudsman, and I don't want to get
Commissioner Mohorovic upset, since it involves his prior
occupation, but we have found that a lot of the third party
labs are testing for services that are not required.
And so our small business ombudsman and his office provide
phenomenal support and assistance working with small
businesses, and I would encourage any of the members who have
small businesses in particular that have issues to reach out to
Neal Cohen of the CPSC because he can work with companies to go
through their testing reports and to find out whether or not
they really need certain testing.
Now, he doesn't actually go line by line, but what he says
is, here are some general guidances, and here are some
questions that you should be asked. He really does a phenomenal
job of empowering a lot of companies, and I think that has gone
a huge way to addressing some of these issues.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you. Commissioner Mohorovic?
Mr. Mohorovic. Thank you, Congresswoman. I think what you
will get is a lot of the dodging tactics from the agency to try
to explain why we haven't achieved much in terms of measurable
outcomes in reducing the cost and burden of third party
testing. We have all of the resources we need. We have the
legal authority. We just lack the will to be able to enact very
many of the policies and suggestions that have come before the
agency.
So we can blame the testing labs, we can blame retailers
for retail protocols, we can dodge and weave on this as long as
we want, but, as I said earlier, it is frustrating for me
particularly because it is so--it lacks alignment. It is so
inconsistent with established CPSC policy. If we applied the
same appreciation for risk tolerance that we did in the
promulgation of the Component Part Testing Rule, we would have
all of the emphasis, and staff would be able to recommend
countless means to reduce the cost and burden without any
adverse health or safety impact.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you. Chairman Kaye, it is my
understanding that a million dollars of your 2015 budget was to
be allocated to reducing the needless and duplicative testing
burdens. Can you explain what actions you have actually taken
in leading the Commission to fulfill that role? What--how have
you reached out, what do companies expect to see from this
relief if we have, you know, mandated that in your budget?
Mr. Kaye. Sure. And one of the limitations in--on--I agree
with Commissioner Mohorovic that we do have a lot of what we
need, but we don't have everything that we need. But one of the
areas is that it is a one-time appropriation, which means we
cannot staff up from it. We can't count on--it is not prudent
to hire a bunch of people without knowing how you are going to
pay for them in the following fiscal year, so most of this
money has gone through contracting. So we contract out with
organizations who can do a lot of the technical work to figure
out if there is possibility for relief. But ultimately our
staff has to take that work. There has to be resources
internally to be able to turn that work around, and to try to
make it something actionable.
And so the three areas that I mentioned in response to
Congresswoman Blackburn's questions have to do with providing
this exact type of relief. Looking, for instance, at natural
wood, and whether or not, if you use natural wood alone, you
have to test for certain heavy metals that are required by law.
We keep trying to check off lists of materials and types of
products that you don't actually have to test to to avoid these
costs. And that has been the theme, both in terms of
stakeholder engagement and internal deliberations, that we are
trying to pursue to provide--to make it worth the while.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you. My time is up. I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. Chair thanks the gentlelady. The Chair
recognizes the Ranking Member of the full committee, Mr.
Pallone, 5 minutes for your questions, please.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My question is of
Chairman Kaye. There have been concerning reports of young
athletes that have non-Hodgkin lymphoma and other blood
cancers, and who also have been playing sports on athletic
fields that are filled with crumb rubber coming from tires,
which often contains cancer causing chemicals. This past
October I wrote to the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease
Registry explaining that I believe additional research is
needed into whether synthetic turf athletic fields increase the
risk of lymphoma, leukemia, and other blood cancers. In the
agency's reply, they stated that they are supporting efforts by
the Commission in this area.
Yet in 2008 the Commission released a statement saying that
field filled with crumb rubber are ``OK to install, OK to play
on,'' and I was pleased to hear more recently that a
spokesperson explained that the 2008 statement does not reflect
your current views. So I just wanted to ask, is it correct that
your views are not reflected in that 2008 report, and do you
agree that additional research and study is necessary to
determine whether crumb rubber used in synthetic turf athletic
fields presents any public health dangers? And also, is the
Commission committed to working with other Federal agencies to
obtain this information, and to ensure young athletes playing
on these fields are protected? Just ask you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kaye. Thank you, Congressman, and thank you for your
leadership on this area. I think you have three questions
embedded in there, so I am going to try to address all three--
--
Mr. Pallone. Sure.
Mr. Kaye [continuing]. In turn. The first is, you are
absolutely correct that that 2008 release does not reflect my
views of the state of play, and I think it is important to note
that that 2008 didn't--release didn't even reflect, as far as I
understand it, the technical staff's views at the time, that
there was a political effort at the time at the Commission to
say something in the headline of the release that may not
actually reflect the state of play, which is basically that
those products are safe.
I think there is a big difference in looking at the lead
exposure that might exist from the blades of the grass and
determining that, based on a small sample size, the staff was
not able to say that there are--were disconcerting levels of
lead in those fields in that particular aspect. That is very
different from saying these things are safe to play on. Safe to
play on means something to parents that I don't think we
intended to convey, and I don't think we should have conveyed.
So that is the answer to the first question.
The answer to the second question is, absolutely we are
working with our Federal partners to try to figure out a better
and faster way, working together, to see if an issue such as
crumb rubber can be resolved more quickly. As I mentioned to
the Ranking Member earlier, we are working with EPA, we are
working with NIH, through their center down in Research Trial
Park, North Carolina, the National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences and the National Toxicology Program, CDC,
ATSDR, and then also the FDA. We are trying to figure out a way
for the Government to come together, use our existing resources
and authorities to address these issues. Parents don't care
which acronym-name Government agency is supposed to do what.
They just want answers, and they want this uncertainty
resolved.
And the third question--I apologize, I can't even remember
what the third one was. If you could--if you wouldn't mind
asking me again?
Mr. Pallone. Well, I am just--I think you are, you know,
just really basically trying to find out what your view is, and
what the Commission is doing, and whether you are working with
other Federal agencies----
Mr. Kaye. Absolutely.
Mr. Pallone [continuing]. On the issue.
Mr. Kaye. Absolutely.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Thank you very much.
Mr. Kaye. Thank you.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Mr. Burgess. Gentleman yields back. The Chair thanks the
gentleman. The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Kinzinger,
recognized 5 minutes for your questions.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here today, and it is nice to have you in front of the
committee.
Chairman Kaye, it seems that banning a chemical that has
been deemed safe by other Government agencies opens the door to
the use of substitutes that have been far less studied, and
with far fewer scientific and performance data available. Is
the agency prepared to deal with the market and potential
safety repercussions of transitioning from well tested
thiolates to the uncertainty associated with any potential
substitutes?
Mr. Kaye. Well, this gets into, Congressman, some of the
answers to Congressman Pallone. There is a larger issue going
on from a public policy matter, where, unfortunately--and the
concept that you are getting to is regrettable substitution,
where one chemical is banned, and we don't really have a full
sense, from a scientific and safety perspective, what the
substituting chemical will be. I think that is a failed public
policy, I have to admit.
I think the better approach, and this can be done working
with industry, and this would be something that I would like to
see happen, is for the Government and industry to come together
to not only focus on which chemicals shouldn't be used, but to
try to get to a faster way to figure out which chemicals should
be used. So, as a public policy matter, that is my preference.
Unfortunately, neither the resources or the authorities and the
directions that agencies have been going in for a long time are
moving in that direction.
But, again, as part of these collaborative efforts that I
am trying to undertake, and that we are trying to undertake
from CPSC with these other agencies, that is one of the key
goals that we are looking at.
Mr. Kinzinger. Yes, and I think, you know, until we get to
that point, where we can have that perfect system, we--I think
we ought to be very careful when we look at banning substances.
Because if we don't have a situation in place where we can do
all the studying of alternatives, I think, you know, we ought
to be very careful.
Let me--following the thiolate rulemaking, Commissioner
Buerkle noted in--her concern on banning chemicals that have
been in use for many years, and there is risk even studying
what little is known about the substitutes. So you said you
agree with that. I want to see--Commissioner Buerkle, what are
your thoughts on the idea of banning something with unknown
substitutes to follow?
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you for your question. As you note, that
was one of my concerns when the MPR came out, that we are not
proposing substitutes be used that we know little--less about
than we know about the chemicals that are already banned. My
more general concern, with regards to the CHAP, and I have,
both in comment and--here today, and also in previous
statements--was the whole process for how the CHAP report was
done, and now this proposed rule. And I think we really need to
take a step back.
Whether it is regarding chemicals, or whether it is
regarding any of the things we do, we are a data driven agency.
And so to make sure that we have the data correct, and to make
sure that the processes we follow are correct, and that the
CHAP followed a process that the entire scientific community
can accept as credible is very key to our agency, and the
credibility of our agency. It has been noted the American
people rely on information coming from us, so it is important
that we get it right. And so if it takes a little more time, if
it requires a request to Congress that we can't promulgate that
rule within 180 days after the CHAP report was issued, so be
it. We have to make that request, because it is incumbent upon
our agency to get it right, to take the time that we need to
do.
Mr. Kinzinger. Yes, and, you know, I want to add to that
especially--I guess maybe to reiterate what you said. You know,
I understand that there is, in many cases, a need for 180 days.
Going past deadlines isn't fun, it is nothing that any of us
like to do. But I think at the risk of maybe getting something
wrong, versus getting something right, even if we have to go
past a little bit of a deadline, I think, frankly, Republicans,
Democrats, Americans, Independents, far right, far left would
all agree that that is probably a preferable way to go. And so
that is, you know, some of the concerns we have there.
Chairman Kaye, I want to go to a bit of a different subject
just real quick. In the preamble for the proposed rule on
voluntary recalls, the CPSC indicated that it has encountered
firms that have deliberately and unnecessarily delayed the
timely implementation of the provisions of their correction
action plans. How many firms have deliberately and
unnecessarily delayed the implementation of provisions of their
corrective action plans?
Mr. Kaye. Congressman, I will have to follow up and give
you an answer to that. I don't know the answer to that
question. The voluntary recall rule, as my colleagues know very
well, at this point, from our continued reiterations of our
positions on it, is not something that has been a high priority
for me. I have had higher priorities that go to saving lives. I
am not saying the rule is without merit. I think it has some
value, but it has not been something that I have spent a lot of
time on. I thought that early----
Mr. Kinzinger. Well, can you give me, like, an example
maybe of----
Mr. Kaye. I can certainly give you anecdotal examples of
where we have reached a situation--the agreements are
voluntary. So we have reached a voluntary corrective action
plan with a company, and we notice, when they file their
quarterly reports, that they are not doing what they said they
were going to do. They are either not engaging on social media,
or they are not attempting to reach out and put forth the
amount of resources and effort that they said they would. I--
one, I wouldn't name a company, even if I could----
Mr. Kinzinger. I understand.
Mr. Kaye [continuing]. But I can't name a company at this
point. But I thought Commissioner Adler, last week, during a
public meeting that we had, when this topic came up, had a
phenomenal suggestion, where he asked our staff to spend a few
months collecting this data, and reporting back to the
Commission to see whether or not this is a real issue. And, to
Commissioner Buerkle's point, we are data driven, and I think
that will be a useful exercise, and we will all be curious to
see that.
Mr. Kinzinger. Good. Well, yes, I would be interested too,
and I just want to point out, let us make sure, if you are
going to throw out the entire system, that it is very data
driven. So, with that, thank you all for being here, and I will
yield back.
Mr. Burgess. Chair thanks the gentleman, gentleman yields
back. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr.
Mullin, 5 minutes for questions, please.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
Commissioners for taking the time to be here. I know you guys
have a very busy schedule too, and anytime you've got to come
to the Hill, you have got to be thrilled about that, right?
But, you know, we are all held accountable for statements
that are made, and sometimes, when you are sitting in a
position, Chairman, that you sit in, your agency carries a
pretty big stick, and your statements can be devastating to
people that are producing a product that depend on retail
sales. Would you agree with that?
Mr. Kaye. Absolutely, and I think about that all the time.
There is a lot of thought that goes into what I say, whether I
end up saying something like that or not.
Mr. Mullin. Well, I am holding in my hand right here a
story that was published by an Indianapolis news agency, and it
says, ``If a consumer was to see a gas can at a retail that
contained a flame arrester, we would encourage them to select
such a model, as it provides a vital layer of fire
protection.'' That was made by your agency. Are you familiar
with that news story?
Mr. Kaye. I am.
Mr. Mullin. Do you agree with that statement?
Mr. Kaye. I don't understand enough about the technical
aspects of flame arresters, I am sorry. That is just not--on
gas cans. I can't comment one way or another.
Mr. Mullin. But your statements have an impact, and the
flame arresters that we are talking about, they are only sold
on commercial cans. They are not in retail stores. Are you
familiar with that?
Mr. Kaye. No, I am not familiar with that. I don't have any
familiarity with gas cans, other than talking to our staff, and
knowing that the issue that you are talking
about----
Mr. Mullin. But someone on your staff made this statement.
And the reason why I say this is because, in my district, I had
a manufacturer that produced retail gas cans, and your agency
came out and made a statement referring to retail gas cans,
and--has nothing to do with retail gas cans. They are only
regulated by OSHA and the EPA with the flame arresters. Once
again, we are held accountable for what we said, and your
agency made a statement that could have possibly cost real
people their jobs. So does the CPSC regulate commercial safety
cans?
Mr. Kaye. We do not, but the statement that you are talking
about, I am not sure that it is inconsistent with the position
that our staff has taken in the voluntary standards capacity.
Mr. Mullin. OK. Well, then let us talk about that. Are you
aware that the commercial safety--a commercial safety can with
the flame arrester failed an ASTM protocol?
Mr. Kaye. I am not.
Mr. Mullin. But you made the statement. Your agency made
the statement encouraging people to go out and buy a gas can
from a retail store that doesn't even exist, and the purpose of
it is to keep children from being burned. But you guys made a
statement that failed that exact test, but yet the consumer can
does. It met those ASTM standards. You don't see a problem with
this?
Mr. Kaye. I see a problem with it if what you are saying is
100 percent accurate, and I am not----
Mr. Mullin. Well, I am holding the news story.
Mr. Kaye. No, I understand----
Mr. Mullin. You guys sent the press release.
Mr. Kaye. I am not doubting----
Mr. Mullin. And this is coming from ASTM, their testing
protocol, that said it failed.
Mr. Kaye. I understand that, but what I am--my point is
that I am not familiar enough with the area that you are
talking about where I can give you the type of answer you are
looking for.
Mr. Mullin. Then how about we do this? Why don't you get
back with my office----
Mr. Kaye. Absolutely.
Mr. Mullin [continuing]. Since you guys are making those
statements, and since they affect real jobs in my district? Why
don't you get back with me and give me that information so you
can be spun up to it, so the next time that your agency opens
its mouth and gives a statement like that, maybe they are
informed about what they are saying.
Mr. Kaye. Would you be willing to have a meeting with my
staff and me on it?
Mr. Mullin. Without question. We would----
Mr. Kaye. OK.
Mr. Mullin [continuing]. Love to, because we would----
Mr. Kaye. OK.
Mr. Mullin [continuing]. Like to get to the problem of
this, too, because statements like that hurt real people.
Mr. Kaye. Excellent. So my hope is that you would be
willing to come out to our testing center, where we have the
technical expertise, and we can walk through the gas cans, and
we can look at the issue together. Would you be willing to do
that?
Mr. Mullin. Absolutely I would.
Mr. Kaye. That would be great.
Mr. Mullin. But then we have got to come back and--if I am
going to be willing to do that----
Mr. Kaye. Yes.
Mr. Mullin [continuing]. If what I am saying is accurate, I
would like you guys to make another statement publicly----
Mr. Kaye. You got it.
Mr. Mullin [continuing]. Backing that up.
Mr. Kaye. Yes. Let us get to the answers together, and then
we will figure out where we go from there. And you have my
commitment that if it turns out that we said something that we
both believe----
Mr. Mullin. Well, it is not if. The statement says it, and
you guys----
Mr. Kaye. No, the rest of it----
Mr. Mullin. We checked it.
Mr. Kaye. If we said something that is not accurate, you
have my commitment that I will say something that is accurate.
I am not going to leave it to anybody else. I will say it.
Mr. Mullin. Good enough. Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank
you.
Mr. Kaye. You are welcome.
Mr. Burgess. Chair thanks the gentleman. The gentleman
brings up an excellent point. Several years ago I actually took
a field trip up to the CPSC testing facility, and it was a very
illuminating day. My understanding is you are in new
headquarters now, and I think the gentleman is quite right. A
field trip of the subcommittee out to the CPSC would be both
informative and instructive, and probably help the Commission,
as well as the subcommittee members, and we will see about
putting that in the process.
I would just also observe that I am, in addition to being
chairman of this subcommittee, I am the chairman of the House
Motorcycle Caucus. I know that is kind of a disconnect, but I
am. And going over to talk to that group one day after we
passed the CPSIA here in the subcommittee in 2007 or 2008,
there was a young man, very young man, probably 12 or 13 years
old, who stood up in front of the group and said, ``Mr.
Congressman, if you promise to give me my motorcycle back, I
promise I won't eat the battery anymore.'' Apparently youth
motorcycles had been--the sale had been prohibited during the
bill that we passed, and until those technical corrections were
enacted, it made it very, very difficult for the people who
sold youth motorcycles and their parts. So we do have to be
careful about the unintended consequences.
Seeing no other members--did you have a follow up question,
Ms.----
Ms. Schakowsky. No.
Mr. Burgess [continuing]. Schakowsky? Seeing no further
members wishing to ask questions for this panel, I do want to
thank you all for being here today. This will conclude our
first panel, and we will take an underscore brief recess to set
up for the second panel. And thank you all very much for your
time today.
[Recess.]
Mr. Burgess. The subcommittee will come back to order, and
I will thank everyone for their patience and taking time to be
here today. We are ready to move into our second panel for
today's hearing, and we will follow the same format as during
the first panel. Each witness will be given 5 minutes for an
opening statement, followed by a round of questions from
members.
For our second panel, we have the following witnesses. Mr.
Ronald Warfield--I have here ``Buck,'' is that correct?--CEO of
ATV/ROV/UTV Safety Consulting. Ms. Heidi Crow-Michael from
Winnsboro, Texas. Thank you for being here today. Ms. Cheryl
Falvey, Co-Chair of the Advertising and Product Risk Management
Group at Crowell, Moring, and Mr. Erik Pritchard, Executive
Vice President and General Counsel for the Recreational Off-
Highway Vehicle Association.
We will begin our second panel with Mr. Warfield. You are
recognized for 5 minutes for the purpose of an opening
statement, please.

STATEMENTS OF RONALD WARFIELD, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, ATV/
ROV/UTV SAFETY CONSULTING; HEIDI CROW-MICHAEL, WINNSBORO,
TEXAS; CHERYL A. FALVEY, CO-CHAIR, ADVERTISING AND PRODUCT RISK
MANAGEMENT GROUP, CROWELL & MORING, LLP; AND ERIK PRITCHARD,
EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT AND GENERAL COUNSEL, RECREATIONAL OFF-
HIGHWAY VEHICLE ASSOCIATION

STATEMENT OF RONALD WARFIELD

Mr. Warfield. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Members, and
members of the committee. Thank you for this opportunity to
testify in support of H.R. 999, the ROV In-Depth Examination,
or the RIDE Act. My name is Buck Warfield, and I have extensive
experience in dealing with safe and appropriate use of off-
highway vehicles. First a bit of background. I was employed by
the Maryland State Police as a police officer, or a trooper,
for over 23 years, and I retired in 1993. With regard to off-
highway vehicle experience, in 1985 I was trained and certified
by the Specialty Vehicle Institute of America, SVIA, as an ATV
instructor. In 1989 I became an ATV Safety Institute, or ASI,
licensed chief instructor, and I continued to be contracted by
ASI to train, license, and monitor other ATV instructor staff.
With respect to recreational off-highway vehicles, known as
ROVs, or side by sides, I have assisted several agencies,
including military and Government groups, in developing primary
ROV training programs, and combining the Recreational Off-
Highway Vehicle Association, or ROHVA, approved training
program in December of 2010. I currently serve as chief ROV
driver coach/trainer, and I have a training facility at my farm
in Sikesville, Maryland which has been designated by ROHVA as a
driver/coach training center, and that is one of only three in
the entire United States. On a personal note, I have logged
over 900 hours as an operator of my personal ROV since 2006. I
currently own two ROVs, utilized primarily for ROV training,
and two more utilized for daily facility maintenance at my
training center and farm.
I participated in the development of the ROV basic driver
course curriculum, which is designated for current and
prospective recreational off-highway vehicle drivers. The basic
driver course is a training opportunity that provides current
and experienced ROV drivers the chance to learn and practice
basic skills and techniques. It addresses basic operation, and
emphasizes safety awareness related to specific--related
specifically to ROV operation. The overall aim of the driver/
coach course is to provide for drivers' development in the area
of skill and risk management strategies. This includes learning
to foster driver gains in basic knowledge, skill, attitude,
values, and habits.
I am here to support H.R. 999. The legislation would only
pause the Consumer Product Safety Commissions ongoing ROV
rulemaking until the National Academy of Science, in
cooperation with the Department of Defense, and the National
Highway Traffic Safety Administration, perform a study of the
vehicle handling and requirements proposed by CPSC. I do not
claim to be an engineer, or to fully understand the complex
engineering issues, but I do understand that these are some
basic disagreements on a select few issues between engineers at
CPSC and the engineers who work for major manufacturers. I
appreciate the CPSC is well intended. I also know that the
manufacturers develop safe, capable vehicles for me, my family,
my friends, and the students that I train to use--with power
sport vehicles, including training countless people who have no
prior experience with ATVs or ROVs show me that these vehicles
are safe, with amazing capabilities when operated as intended.
H.R. 999 is a narrowly tarrowed--tailored--is narrowly
tailored to examine, first of all, the technical validity of
CPSC's proposed lateral stability and vehicle handling
requirements. Also, the number of ROV rollovers that would be
prevented if the rule were adopted, and whether there is a
technical basis for the proposal to provide information on a
point of sale hang tag about a vehicle's rollover resistance on
a progressive scale. And, lastly, the effects on the utility of
ROVs used by the U.S. military if the rule were adopted.
So, in conclusion, I think the best way to--forward would
be for the industry and CPSC to work together to find a
voluntary solution that works for all the parties, and protects
the safety of ROV drivers and passengers. Barring a cooperative
solution, the best and safest way forward is for independent
third party experts to make sure that we get it right. Thank
you, sir.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Warfield follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. Gentleman yields back, the Chair thanks the
gentleman. Ms. Crow-Michael, you are recognized for 5 minutes
for the purpose of an opening statement, please.

STATEMENT OF HEIDI CROW-MICHAEL

Ms. Crow-Michael. Thank you. My name is Heidi Crow-Michael,
and I would like to thank you all for allowing me to speak
today on behalf of my son, J.T. Crow.
I play many roles in life. I am a homemaker, and an
advocate, but most importantly a mother to five children. J.T.
Crow is my second child, and firstborn son. He was a happy and
extraordinary 9-year-old boy. At school he was a straight A
student with perfect attendance. He loved science, and learning
about birds and butterflies. J.T. also loved being outside and
playing sports like soccer and football.
J.T.'s life was cut short when he went for a ride in a 2007
Yamaha Rhino 450. While riding at a slow speed around a slight
curve, the ROV suddenly and inexplicably rolled over. Through
J.T. was wearing a safety belt, he was thrown from the Rhino
ROV, and then crushed by the half ton vehicle as it rolled
over. Paramedics rushed J.T. to the emergency room, but he had
sustained more injuries than his young body could handle. My
son died that day, when he was 9 years old, and my life was
forever changed. On a daily basis I live with the pain of the
tragedy that struck my family, and the fear of knowing that it
could happen to other families. This fear has led me to become
an advocate for ROV safety and industry reform. I have been
given the opportunity to use my son's life to make a
difference, a difference that can save lives.
As we sit here this morning, the ROV industry is one that
sets its own safety standards and makes its own rules, and
innocent people are paying the price. I am not against ROVs. I
just want safe ROVs. Many consumers buy ROVs because they have
four wheels, and sometimes seat belts, roll bars and roofs, and
they look safer than ATVs, but ROVs are not safe. And it has
been many years, and every year, every day that there is not a
better solution implemented for ROV safety is a day that more
people, more children, our children, are put at risk.
When we wrote the Citizens' Report on Utility Trained
Vehicle Hazards and Urgent Need to Improve Safety and
Performance Standards in February of 2009, asking for safety
and performance standards, including minimum occupant
containment stability and seat belt standards, we were hopeful
our recommendations for safer ROVs would become standard. We
asked for action. Nothing happened. An already unacceptably
high casualty rate will continue unless action is taken.
In 2014 ROV use resulted in at least 61 deaths, and eight
more in 2015. While less stringent than the recommended safety
measures in the Citizens' Report, the CPSC has proposed
standards that would significantly improve ROV safety. If the
ROV industry really wants to protect their consumers, why
wouldn't they want to make the safest product possible? Why
wouldn't they want to do all they could do to protect the
people who purchase their vehicles? I have been given the
opportunity to speak to many families, and we all share a
common bond. We have lost someone we love in an ROV rollover
accident. Perhaps the most painful part of my role as an
advocate for this cause is hearing the heart wrenching stories
from those families.
I know I am not alone in asking this committee to allow the
CPSC to move forward with its rulemaking to issue ROV safety
standards and stop the senseless death of our loved ones. In my
journey over the last 8 years, I have collected the names and
stories of those who shared a fate similar to J.T.'s, and it is
for them that I speak today. For Ellie Sand, age 10, Kristin
Lake, 11, Dusty Lockabey, 14, Ashlyn Vargas, 12, Dani Bernard,
18, Stephanie Katin, 26, Whitney Bland, 13, Sydney Anderson,
10, and Abbey West, age 13.
Our stories do not begin and end on the day our loved ones
were killed or injured. The battle is ongoing for all of us. We
will miss soccer games, dance recitals, graduations, birthdays,
weddings, and holiday celebrations. We will live with the
consequences forever. Today you have the opportunity, and I
think the obligation, to help me honor these young lives, their
families, and the life of my son, J.T. Crow, but it is more
than that. You have an opportunity to become a part of their
story, the part that offers hope for the future by bringing
about change. Our request is simply common sense. It is
unimaginable that anyone would feel differently. If you don't
do something about it, can you live with yourself?
Delay is a problem. Delay puts our children at risk. It has
been too many years and too many tragedies already. We urge you
not to contribute to any further delay. Thank you for your
time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Crow-Michael follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. Chair thanks the gentlelady, gentlelady yields
back. Ms. Falvey, you are recognized, 5 minutes for opening
statement, please.

STATEMENT OF CHERYL A. FALVEY

Ms. Falvey. Thank you, Chairman Burgess, Ranking Member
Schakowsky, distinguished members. Thank you for providing the
opportunity to discuss the statutory framework that the
Consumer Product Safety Commission will use to address the kind
of risk we have just heard about. I have served as the General
Counsel of the Consumer Products Safety Commission from 2008 to
2012, during the implementation of both the Virginia Graeme
Baker Pool and Spa Safety Act, as well as the Consumer Product
Safety Improvement Act. Both of those statutes made voluntary
standards mandatory. I have been asked to discuss the way the
CPSC statutes interrelate to the voluntary standards process to
inform the committee's consideration of H.R. 999.
My oral remarks will focus on three important aspects of
the interrelationship between the voluntary standards process
and mandatory law. First, safety standards developed by the
CPSC require time and effort to develop in order to meet the
statutory requirements. It is not easy. Section 7 of the CPSA
provides the CPSC with the authority to promulgate rules that
set forth performance standards and require warnings and
instructions, but only when the CPSC finds such a standard
reasonably necessary to prevent or reduce an unreasonable risk
of injury, and that the benefits of such regulation bear
reasonable relationship to the costs of the regulation. The
Commission must consider and make appropriate findings on a
variety of issues, including the degree and nature of the risk,
along with the utility of the product, and the costs and means
to achieve the objective.
To issue a final rule, the Commission must find that the
rule is necessary to reasonably eliminate or reduce the
unreasonable risk of injury, and that issuing that rule is in
the public interest. Must also find that the rule imposes the
least burdensome requirement that would adequately reduce the
risk of injury. Congress recognized just how difficult it is
for CPSC to do that when it enacted the CPSIA, and made it
easier to make voluntary standards mandatory law in the Danny
Keysar Child Safety Notification Act, due in part to resolute
efforts by Ranking Member Schakowsky, which streamlined the
process of making voluntary standards mandatory law.
Second, the CPSC statute favors voluntary standards when
they eliminate the risk of injury, and are complied with by
manufacturers. If a voluntary standard addressing the same risk
of injury is adopted and implemented, the Commission cannot
proceed with a final rule unless it finds that the voluntary
standard is not likely to eliminate the risk of injury, and
that--and/or that it is unlikely that there will be substantial
compliance with the voluntary standard. These can be very
difficult findings for the Commission to make. As a data driven
agency, the CPSC staff has to look for hard science to
demonstrate the intended safety benefits of both its standards
and consensus driven voluntary standards, but the CPSC must
still attempt to extrapolate from current data the likely
future effects of its proposed rulemaking.
The legislative history of the CPSA sets a high bar,
directing the CPSC to consider whether the voluntary standard
will reduce to a sufficient extent, such that there will no
longer exist an unreasonable risk of injury. Predicting that
there is an unreasonable risk in certain circumstances is easy.
It can be extremely difficult when you are dealing with the
highly technical issues of vehicle rollover. And that is why it
takes staff time to develop the rulemaking packages, and why it
is over 500 pages long. Determining whether there is
substantial compliance is also a challenge when so many
products come into the country now from overseas. The
legislative history of the CPSC--CPSA directs that the
Commission look at the number of complying products, rather
than the number of complying manufacturers, and those products
are coming in from all over the world.
Third, and finally, the challenges of making voluntary
standards mandatory law is one of the most important lessons we
learned in both CPSIA and the Virginia Graeme Baker Pool and
Spa Safety Act. These voluntary standards are iterative. They
evolved over years. And unless we know that the test methods
can be replicated and are reliable, making them law prematurely
can be very dangerous.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Falvey follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. Chair thanks the gentlelady. Chair recognizes
Mr. Pritchard, 5 minutes for an opening statement, please.

STATEMENT OF ERIK PRITCHARD

Mr. Pritchard. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Member, and members of the committee. Thank you for this
opportunity to testify in support of H.R. 999, the ROV In-Depth
Examination, or RIDE Act. My name is Erik Pritchard. I am the
Executive Vice President and General Counsel of the
Recreational Off-Highway Vehicle Association, known as ROHVA.
ROHVA is a not-for-profit trade association sponsored by Arctic
Cat, BRP, Honda, John Deere, Kawasaki, Polaris, Textron, and
Yamaha. ROHVA was formed to promote the safe and responsible
use of recreational off-highway vehicles, called ROVs, or side-
by-sides, in North America.
Between 2011 and 2014 alone, ROV sales are conservatively
estimated to total more than 750,000 in the U.S. These popular
off-highway vehicles are used safely by families, emergency
personnel, and the U.S. military in a variety of environments
ranging from mud, to sand, to forest, to trails. This is a high
growth industry, and a bright spot in the U.S. manufacturing
economy. ROHVA is accredited by the American National Standards
Institute to develop standards for ROVs, and has worked with
numerous stakeholders for years to develop those standards,
commencing in 2008, and culminating in voluntary standards
approved in 2010, 2011, and most recently in September 2014.
The CPSC has been involved throughout that process.
The newest ROV voluntary standard includes a new dynamic
stability and handling test and requirement, as well as new
alternative seat belt reminders that were proposed by the CPSC
staff, and driver side speed limiting seat belt interlocks
found in over 60 percent of the 2015 model year ROVs.
Nonetheless, and essentially simultaneously with the approval
of the new voluntary standard, the CPSC voted out the pending
notice of proposed rulemaking regarding ROVs. The NPR largely
ignores the new voluntary standard. Instead, the CPSC staff
analyzed the prior 2011 version of the voluntary standard, and
based it on testing of vehicles from model year 2010.
In a supplemental briefing submitted 3 weeks after the
voluntary standard was approved, the CPSC staff summarily
rejected the new standard because it did not match the
rulemaking. The CPSC's proposals are not supported by science
or real world application. One area of concern is the CPSC's
application of on road vehicle dynamics to vehicles used in
rugged off-highway environments. Meanwhile, the CPSC actually
continues to conduct testing in support of the NPR it has
already voted out.
While our review of the CPSC's data underlying the
rulemaking is not yet complete, I can share a couple initial
observations with you. According to the CPSC's data, where seat
belt use is known, approximately 90 percent of riders suffering
fatalities did not wear the seat belts that are provided in
every ROV. Next, approximately 60 percent of the severe injury
rolled sideways incidents in the data were reported by a
Plaintiff's law firm. This is a representative example of the
reporting relied on by the CPSC. A 46-year-old man was injured
by the tip over of an ROV, whose unpadded roll cage crushed his
foot on June 16, 2006. While it has been a year since his
accident, foot is still swollen, he finds it extremely
difficult to walk, and is in considerable pain, end.
Putting aside the bias of a Plaintiff's lawyers reporting,
this is not a scientifically sound approach to gathering data.
It tells us nothing about how or why the alleged tip over
occurred, and it is not possible to draw any statistical
conclusions based on this limited information. These vehicles
are significantly more complex than other products under the
CPSC's jurisdiction. The ROV manufacturers and engineers have
serious safety concerns about the effects of the CPSC's
proposals. The RIDE Act will help resolve these matters by
having these proposals examined by an independent agency, such
as the National Academy of Sciences.
This commonsense approach, resolving technical issues
before considering implementation, should be supported by
everyone. Some, however, have attempted to characterize the
RIDE Act as further delay in a long process. The record,
however, does not support that criticism. The voluntary
standard has been updated as technology has evolved. The fact
that the CPSC spent years drafting a proposed rule based on
vehicles from 2010 cannot be evidence that the rule should be
pursued, nor is the quantity of pages in the briefing package
relevant to their quality. And the NPR comment period has been
extended only because the CPSC failed, until recently, to turn
over the documents and data underlying the rulemaking.
This morning an ROV industry group is meeting with CPSC
staff to discuss voluntary standards. ROHVA members went with--
met with the CPSC on May 5. The effort to establish a mutually
agreeable voluntary standard is the best approach, a view, that
I understand, is shared by the CPSC in light of this morning.
But in the meantime, the NPR remains pending. It would be a
mistake to proceed to a mandatory rule without first conducting
the testing contemplated by the RIDE Act. It is imperative that
we get this right for the families, emergency personnel, and
the military who use these vehicles in a variety of off-highway
terrains and conditions. Thank you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pritchard follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentleman, gentleman
yields back. The Chair is prepared to recognize Ms. Schakowsky.
Five minutes for your questions, please.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have to
begin by saying, as a consumer advocate pretty much all of my
adult life, I have been around these conversations for a very
long time, and, frankly, I think this panel is reflective of
what happens to consumers, three to one, on not doing these
kinds of mandatory standards.
You know, one example--I have been working on this rear
visibility, and the number of children who are killed in--
when--often their parent or grandparent drives their car over
backwards on them. We had one in Chicago recently. And now we
are going to have, by 2018, mandatory in every car there is
going to be a camera. That bill was passed in 2008, and an
average of two children die every week. Well, heck, that is not
that many kids. 355 deaths from these vehicles since--between
2003 and 2013. And thank you, Ms. Crow-Michael, for reading
some of those names, and bringing it home to us. And thank you
for your courageous testimony today.
I would like to hear from the industry, instead of why it
all ought to be voluntary--because you said 15--I guess that is
under the voluntary standards. Fifteen people have died this
year, is that right, already? Isn't that--200 and--2015?
Ms. Crow-Michael. Yes, correct.
Ms. Schakowsky. Yes. So that is under voluntary standards,
I take it. Well, maybe cost/benefit doesn't make that
worthwhile to have mandatory standards. I disagree. And I think
that, while you want to get it right, absolutely, I am sick of
hearing, the fault is the trial lawyers, the fault is the user
who doesn't put on the seat belt. And if we can do something to
save another life, and I am with you, then we need to have
mandatory standards.
So I am wondering if you had any feeling that you had any
reason not to trust the vehicle that your son was using when
you looked at that.
Ms. Crow-Michael. In the beginning, I really feel like the
vehicles give a perception of safety, but ROVs are not safe.
And the fact that so many children have lost their lives has
proven that, time and time again.
Ms. Schakowsky. And when your son was bucked into the
vehicle, did you trust that the seat belt would keep him from
being thrown from the vehicle, just like it would in a car?
Ms. Crow-Michael. Of course. We think the products that we
buy are safe.
Ms. Schakowsky. Did the vehicle your son was riding look
like the kind of vehicle that would lead to more than 300
deaths? Or I guess you already said the vehicle----
Ms. Crow-Michael. Absolutely not.
Ms. Schakowsky. Proponents of the CPSC rule, an activist
like yourself, had said that the type of everyday use of the
ROVs that lead to rollover deaths is not necessarily obvious to
riders, particularly children. Do you agree?
Ms. Crow-Michael. I agree.
Ms. Schakowsky. And based on your work advocating on behalf
of other victims of ROV accidents, do you believe that children
are particularly vulnerable?
Ms. Crow-Michael. I do, and I believe waiting for more data
is waiting for more deaths.
Ms. Schakowsky. So what I would like to see is, rather than
saying we have to have perhaps years more of study, and years
more of death, that the industry work with the advocates, and
with the CPSC, and with their investigators, to--if you don't
think the rule--the mandatory rule is proper, then figure out
what a mandatory rule ought to look like. Didn't you say, Ms.
Falvey, that there are imports, et cetera, and that, you know,
we need to look at all of those?
Ms. Falvey. The way the statute would work, the Commission
would need to know that there is substantial compliance before
they relied upon a voluntary standard. Or they could just
decide, we don't have confidence in these foreign
manufacturers, and that they will be compliant, and move
forward with their final rule.
Ms. Schakowsky. So why don't we have a mandatory standard
that would apply to all, including imports? I mean, I just feel
so strongly that when we have an opportunity to do something
that is going to save a life, and I know that there are
complicated mathematics that figures out money spent, is it
worth a life? I don't really abide by that, and it seems to me
that 335 is enough, I think your son is enough, that we ought
to move ahead. I support moving ahead as quickly as possible
with the mandatory standards, and I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentlelady, gentlelady
yields back. I will recognize myself, 5 minutes for questions.
Ms. Falvey, let me just, first off, say thank you for your
work on the Virginia Graeme Baker pool standards. I was on the
subcommittee when that bill went through, and actually added
the language for ornamental pools because, as you may recall,
we lost a number of people at a Fort Worth water garden just
shortly before that came through, which underscored to me the
necessity of including ornamental pools, as well as backyard
pools. But when you were doing the drain cover recall, did you
go from a voluntary standard to a mandatory standard during
that process?
Ms. Falvey. Yes, we did.
Mr. Burgess. And what were the advantages, or perhaps the
disadvantages, in moving from the voluntary to the mandatory
standard?
Ms. Falvey. The advantage is always safety and stopping
death. You are always tempted to move as quickly as possible in
order to address an addressable risk. The disadvantage in that
circumstance is----
Mr. Burgess. Let me just interrupt you there for a second,
if I could, because--which is the more expeditious path, the
voluntary or the mandatory?
Ms. Falvey. It depends, but it can be more expeditious to
rely on the voluntary standard. You get industry and the CPSC
staff working together on a standard that everyone can agree
on.
The problem with doing it too quickly, and mandating it as
law when it is not quite ready to be law is that, in that case,
we didn't make things safer fast enough, in that the drain
covers were tested by different labs in different ways. We
didn't know that the test results--exactly how to do the tests
at the lab level, and there were different labs passing
different drain covers, and we ended up with pools with brand
new drain covers installed that weren't compliant. And we had
to recall those, pull them out, and put them in, properly
tested.
That works well in the voluntary world, where things can be
iterative and change over time. When you make it mandatory law,
it changes the equation. And so while it is helpful, from a
safety perspective, to move as quickly as possible, and that is
always the CPSC's goal, if you don't do it right, it can cost
an enormous amount of money, and it doesn't save lives. And
that is what we want to try to avoid.
Mr. Burgess. Very well. Now, we--Mr. Pritchard, I guess I
should ask this question of you. The list that Ms. Crow-Michael
read is impressive, but it is also impressive because of the
young age of so many of the people who were--who met their
demise. Is there--do you placard these machines with an age
restriction, or a recommendation for training under certain
ages?
Mr. Pritchard. We do. The industry's recommendation is
that, in order to drive an ROV, you need to be at least 16
years of age, and have a valid driver's license. These are not
toys. These are not meant to be driven by children. This is on
the machines, it is part of the free online training that is
available to everyone. It is certainly part of the hands-on
training that is available. Children don't belong behind the
wheel of these vehicles.
We have covered a lot of ground here in sort of very short
form. One thing I do want to clarify is that, when we talk
about a voluntary standard, and the requirements under the
voluntary standard, that is enforceable. That is enforceable by
the CPSC. It is not voluntary in the sense of an opt-in and
opt-out. It is the standard. And that is how the approximately
14 to 15,000 other products that are under the jurisdiction of
the CPSC are handled. I mean, you could--you can imagine the
CPSC trying to write 15,000 different standards for every
product out there. So the voluntary standard is enforceable.
Mr. Burgess. Yes. Let me just interrupt you for a minute,
because I am going to run out of time, and I want to be
respectful of the other members.
Now, Ms. Crow-Michael, on your--I think it is a Facebook
page that is set up to the memory of your son, there is a list
of I guess safety measures, for want of a better term. One
mentions the age, another mentions a helmet. I mean, these are
things that your organization recommends?
Ms. Crow-Michael. First off, I don't have an organization,
per se. But if we are talking about the fact that children
shouldn't be on them, then I would have to say, what about
Karen Harwood, 46, or Andrea Jones, who is 34?
Mr. Burgess. And that is an excellent point, and I was
going to ask Mr. Warfield, is there--you have studied this for
a long time.
Mr. Warfield. Yes.
Mr. Burgess. Does, you know, the age placarding may be one
thing, but does there--I want to say this as nicely as I can,
but does body mass make a difference? That is, the lighter the
driver--because most of the people older than age 16 that Ms.
Crow-Michael mentioned on her list, most of those were women,
so presumably of lighter body weight. Does that make a
difference? Is that something that you have studied?
Mr. Warfield. Not the weight itself, sir. What I see time
and time again with these machines, it is operator error. It
has almost nothing to do with the design of the vehicle. Please
let me carry it one step further here. I have been operating
these machines since 1985. I currently have 13 ATVs. I have
four ROVs. I have a brand-new one coming in today. I am on
those ROVs every day, either maintenance or through training. I
have never rolled an ROV over. I have never rolled an ATV over.
I have operated these machines in every State in the United
States, including Alaska and Hawaii, except for North Dakota. I
don't know why I missed that on North Dakota.
But what I am getting at is I put these machines through
their paces, through training, through an advocate of riding. I
wear a helmet, I make sure the proper age person is operating
the machine. I follow the guidelines. So what I am saying is, I
have trusted this industry. I have trusted this industry that
they have shown me--they have given me and my family a vehicle
that is safe to operate. I am really concerned that now CPSC is
saying, wait a minute, there is something wrong here.
And to answer your question, why wait? I have been
operating a machine that was perfectly capable of doing
everything I wanted. If we are going to make a change, let us
make sure that change is not a negative change.
Mr. Burgess. All right. I am going to ask you to hold that
thought, and the Chair will recognize Ms. Clarke. Five minutes
for questions, please.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the Ranking
Member, and I thank our witnesses for their testimony here
today. It has been more than a half a decade since the Consumer
Product Safety Commission issued the advance notice of proposed
rulemaking in 2009. Since then, CPSC has conducted thorough
research to determine the appropriate mandatory standards for
ROVs. CPSC staff reviewed more than 550 ROV related incidents,
335 of which resulted in the death of the driver, or passenger,
or both. Each incident was reviewed by a multi-disciplinary
team, included--including an economist, human factors engineer,
a health scientist, and a statistician. The Commission also
worked with FEA Limited, a CPSC contractor, to create a ROV
rollover simulator from scratch. In addition to the agency's
own data collection, this year the CPSC also held a 7-hour
public meeting in which the Commission heard testimony from and
asked questions of witnesses both for and against the proposal.
By any traditional measure, internal research, hypothetical
simulation, incident review, and public input, the Commission
has conducted a thorough investigation and has more than enough
information to issue appropriate standards.
Ms. Crow-Michael, your son was not the only person affected
by weak safety standards that allowed Yamaha to continue
selling defective versions of the Rhino ROV. In 2009 the
Consumer Product Safety Commission estimated that 59 people
were killed riding the Rhino. In fact, the Rhino incident--
accident epidemic was one of the primary drivers of the
Commission's original rulemaking. But H.R. 999 would force the
CPSC to contract with the National Academy of Sciences to
conduct further research before implementing these reasonable
and thoroughly tested standards. So my question to you, Ms.
Crow-Michael, is do you think more data is needed to determine
the ROVs that are currently on the market are unsafe?
Ms. Crow-Michael. CPSC, I think they have worked hard to
get the data that they have. They have spent money to gather
and understand that data. More delay puts and all people at
serious risk of injurly [sic]--injury or death, I am sorry. But
I don't think more data is needed. I think it has been enough
time, and I--and, like I said before, waiting for more data is
waiting for more death.
Ms. Clarke. Then let me just follow up with that question.
You have suffered an unspeakable loss because of an unsafe ROV.
Do you think that the CPSC is rushing to judgment in proposing
standards for a recreational activity responsible for more than
330 deaths in the last decade?
Ms. Crow-Michael. No.
Ms. Clarke. I thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back the
balance of my time.
Mr. Burgess. Chair thanks the gentlelady, gentlelady yields
back. Chair recognize the gentleman from Kentucky, 5 minutes
for questions, please.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all for
being here to testify today. I have a question for Mr.
Pritchard. I notice in your testimony you mention that the
ROHVA is accredited by the American National Standards
Institute to develop standards for the equipment,
configuration, and performance of ROVs. Can you tell us more
about this process, and how voluntary safety standards have
been developed over the last few years, and does this process
involve the CPC? I know you touched on it a little bit, but how
that process of voluntary standards that are mandated, and is
the CPSC involved?
Mr. Pritchard. Absolutely, and cut me off when you get
tired of listening, because I could talk about this all day.
ROHVA was formed in 2007. The work on a voluntary standard
began in 2008, so essentially almost immediately. In 2010 a
voluntary standard was developed and published, then another
version in 2011, and another version in 2014 reflecting the
evolving technology.
The way the process works is you get the process started
through a procedure mandated by--it is ANSI [ph], that is the
acronym, for this process. You put out a proposed draft
standard to the canvas, and the canvas is made of a variety of
stakeholders, and the stakeholders include--in every iteration
has included the CPSC. It has included consumer groups. It has
included industry. It has included user groups. It is a broad
swath. And the way this works is people get the draft, the
canvasees comment, and submit their comments back in. The
comments are shared with everyone on the canvas, then ROHVA
responds to those comments. Each one has to say, your
suggestion for this area, say seat belts, here is our response.
Then the canvas gets all of those comments from ROHVA back
to the canvasee, so everyone gets to see this full exchange of
information, and then a consensus is built around the voluntary
standard. It is then sent to ANSI, here is how we did it, and
ANSI checks that process and verifies that you followed the
ANSI procedure. When ANSI approves it, then it becomes
official, and ultimately a book, for lack of a better word, is
published, and that becomes the standard by which all of the
vehicles subject to that voluntary standard must conform.
Mr. Guthrie. So then it becomes mandatory?
Mr. Pritchard. It is voluntary----
Mr. Guthrie. So what is the difference between mandatory
and voluntary, then?
Mr. Pritchard. Sure. It is voluntary in the sense of--it is
developed by stakeholders, but it is enforceable. Mandatory
means the CPSC imposes what it thinks is the best approach. And
where we are now is at an impasse between a voluntary standard
that is brand new, that just came out in September 2014, and a
mandatory standard, or at least a proposal for a mandatory
standard, based on the old standard, but a mandatory standard
proposed by the CPSC. And the engineers and industry just think
CPSC has got this wrong.
Mr. Guthrie. Well, was the voluntary standard better?
What--was it more likely to protect life than the mandatory
standard?
Mr. Pritchard. So----
Mr. Guthrie. What are the critical differences, and why is
yours better?
Mr. Pritchard. So there are three--what I call three
fundamental differences between the two. One is on vehicle
handling. The CPSC wants to impose something called an
understeer mandate. Every vehicle must understeer, and I can
tell you about that. The next is testing lateral stability. The
CPSC's test for lateral stability, frankly, suffers from
problems with repeatability and reproducibility, which the CPSC
is conducting testing to address right now. The final piece is
seat belts. CPSC has proposed a seat belt interlock which would
essentially prevent the vehicle from moving above 15 miles an
hour if the seat belts aren't moved in both the driver and the
passenger seat.
Now, in the driver seat, there is actually a lot of
agreement, and the voluntary standard includes that as an
approach. The dispute really is over the passenger seat. CPSC
commissioned a study of the passenger seat interlock. They just
got the results I think in February. They published them in
March. So they got these after the voluntary standard was voted
out. And the study confirmed what industry had been telling--
that we have heard from our own consumers, which is no one
wants this passenger side seat belt interlock because drivers
don't want to lose control of their vehicle. You add on top of
that the technical challenges, which would be if you put your
dog in the seat, your toolbox in the seat--this is an area for
which there is no answer.
And the final wrinkle on this is that even on the driver's
side seat belt interlock, you--it doesn't work with a diesel or
carbureted engine, because it has to be talking with a
computer. Computer has to talk from the seat belt through the
speed limited to tell it that we have a connection here. So
that is one small example of what is a, frankly, complex area.
And the CPSC's engineers, while I believe well intentioned,
don't have this right.
And I want to add, we didn't get--we went through this
voluntary standard process last year, which I didn't think the
CPSC was very engaged in. A better way to put that, though, is
that they seem to be much more engaged with industry now. And
there is a meeting taking place right now between industry and
CPSC staff to discuss the voluntary standards. That is the path
forward.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. And, before I yield back, if I
could ask--I want to say, Ms. Crow-Michael, thank you for
coming. Your advocacy is very important, and thoughts and
prayers are with you. But thank you for taking this cause, and
hopefully we can come to the right standard and do the right--
and have the right thing as a result. Thank you.
Mr. Burgess. Gentleman yields back. The Chair thanks the
gentleman. Chair recognizes Ms. Schakowsky for the purpose of a
unanimous consent request.
Ms. Schakowsky. I would like to put on the record the
statement of G.K. Butterfield; the statement of John Sand,
father of an ROV victim; letters from the American Academy of
Pediatrics; letter from various consumer groups; testimony of
Rachel Weintraub of the Consumer Federation of America before
the CPSC; Citizens' Report that Ms. Crow-Michael referred to in
her testimony. We will add that to the permanent record.
Mr. Burgess. Without objection, so ordered.
Chair would just note I offered Ms. Schakowsky a follow-up
question. She declined. I did have one follow-up question that
I wanted to ask.
Ms. Crow-Michael, your son was injured on the Yamaha Rhino
450. Just ask the question of anyone on the panel, is that
particular model still available? Is that something that is
still sold on the market?
Mr. Pritchard. I can address it.
Mr. Burgess. Please.
Mr. Pritchard. That vehicle is not sold. In fact, you are
talking about a vehicle from 2007, if I recall your testimony
correctly. We are now three voluntary standards past that, so
the technology has evolved beyond that. I can add, there are
tens of thousands of those Rhinos still in use that people
enjoy, at this point have probably put on hundreds of
thousands, if not more, hours of use. But, no, the technology
for these vehicles has evolved, and we are now in a new
standard.
Mr. Burgess. But you could still buy one on Craigslist?
Mr. Pritchard. Yes, I would guess.
Mr. Burgess. Yes. So it is going to be an informational
challenge to get information to people who may be new
purchasers of old machines.
Mr. Pritchard. But those vehicles--and, respectfully, are
not defective, period--I think that these incidents are more
complicated than what we have heard today. I don't think that
is the focus of today. I think the focus of today is, can we
get this right between industry and the CPSC, and if the CPSC
just won't listen to industry, they won't listen to the folks
who make these vehicles, maybe they will listen to the National
Academy of Sciences.
Mr. Burgess. Very well. Chair wishes to thank all members
of the panel. Ms. Crow-Michael, I just echo what Mr. Guthrie
said. I am sure every member of the subcommittee extends to you
our condolences for your loss.
Seeing that there are no further members wishing to ask
questions, before we conclude, I would like to submit the
following documents for inclusion in the record by unanimous
consent: statement for the record from Commissioner Marietta
Robinson from the Consumer Product Safety Commission; a
letter--we already did Mr. Olson's letter; a response letter
from Chairman Elliot Kaye to Chairman Olson.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Burgess. Pursuant to committee rules, I remind members
they have 10 business days to submit additional questions for
the record. I ask the witnesses to submit their response within
10 business days upon receipt of the questions. Without
objection, again, my thanks to the panel, and thank you for
staying with us through a long morning. Without objection, the
subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:45 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

As one of the smaller agencies that this committee
oversees, the Consumer Product Safety Commission has a
critically important mission: to protect consumers against
unreasonable risks of injury from consumer products.
Over 15,000 different products fall within the Commission's
jurisdiction-from toys and baby cribs to swimming pools and
recreational off-highway vehicles. The Commission's work is
critically important, but over the years there have been many
issues raised with the Commission's implementation of its
mission. When the Commission overreaches, it can jeopardize
safety and erode Congress' trust. I have a responsibility to
families in southwest Michigan to ensure the CPSC is focusing
on its whole mission of safety, and not just on headlines or a
few interest driven priorities.
Today, I am pleased to see Chairman Elliot Kaye, as well as
Commissioners Ann Marie Buerkle and Joseph Mohorovic before the
subcommittee for the first time in their new capacities. And
Commissioner Adler, we welcome you back. I would also like to
welcome the witnesses of the second panel here to talk about
Mr. Pompeo's bipartisan legislation, H.R. 999.
Oversight of an agency with such broad jurisdiction is
critical to ensuring unsafe products are either stopped from
coming into the stream of commerce or are taken off the shelves
in a seamless and timely manner. I look forward to hearing from
the Commissioners about issues currently before them as well as
their budget and regulatory priorities for the upcoming fiscal
year. In particular, I would like an update on the progress
being made on third party testing burdens that impact small
businesses.
I would also like to hear more about how the Commission
prioritizes consumer education initiatives for known hazards in
specialized circumstances, such as the newly announced ``Best
for Kids'' program for window coverings, and how working with
industry has provided opportunities for additional outreach. We
have seen an increase in company-driven safety initiatives,
ranging from this year's Super Bowl ads to the self-directed
recall of Fitbit activity bands last year. The potential for
cooperation and partnerships should not be overlooked when
consumer safety is at stake.
Everyone in this room shares the common goal of protecting
consumers. Today's hearing is a positive step and I look
forward to continuing to work with my colleagues on the off-
road vehicles and other issues.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Mr. Kaye's answers to submitted questions have been
retained in committee files and also are available at  http://
docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF17/20150519/103481/HHRG-114-IF17-
Wstate-KayeE-20150519-SD005.pdf.]

[all]
