- OVERSIGHT OF FEDERAL FACILITY CLEANUP UNDER CERCLA

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF FEDERAL FACILITY CLEANUP UNDER CERCLA

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND THE ECONOMY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 11 & 16, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-73

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

98-219                         WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                     Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

Subcommittee on Environment and the Economy

JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
Chairman
GREGG HARPER, Vice Chairman          PAUL TONKO, New York
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                LOIS CAPPS, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JERRY McNERNEY, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TONY CARDENAS, California
BILL FLORES, Texas                   FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina           officio)
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------

SEPTEMBER 11, 2015

Page
Hon. John Shimkus, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Illinois, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Paul Tonko, a Representative in Congress from the State of
New York, opening statement....................................     4
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................     5
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     6

Witnesses

Mathy Stanislaus, Assistant Administrator, Office of Solid Waste
and Emergency Response, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency...     8
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Answers to submitted questions...............................    89
Mark Whitney, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for
Environmental Management, U.S. Department of Energy............    19
Prepared statement...........................................    22
Answers to submitted questions...............................   104
John Conger, Performing the Duties of the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Energy, Installations, and Environment, U.S.
Department of Defense..........................................    27
Prepared statement...........................................    29
Answers to submitted questions...............................   117
Alfredo Gomez, Director, Natural Resources and Environment, U.S.
Government Accountability Office...............................    36
Prepared statement...........................................    38
Answers to submitted questions...............................   145

SEPTEMBER 16, 2015
Witnesses

Elizabeth Dieck, Director of Environmental Affairs, South
Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control, on
behalf of the Environmental Council of the States..............   150
Prepared statement...........................................   153
Answers to submitted questions...............................   204
Bonnie Buthker, Chief Southwest District Office, Ohio EPA, on
behalf of the Association of State and Territorial Solid Waste
Management Officials...........................................   166
Prepared statement...........................................   168
Answers to submitted questions...............................   211
Michael Houlemard, Jr., Executive Officer, Fort Ord Reuse
Authority......................................................   174
Prepared statement...........................................   177

Submitted Material

Statement of the Department of the Interior......................   196

OVERSIGHT OF FEDERAL FACILITY CLEANUP UNDER CERCLA, DAY 1

----------

FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 11, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment and the Economy,
Committee on Energy and Commerce
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:02 a.m., in
room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John Shimkus,
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Shimkus, Harper, Murphy, Latta,
Johnson, Bucshon, Hudson, Upton (ex officio), Tonko, Schrader,
Green, DeGette, and Pallone (ex officio).
Also Present: Representative Luj AE1an.
Staff Present: Will Batson, Legislative Clerk; David
McCarthy, Chief Counsel, Environment/Economy; Tina Richards,
Counsel, Environment; Chris Sarley, Policy Coordinator,
Environment and Economy; Dan Schneider, Press Secretary; Peter
Spencer, Professional Staff Member, Oversight; Christine
Brennan, Minority Press Secretary; Jacqueline Cohen, Minority
Senior Counsel; Tiffany Guarascio, Minority Deputy Staff
Director and Chief Health Advisor; Rick Kessler, Minority
Senior Advisor and Staff Director, Energy and Environment; and
Alexander Ratner, Minority Policy Analyst.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN SHIMKUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Shimkus. We are going to call the hearing to order.
I want to thank everyone for the early start time, both
from the agencies and my colleagues. As we know, Friday fly-out
days are challenging for Members, so it is good to get started.
Just, also, a point of notice is that there are really two
panels. This is the first panel of our hearing, and then we
will have other stakeholders later on.
So, with that, I will recognize myself for an opening
statement, 5 minutes.
I welcome today's witnesses, and thank you all for
appearing to discuss protection from and cleanup of hazardous
waste at Federal Government facilities. Today we will hear
perspectives of the Department of Defense, the Department of
Energy, the Environmental Protection Agency, and the Government
Accountability Office.
Thousands of ordinary citizens in private-sector companies
face the daily challenge of controlling costs and making a
profit without leaving behind a trail of hazardous waste. The
same citizens and companies must meet both Federal and State
prevention and cleanup standards.
In meeting all these challenges, they face distinct
disadvantages when compared with their Federal agency
counterparts. One, they can't rely on the U.S. taxpayer to
cover either their compliance or their cleanup costs. They also
can't always choose their own remediation options. And they
can't fall back on the defense of sovereign immunity when they
are taken to court.
While those private-sector companies focus on making a
profit while complying with the Environmental Protection Agency
standards, the Defense and Energy Departments focus on national
security. And national security can be a messy business,
involving everything from motor oil to munitions waste. And
even national security is no excuse for leaving a mess in your
neighbor's backyard.
As we drill down into specifics on an agency-by-agency
basis, we will learn that some of our Federal partners are more
successful than others in juggling these dual responsibilities
to their core mission and to protecting land and water. The
agencies' challenges are not uniform, and neither are their
budgets.
We have four objectives today. The first one is to get a
detailed update on where agencies stand on meeting their good-
neighbor obligations. The second one is to find out what the
challenges are and how those challenges vary from agency to
agency. The third one is to understand what the resource
management relationship is between each of these agencies and
the EPA. And, finally, to get GAO's perspective on who is doing
a good job, who is not, and what they can do to improve.
Next week, a second panel for this hearing will provide the
state perspective. Under our system of government, states have
primary responsibility for protecting their own natural
resources, including land and water, from environment
degradation. But a state's challenge is made more difficult, if
not impossible, to meet if the entity responsible for the
environmental mess is a Federal agency, with all the power that
status implies.
After the episode last month in Colorado with the release
of contaminated water into the Animas River, I wouldn't be
surprised if some in our audience thought first of EPA when
they heard the phrase ``Federal agency responsible for an
environmental mess,'' but the Colorado mine release is not the
focus of this hearing.
Since we first got the news of the blowout, our committee
has been looking into the Colorado mine incident on a separate
track from this hearing. At the beginning, we had lots of
questions and almost no answers. Gradually, we have been
piecing together the facts as best we can. We are not finished
yet. I trust our friend Mr. Stanislaus and everyone in the
administration will cooperate with our committee as we pursue
that inquiry.
Correct, Mr. Stanislaus?
And he shakes his head ``yes.''
Thank you.
Today I hope that we can focus on the Federal facilities
issue and whether important agencies such as the Department of
Defense and the Department of Energy are good neighbors and
good stewards of the land and water that they touch wherever
they have a presence.
I will now just end with--my background is also as a
military officer, understanding national security and the
challenges that face us. So the balancing of that and also
being a good neighbor toward folks is very important to me, but
I would also want to say I appreciate the work that the DOE and
the Department of Defense does in protecting our citizens.
With that, I yield back my time and yield 5 minutes to the
ranking member, Mr. Tonko.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shimkus follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. John Shimkus

I welcome today's witnesses and thank you all for appearing
to discuss protection from, and clean-up of, hazardous wastes
at Federal government facilities. Today we'll hear perspectives
of the Department of Defense, the Department of Energy, the
Environmental Protection Agency, and the Government
Accountability Office.
Thousands of ordinary citizens and private sector companies
face the daily challenge of controlling costs and making a
profit without leaving behind a trail of hazardous waste. The
same citizens and companies must meet both Federal and state
prevention and clean-up standards.
In meeting all these challenges they face distinct
disadvantages when compared with their Federal agency
counterparts:

they can't rely on the U.S. taxpayer to cover
either their compliance or their clean-up costs.

they can't always choose their own remediation
options. and

they can't fall back on the defense of sovereign
immunity when they are taken to court.
While those private sector companies focus on making a
profit while complying with environmental protection standards,
the Defense and Energy Departments focus on national security.
And national security can be a messy business involving
everything from motor oil to munitions waste. But even national
security is no excuse for leaving a mess in your neighbor's
back yard.
As we drill down into the specifics on an agency-by-agency
basis, we'll learn that some of our Federal partners are more
successful than others at juggling these duel responsibilities,
to their core mission and to protecting land and water. The
agencies' challenges are not uniform and neither are their
budgets.
We have four objectives today:

to get a detailed update on where agencies stand
meeting their good- neighbor obligations;

to find out what the challenges are and how those
challenges vary from agency to agency;

to understand what the resource management
relationship is between each of these agencies and theEPA; and

to get GAO's perspective on who's doing a good
job, who's not, and what they can do to improve.
Next week a second panel for this hearing will provide the
State perspective. Under our system of government States have
primary responsibility for protecting their own natural
resources, including land and water, from environmental
degradation. But a State's challenge is made difficult if not
impossible to meet if the entity responsible for the
environmental mess is a Federal agency with all the power that
status implies.
After the episode last month in Colorado with the release
of contaminated water into the Animas River, I wouldn't be
surprised if some in our audience thought first of EPA when
they heard the phrase ``Federal agency responsible for an
environmental mess.'' But the Colorado mine release is not the
focus of this hearing.
Since we first got the news of the blow-out, our Committee
has been looking into the Colorado mine incident on a separate
track from this hearing. At the beginning we had lots of
questions and almost no answers. Gradually, we've been piecing
together the facts, as best we can. We are not finished yet. I
trust our friend, Mr. Stanislaus, and everyone in the
Administration, will cooperate with our Committee as we pursue
that inquiry. --Mr. Stanislaus?
Thank you. Today, I hope that we can focus on the Federal
facilities issue and whether important agencies such as DOD and
DOE are good neighbors and good stewards of the land and water
that they touch wherever they have a presence.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TONKO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And good morning, and thank you to our witnesses for
participating this morning.
And I thank the chair for holding a hearing on this very
important topic.
Congress enacted the Comprehensive Environmental Response
Compensation and Liability Act, commonly known as Superfund,
some 35 years ago, but communities across the country are still
dealing with the legacy of toxic waste. After a rough start,
the Superfund program has had success in containing and
cleaning up serious contamination problems in many of our
communities, but there is still much work to do and too few
dollars available to do it.
The good news is that sites are being cleaned up. When
sites are cleaned up, the surrounding community benefits from a
cleaner, healthier environment, and returning abandoned,
contaminated land to productive use improves the local economy.
In addition to the sites on private or State land, there
are many Superfund sites on Federal land. The Federal
Government operates facilities across our country on millions
of acres of land. Some of the Federal site contamination is due
to the government's activities, but there are also many areas
where mining, drilling, and industrial activities by private
parties took place decades ago, leaving a legacy of
contamination.
The Federal Government is subject to the Superfund law, and
the government spends billions of dollars annually to clean up
hazardous contamination at Federal facilities.
A few years ago, I asked the Government Accountability
Office to look at the status of cleanup activities on Federal
lands and to focus on the agencies and departments other than
the Departments of Defense and Energy. These department sites
are generally well known and have received considerable
oversight and attention. The situation for the United States
Department of Agriculture, the Department of the Interior, and
other Federal agencies was less clear.
Under the Superfund law, Federal agencies are required to
identify, assess, and clean up contamination on the properties
that they administer, but cleanups cannot begin if sites have
not been identified and characterized. As Mr. Gomez and his
team found, this first crucial step has not been completed in
the case of these other departments. And because of the nature
of the sites on Department of Interior and Department of
Agriculture lands and the limited budgets for these activities,
it does not appear we will have a complete, reliable inventory
in the near future.
We spend a lot of time these days worrying about how much
the government is spending. I worry about that, as well, but I
also worry about how we are distributing these dollars that we
do spend. Across-the-board cuts and arbitrary caps are
preventing us from doing some of our most important and
difficult tasks: setting priorities and ensuring that we are
providing funds to programs that deliver sustained benefits to
our citizens. And returning contaminated land to productive
use, preventing pollution migration, and reducing people's
exposure to dangerous toxins certainly is a sustained benefit.
With the passage of Superfund, we made a commitment to
identify and clean up contaminated properties. We should
fulfill that commitment. I don't know that new legislation is
required to do this. I do believe that additional oversight of
this program, however, would be very useful. This hearing makes
an important contribution to that effort.
Mr. Gomez, thank you and your team for your work on this
issue. You have given us a lot to consider and provide some
constructive recommendations.
I do appreciate the opportunity for the subcommittee to
examine our Superfund program. The citizens living in
communities with these sites are anxious, and they are anxious
to have them cleaned up and returned to safe, productive use.
The responsible parties, whether public or private, want to
accomplish those cleanups in a cost-effective manner. These are
goals that we can all support, so I do hope to work with you,
Chairman Shimkus, and the other members of the subcommittee to
achieve these goals.
And I thank all for participating in the hearing this
morning and next week, and I look forward to your testimony on
what is a very important issue.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
I would like to submit, with unanimous consent, a statement
for the record from Chairman Upton for his opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Today's hearing examines the important role federal
agencies play in protecting our land and water resources
through cleanups at federally owned and operated facilities.
Federal officials in all branches, but particularly at EPA,
want to exert leadership in environmental protection. As most
successful coaches know, inspiring leadership comes first by
setting a good example. Federal agencies must set a good
example in how they assess contamination and conduct cleanups
if they expect the American people to take their efforts to
prevent and clean up hazardous materials seriously. We know
that federal agencies do many things well but there is room for
improvement. Not all agencies have the same level of success at
conducting environmental cleanups and today's hearing will
examine what works and what doesn't with respect to Federal
remediation under CERCLA. We should work to figure out what can
be done to improve cleanups to better protect our nation's land
and water.
EPA may have room to improve how it conducts response
activities under CERCLA too. Last month we learned that an EPA
contractor working at a mine in Colorado somehow triggered a
release of contaminated water into the Animas River. This is
unacceptable and we are still investigating the incident to
find out:
What exactly went wrong? Who was responsible? What were the
standards of care the personnel at the site were operating
under and did they breach those standards? What can be done to
prevent future such incidents?
I hope that lessons we learn from this incident can help us
make good, corrective policy choices. No one ever wants to see
headlines like that again.
But today I thank witnesses from the Department of Defense,
Department of Energy, EPA, and GAO to compare their
perspectives on CERCLA cleanups. And next week we will welcome
back the Environmental Council of States and the Association of
State and Territorial Solid Waste Management Officials who will
be sharing with us the State perspective on federal facility
cleanups.
I commend all my committee colleagues for working together
on these issues.

Mr. Shimkus. Is there anyone on the majority side wishing
to seek time?
Seeing none, the chair now recognizes the ranking member of
the full committee, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and our ranking
member, for calling this hearing on the Superfund program.
Superfund has been an incredibly important tool for
protecting public health and the economy in my home State of
New Jersey and throughout the country, and thousands of
contaminated sites have been cleaned up and revitalized,
including many former Federal sites.
As successful as Superfund has been, there is still so much
important cleanup work to be done. I expect we will hear from
today's panel about the staggering number of abandoned mine
sites--just a subset of Federal sites and even smaller subset
of contaminated sites nationwide. And I hope that my colleagues
on this subcommittee will join me in working to ensure that
EPA, other Federal agencies, state and local communities, have
the resources needed to get these cleanups done.
Superfund sites are contaminated with toxic substances that
can make their way into drinking-water wells, creeks and
rivers, backyards, playgrounds, and streets. Communities
impacted by these sites can face restrictions on water use and
recreational activities as well as economic losses as property
values decline due to contaminated land. In the worst cases,
residents of these communities can face health problems such as
cardiacimpacts, infertility, low birth weight, birth defects,
leukemia, and respiratory difficulties.
The major environmental laws that are truly the powerful
legacy of this committee have consistently held that polluters
must pay for environmental harms. The principle is the heart of
the Superfund program and should be preserved. For Federal
facility cleanups, that means that we in Congress have a duty
to ensure funds are appropriated to cover cleanup needs. For
private facilities, that means we have a duty to reinstate the
Superfund tax and stop charging taxpayers for cleanups.
In 1995, despite opposition from myself and other
Democrats, a Republican Congress allowed the Superfund tax to
expire. Before its expiration, the collected taxes were placed
into a Superfund trust fund that was used for the cleanups of
so-called orphan sites, where the party responsible for the
pollution either no longer existed or could not afford the cost
of the cleanup. The thousands of abandoned mines across the
Western United States are examples of such sites. Without those
revenues, important Superfund cleanups have been delayed, the
backlog of sites needing cleanup has grown, and the costs have
shifted to the taxpayers.
As many of you know, I have routinely introduced
legislation, the Superfund Polluter Pays Act, which would
replenish the Superfund trust fund by reinstituting the taxes
that the oil and gas companies paid between 1980 and 1996. The
legislation reinstates a 9.7-cents-a-barrel tax on petroleum, a
tax on 42 chemicals, and a corporate environmental income tax
of 12 percent on taxable income in excess of $2 million. This
would help ensure that the EPA has sufficient funds available
for the costs of investigation and cleanups of these toxic
sites.
Reinstating this tax should be a part of any conversation
we have in Congress about Superfund, but the tax itself is not
enough. We need higher appropriations for Federal agencies with
responsibility for cleanups, and we need financial
responsibility requirements to stop the proliferation of
abandoned mines and other orphan sites.
Under section 108 of Superfund, EPA has been working to
establish such requirements for hard-rock mining and eventually
for other polluting industries. Financial responsibility
requirements would ensure that any company undertaking the
dangerous practice has the resources necessary to cover the
costs of anticipated cleanup needs.
Republicans have blocked these requirements in recent years
through appropriation riders, a practice that I hope will stop
in the wake of the Gold King Mine spill last month.
Removing public health hazards by cleaning up contaminated
sites is incredibly important for the surrounding communities.
Cleaning up toxic Superfund sites not only reduces human health
risks, it helps create jobs during the cleanup and, through
newly uncontaminated and productive land, makes it ready for
redevelopment. So we should all support cleanup efforts and
should ensure that those efforts are funded.
Again, I look forward to today's testimony. I thank both
the chairman and Mr. Tonko for calling this hearing.
I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Today's hearing examines the important role federal
agencies play in protecting our land and water resources
through cleanups at federally owned and operated facilities.
Federal officials in all branches, but particularly at EPA,
want to exert leadership in environmental protection. As most
successful coaches know, inspiring leadership comes first by
setting a good example. Federal agencies must set a good
example in how they assess contamination and conduct cleanups
if they expect the American people to take their efforts to
prevent and clean up hazardous materials seriously. We know
that federal agencies do many things well but there is room for
improvement. Not all agencies have the same level of success at
conducting environmental cleanups and today's hearing will
examine what works and what doesn't with respect to Federal
remediation under CERCLA. We should work to figure out what can
be done to improve cleanups to better protect our nation's land
and water.
EPA may have room to improve how it conducts response
activities under CERCLA too. Last month we learned that an EPA
contractor working at a mine in Colorado somehow triggered a
release of contaminated water into the Animas River. This is
unacceptable and we are still investigating the incident to
find out:
What exactly went wrong? Who was responsible? What were the
standards of care the personnel at the site were operating
under and did they breach those standards? What can be done to
prevent future such incidents?
I hope that lessons we learn from this incident can help us
make good, corrective policy choices. No one ever wants to see
headlines like that again.
But today I thank witnesses from the Department of Defense,
Department of Energy, EPA, and GAO to compare their
perspectives on CERCLA cleanups. And next week we will welcome
back the Environmental Council of States and the Association of
State and Territorial Solid Waste Management Officials who will
be sharing with us the State perspective on federal facility
cleanups.
I commend all my committee colleagues for working together
on these issues.

Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
I would now like to recognize--and I will introduce you
when your time comes to speak.
First would be the Honorable Mathy Stanislaus, Assistant
Administrator, Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response at
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Your full statement is in the record. You have 5 minutes.
And welcome back.

STATEMENTS OF MATHY STANISLAUS, ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR, OFFICE
OF SOLID WASTE AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE, U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION AGENCY; MARK WHITNEY, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY ASSISTANT
SECRETARY FOR ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
ENERGY; JOHN CONGER, PERFORMING THE DUTIES OF THE ASSISTANT
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ENERGY, INSTALLATIONS, AND
ENVIRONMENT, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE; AND ALFREDO GOMEZ,
DIRECTOR, NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT, U.S. GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

STATEMENT OF MATHY STANISLAUS

Mr. Stanislaus. OK. Thank you.
Chairman Shimkus, Ranking Member Tonko, Congressman
Pallone, and members of the subcommittee, I am Mathy
Stanislaus, Assistant Administrator for the Office of Solid
Waste and Emergency Response. And, again, thank you for
inviting me here to talk about the Superfund program.
Specifically, I want to talk about the Federal facilities
component of it, which is the focus of this hearing. The
cleanup of Federal facilities is led by the Federal agencies
who have delegated authority with properties under their
responsibility, with the EPA having a discrete role, which I
will get into in a second.
CERCLA section 120 provides a framework for identifying
contaminated Federal facility sites, assessing actual or
potential environmental risks from these sites, and assuring
cleanup and other actions to protect public health and the
environment. Under section 120, Federal facilities are required
to comply with CERCLA in the same manner and to the same
extent, both substantively and procedurally, as private
entities.
Section 120 includes provisions and timetables that apply
to Federal facilities only, including requiring the EPA to
establish a Federal agency hazardous waste docket, requiring
completion of a preliminary assessment by a Federal facility
after docket listing, requiring a Federal agency to commence a
remedial investigation and feasibility study within 6 months of
that facility being placed on the National Priorities List, and
requiring that the EPA and the Federal facility agency enter
into an interagency agreement referred to as a Federal facility
agreement at all NPL sites. Also, there are specific provisions
that govern the transfer of Federal facilities to private
entities.
Under Executive Order 12580, Federal agencies are
designated as the lead agency for carrying out many of CERCLA's
statutory requirements at their facilities. However, EPA
retains the final decision authority over a small subset of
these. These are National Priorities List sites. If the Federal
agency and department and EPA are unable to reach agreement on
the selection of remedial action at these NPL sites, the EPA's
Administrator makes the final decision.
The shared responsibility of program implementation under
CERCLA has unique challenges for EPA and other Federal agencies
but has generally worked effectively. Currently, there are 157
final Federal facility sites on the NPL, and another 17 Federal
sites have been deleted from the NPL. Approximately 80 percent
of these 174 sites are DOD component sites.
The CERCLA framework has worked effectively for helping to
ensure appropriate cleanup for more than 20 years. Moreover,
because States are often parties to a Federal facility
agreement and State laws and regulations may apply to State
site cleanups, States and EPA work together to ensure that the
NPL cleanups meet statutory requirements, protective of public
health and the environment, and incorporate pertinent State
requirements.
The EPA is engaging with other Federal departments and
agencies on a range of activities to maintain and accelerate
cleanup progress at Federal facilities. For example, we are
working collaboratively with DOD on tools for advancing
geophysical classification to allow for more accurate and
efficient cleanup of munitions sites, a fairly significant
issue; improving site-level data quality; and resolving
technical issues associated with emerging contaminants.
Ensuring that people have environmental information about
their communities is a top priority of my office. In 2010 and
2011 as part of ongoing efforts to enhance community
engagement, my office reached out to diverse stakeholders
through the Federal Facility Dialogue, as well as the Federal
agencies represented here today. What we heard from
stakeholders is that there is a need for more transparent and
easily accessible information on cleanup progress and long-term
protectiveness.
We have begun to move forward on some of these issues. For
example, for the past 5 years, the EPA has led an interagency
working group to make improvements to the 5-year review process
that would force a greater transparency and participation from
impacted communities. When wastes are left in place, EPA
assesses whether remedies continue to be protective of public
health and the environment through a 5-year review. And we are
continuing to modernize the Federal Agency Hazardous Waste
Compliance Docket and exploring ways to make the program data
more accessible to communities and other stakeholders, as
required by CERCLA.
In 2012, the EPA, in collaboration with other Federal
agencies and departments, completed a Federal facilities site
evaluation project. This project evaluated the disposition of
514 federally owned sites that EPA identified as potentially
stalled in their progress. Through this process, EPA has been
able to make an activity determination on 491 of the 514 sites
on this list. Initiatives like this allow EPA to ensure the
Federal facility information is up to date and communities have
the most pertinent information on that site.
I will close, and look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stanislaus follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Mark Whitney, Principal Deputy
Assistant Secretary for Environmental Management with the U.S.
Department of Energy.
Sir, you are welcome. You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARK WHITNEY

Mr. Whitney. Thank you, and good morning, Chairman Shimkus,
Ranking Member Tonko, and members of the subcommittee. I am
pleased to be here today to represent the Department of
Energy's Office of Environmental Management and to discuss the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
Liability Act.
The Environmental Management program was established in
1989 with the mission to clean up the largest and most complex
nuclear waste sites in the world as safely, effectively, and
quickly as possible. This involves some of the most dangerous
materials known to humankind, and it is no simple task. But the
EM has completed cleanup activities at the 91 sites across 30
States since their inception, leaving the remaining cleanup
work at 16 sites in 11 States. That is approximately $150
billion worth of cleanup work completed since the inception of
the program.
Sites like Fernald in Ohio and Rocky Flats in Colorado have
been cleaned up and are now wildlife preserves. We have
decommissioned and demolished more than 2 million square feet
of excess facilities and removed all EM special nuclear
material from the Idaho National Laboratory. We produced nearly
4,200 cannisters of vitrified high-level waste at Savannah
River site and the West Valley sites combined, and we have
closed 6 underground storage tanks at the Savannah River site.
We demolished the K-25 building at the Oak Ridge site, which
was once the largest building under a single roof in the would.
The Federal Government's investment in EM is resulting in
safe and secure nuclear waste and reduced risk to the American
people and environment.
One of the great success stories of the program is the
cleanup of the Rocky Flats site, which is listed on the
National Priorities List, and cleanup was guided by a tri-party
interagency agreement. In October 2005, EM completed the
cleanup significantly under estimated cost and schedule.
A number of factors were important contributors to the
success of the Rocky Flats cleanup, including a collaborative
working relationship with the regulators, both the State
regulators and Environmental Protection Agency; an incentivized
and motivated management and operations contractor; consistent
and reliable budget appropriations; a closure managed as a
finite project; involved stakeholders; and engaged workers and
public.
The Department has a balanced approach under the regulatory
frameworks of the applicable environmental regulations,
including CERCLA, also the Resource Conservation Recovery Act,
or RCRA, the Atomic Energy Act, and the National Environmental
Policy Act. And this guides and directs our cleanup actions.
EM continues to pursue its cleanup objectives safely within
a framework of regulatory compliance, and the Department has 19
sites currently listed on the EPA's National Priorities List.
EM is responsible for the cleanup of 11 DOE NPL sites which are
located across 7 states.
Under CERCLA, EPA oversees the Department's cleanup actions
at NPL sites, and, although States are not a delegated
authority for oversight of DOE's NPL site cleanup under CERCLA,
State regulators are active participants in the CERCLA process.
We work with EPA in the States to determine site priorities,
evaluate cleanup approaches, develop a schedule for cleanup
activities, and specify the requirements the site cleanup
actions and activity must meet.
These collaborative decisions are memorialized as binding
commitments in a Federal Facility Agreement or a tri-party
agreement between the state, EPA, and DOE. And these regulatory
frameworks set cleanup standards and govern our cleanup
activities. Generally, cleanup levels are directly tied to the
expected future land uses of our sites. We have nearly 40
agreements at the 16 sites where we are working.
Largely EM has had success working with state regulators
when it comes to negotiating, updating, and improving
compliance agreements. Our site office have weekly, often
daily, interactions with our regulators, state and EPA, to keep
them apprised of site activities.
We also currently have one Federal Advisory Committee Act-
chartered Site-Specific Advisory Board, with eight local
advisory boards organized under that umbrella. Members of these
advisory boards include people directly affected by site
cleanup activities, such as stakeholders from local
governments, tribal nations, environmental and civic groups,
labor organizations, universities, industries, and other
interested parties and citizens.
A collaborative relationship with state and Federal
regulators and the public is essential to successfully
completing our cleanup at our sites.
In addition to the collaborative relationships with
regulators and stakeholders, there is also a need for continued
investment in research and development for our program. We
believe through strengthening the scientific basis for
decisionmaking, the improvement in the effectiveness of cleanup
technologies, as well as development of new technologies that
address difficult and one-of-a-kind, unique issues and
challenges, it is our hope that costs and project timelines can
be reduced.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Tonko, and members of the
subcommittee, I am again honored to be here today representing
the Office of Environmental Management. I appreciate your
interest in our work, and I appreciate the funding provided by
Congress for EM each year.
We are committed to achieving our mission within a
framework of regulatory compliance and will continue to comply
innovative environmental cleanup strategies and to complete our
work safely and efficiently, thereby demonstrating value to the
American taxpayers.
Mr. Chairman, I know you have had the opportunity in the
past to visit the Savannah River site fairly recently and get a
firsthand look at the magnitude and the challenges that we face
on a day-to-day basis in implementing our cleanup work at our
sites.
I would invite and encourage every member of the
subcommittee to visit our sites and would be happy to assist in
arranging tours and those visits as appropriate.
With that, I am pleased to answer any questions as we move
forward that you may have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitney follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
Next, I would like to recognize Mr. John Conger, performing
the duties of the Assistant Secretary of Defense, Energy,
Installations, and Environment, U.S. Department of Defense.
You are recognized for 5 minutes, and welcome.

STATEMENT OF JOHN CONGER

Mr. Conger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning.
Chairman Shimkus, Ranking Member Tonko, distinguished
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
discuss the Department of Defense's cleanup activities and the
progress we have made to date.
The Department has long made it a priority to protect the
environment. From a mission perspective, we want to ensure that
we have the land, water, and air space that we need for
military readiness. Moreover, we must protect the health of the
military and civilian personnel and their families who live and
work on our bases, to ensure our operations don't affect the
health and environment of surrounding communities, and to
preserve resources for future generations.
While we are here to talk about cleanup of past
contamination, I want to emphasize that we are committed to
rigorously complying with current laws to minimize new
contamination. Our funding requests, our strong relationships
with Federal, state, and local stakeholders, and our continued
progress reflect that commitment.
The Department of Defense is responsible for approximately
39,000 cleanup sites across hundreds of active and closed
bases. And, if I could, I have heard the term ``site'' used by
other witnesses, and I think they use it differently than I do.
I am talking about specific instances of pollution. Multiple
sites can occur on a single installation. So I think the
numbers that I have heard earlier reflect that an entire
installation would be a single site, and we break it out
differently. But, in any case, 39,000 cleanup sites across
hundreds of installations.
In order to make the most impact, we continually reassess
DOD's cleanup program to ensure that we address the highest-
risk sites first, a process we conduct in collaboration with
EPA and with the States. At the same time, we are committed to
completing cleanup or achieving ``response complete'' and ``no
further action required'' at all of our sites.
We appreciate Congress' support for the roughly billion-
and-a-half dollars a year we spend on cleanup. At this point,
more than 80 percent of our 39,000 sites have reached
``response complete.'' I am proud to say that we remain on
track to meet our internally set goals of 90 percent ``response
complete'' by the end of 2018 and 95 percent by the end of
2021.
None of our successes would have been possible without
investments in groundbreaking research and development in
environmental technology. These are aimed at tackling our most
difficult cleanups. Recent successes include bioremediation
techniques for groundwater cleanup and detection technology to
help find buried munitions. We are beginning to focus our R&D
on capabilities needed to accelerate cleanup of the complex
sites that will remain after we achieve our 2021 goals.
Finally, I would like to highlight the contributions of our
state, local, and Federal partners. State and local
stakeholders help us to develop site management plans, play an
active role in remedy selection, and have important oversight
responsibilities. To that end, we have established three high-
level working groups and approximately 200 restoration advisory
boards for local input to provide forums for local communities,
state regulators, and other Federal regulators to discuss
cleanup issues and concerns with us.
We are also committed to interagency efforts. For example,
my staff and senior leaders from the three military components
meet with EPA headquarters staff quarterly to ensure our
programs are on track and moving forward.
In conclusion, our focus remains on continuous improvement
in the restoration program. We have been identifying cleanup
sites since the 1970s and have come a long way. Still, we are
fully aware of the magnitude of our mission, and we look
forward to continuing our partnerships and making smart
investments in technology to meet our outlined goals.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today, and I
look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Conger follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much. And, again, we welcome
you here.
Now, Mr. Alfredo Gomez, no stranger to this committee,
Director of Natural Resources and the Environment at the U.S.
Government Accountability Office.
Welcome. You have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ALFREDO GOMEZ

Mr. Gomez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Shimkus, Ranking Member Tonko, and members of the
subcommittee, good morning. I am pleased to be here today to
discuss our work on hazardous waste cleanup at Federal
facilities.
The Federal Government owns over 700 million acres of land.
Some of this land is managed by the Departments of Agriculture,
Interior, Defense, and Energy and is contaminated with
hazardous waste that poses serious risks to human health and
the environment. The cleanup of these sites can require
substantial time and expense, as you have heard already.
In response, Congress passed CERCLA, also known as
Superfund, which requires owners and operators of hazardous
waste to notify the Environmental Protection Agency of the
existence of their potentially contaminated facilities. Based
on the risks a site poses, EPA may place the site on the
National Priorities List, a list that includes some of the
Nation's most seriously contaminated sites. As of September
this year, there are 158 Federal sites on the list.
My statement today summarizes the results of several
reports on the topic. I will talk about three key points:
first, the number of contaminated and potentially contaminated
Federal sites for the four departments; two, spending on and
estimates of future costs for cleanup at these sites; and
three, EPA's role in maintaining the list of contaminated and
potentially contaminated Federal sites and ensuring that
preliminary assessments of such sites are complete.
The first point is that, while the four departments have
identified thousands of contaminated and potentially
contaminated sites, they do not have a complete inventory of
sites, in particular for abandoned mines.
Specifically, while the U.S. Department of Agriculture had
identified over 1,400 contaminated sites and many potentially
contaminated sites, the Department did not have a reliable
centralized site inventory for abandoned mines. The
Department's Forest Service estimated that there were from
27,000 to 39,000 abandoned mines on its land. The Department of
the Interior had an inventory of 4,722 sites with confirmed or
likely contamination. However the Department's Bureau of Land
Management had identified over 30,000 abandoned mines that were
not yet assessed for contamination, and this inventory was not
complete.
The Department of Defense reported to Congress in June of
2014 that it had 38,804 sites in its inventory of sites with
contamination. The Department had the greatest number of sites
on the National Priorities List. The Department of Energy
reported that it had 16 sites in 11 States with contamination,
and, as you have heard already, the Department is responsible
for one of the world's largest environmental cleanup programs.
Second, with regards to the cost of cleanup at these sites,
the four departments reported allocating and spending millions
of dollars annually on environmental cleanup, and an estimated
future cost in the hundreds of millions of dollars or more in
environmental liabilities.
For example, the Department of the Interior allocated for
fiscal year 2013 about $13 million for environmental cleanup
efforts and reported $192 million in environmental liabilities.
The Department of Energy received an annual appropriation of
about $5.9 billion in fiscal year 2015 to support cleanup
activities, and, in 2014, the Department estimated its total
liability for environmental cleanup at almost $300 billion.
Third, as of August 2015, EPA had compiled a docket of over
2,300 Federal sites that may pose a risk to human health and
the environment. EPA has noted that it is difficult to know
about a site if the agencies have not reported it. EPA is also
responsible for ensuring that Federal agencies assess the sites
for contamination and has established 18 months as a reasonable
timeframe for agencies to complete preliminary assessments.
However, some agencies may take 2 or 3 years to complete an
assessment.
So, in summary, there are thousands of contaminated sites,
and the list is not complete. The four departments have spent
millions annually for cleanup and have estimated future costs
in the billions of dollars. And, lastly, EPA has compiled a
docket of over 2,300 Federal sites that may pose a risk to
human health and the environment.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Tonko, members of the
subcommittee, that concludes my statement, and I would be happy
to respond to questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gomez follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
Before I start with my questions, we are going to have two
panels. The second panel is going to have the states
represented, along with another person, who we don't know who
that is yet. But it was the intent to maybe have it all on one
panel so you could hear the concerns posed by the states. And
it is my hope that you all will follow up and at least listen
to the second panel.
There are always 10 legislative or business days with
followup questions, so a lot of the followup questions that we
will present in writing will be based on the second panel
testimony. I think it is going to be instructive and
educational, and I hope you pay attention to that also.
Having said that, let me start with my questions.
Mr. Stanislaus, do you think that Executive Order 12580, in
delegating lead cleanup status to agencies that may have caused
contamination at a Federal facility and which are responsible
for paying for cleanups, creates a potential conflict?
Mr. Stanislaus. So all I can really speak about is those
sites within our responsibility. So, of those sites within our
responsibility, we do have an ability, EPA, to oversee that
subset of sites. Those are sites on the National Priorities
List. Other sites, we don't have that ability. It has been
delegated directly to the other Federal agencies.
Mr. Shimkus. So let me ask this again. Do you think that
the funding mechanism--OK, so you have a Federal agency; they
have a contaminated site. They are, because of the Executive
order, given the authority for remediation, but the funding
also comes out of their own budget.
Does that cause a conflict? Does that make it difficult? Do
they then make up--are they making a cost-benefit analysis
based upon budgetary outlays?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, with respect to how the other
agencies make that decision, I don't really know. But I can
tell you from where EPA is involved in overseeing sites by the
various Federal agencies, there is a real value to have
independent review of everything from the scope of work and the
implementation of the work.
Mr. Shimkus. So let me go to Mr. Whitney.
This is really the genesis of the questions that I am going
to have for all the panelists. In the situation where DOE is
both the primary responsible party and the lead agency making
remedial decisions, can you understand the potential conflict,
concern about conflict, and the worry that remedial decisions
may be based on budgetary considerations?
Mr. Whitney. Thank you, Chairman.
So, for the Department of Energy sites, while we are the
lead agency for the cleanup, we do not have a regulatory role.
That regulatory role is by the EPA and the states. And so, sir,
I don't see a conflict of interest. We work very closely and--
--
Mr. Shimkus. But you are still the lead agency, whether
there is an oversight role or not?
Mr. Whitney. Yes, sir.
Mr. Shimkus. OK.
And, really, Mr. Conger, same question.
Mr. Conger. Yes, no, I don't see a conflict. Most of the
contamination that we are cleaning up, it dates from a long
time ago, and it is not like there is a conflict at a
particular location between the person cleaning something up
and whoever had made the spill or whatever.
We are pretty successful in getting appropriations for this
cleanup. We have a very stable roughly billion-and-a-half
dollars a year that we get into this program. We have schedules
that have been fairly stable over the years worked out with the
EPA and the states. I don't see any conflict or any problems on
this.
Mr. Shimkus. Let me go back to Mr. Whitney.
What happens if two different Federal agencies assert lead
agency authority?
And, Mr. Conger, you can address it too.
For example, if one agency currently owns the property but
another agency caused the contamination, which agency, in fact,
has the lead agency authority?
Mr. Whitney. Sir, I am not aware of that with respect to
DOE sites.
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. Conger, are you aware of that?
Mr. Conger. I can think of an example or two. So here is
the dynamic. Where we cause the contamination and then transfer
a property, through BRAC or whatever other mechanism--we have a
responsibility for cleaning up all the contamination that we
know about. That is the dynamic that we are dealing with. We
have CERCLA responsibilities, and we uphold them.
Mr. Shimkus. And we are not trying to play gotcha. A lot of
this stuff is way before we were better environmental stewards,
more focused on it. And so this is not an attempt at gotcha. It
is just clarifying the record, trying to get answers for our
questions.
I want to make sure I get to Mr. Gomez for my last
question.
In your written testimony, you recommend that Congress
should change section 120 of CERCLA to add a deadline for
Federal agencies to complete their preliminary assessments. Can
you explain that? Please explain that.
Mr. Gomez. Certainly. Yes, we did note that in the report.
EPA has essentially set 18 months as a reasonable timeframe
for agencies to complete preliminary assessments. And what we
found was that some agencies were taking 2 to 3 years to
complete them. So we suggested that Congress consider giving
EPA the authority to actually enforce that requirement. And we
don't specifically set what that requirement should be, but we
do note that EPA has already set a reasonable timeframe of 18
months.
Mr. Shimkus. So your recommendation is that the EPA have an
enforceable deadline, and in your analysis you don't really
choose what that is.
Mr. Whitney. Correct.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. Great. Thank you very much. I appreciate
it.
My time has expired, and I yield to the ranking member of
the subcommittee, Mr. Tonko, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And, again, I thank the chair for
convening this panel to provide us with a progress report on
Federal facility cleanups under Superfund.
Last Congress, this committee considered legislation to
change the treatment of Federal facility cleanups under
Superfund. That bill was not based on an oversight record and
included several misguided provisions. I did indeed oppose that
legislation, as did all of my Democratic colleagues on the
committee. So I welcome this opportunity to build the
committee's record on these issues and hear from some of our
agencies involved in Federal facility cleanups.
I would like to start by asking about Federal
responsibilities under current law.
Mr. Conger and Mr. Whitney, under current law, are you
subject to the liability and cleanup requirements of Superfund
at sites where you are a responsible party?
Mr. Whitney. Maybe I will go first, if that is OK.
Yes, sir. The Department of Energy is subject to the same
requirements as private entities under CERCLA.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And----
Mr. Conger. Yes.
Mr. Tonko [continuing]. Mr. Conger, you are in agreement.
Mr. Stanislaus, under current law, are all Federal agencies
subject to the liability and cleanup requirements in Superfund?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes.
Mr. Tonko. In fact, section 120 of Superfund imposes
additional requirements on Federal agencies that private
parties do not face, I believe.
Mr. Conger, what obligations does Superfund place on the
Department of Defense and other agencies before you can
transfer land?
Mr. Conger. Before we transfer--so it is a little
complicated. We can transfer land that is contaminated with a
guarantee to clean it up after the transfer; we can have that
set up in the agreement. We have a responsibility for cleanup
regardless of when the transfer occurs.
Mr. Tonko. OK. And is that true also in regard to the BRAC
process where we are addressing the realignment and closure of
bases?
Mr. Conger. Yes, that is generally true.
I want to be careful not to--I am not going to pretend to
be an attorney here. And so, as we go into the finer points of
the law--I will double check for the record the answers to your
questions.
But, in a broad sense, we have responsibilities to perform
the cleanup at BRAC sites or whatever other transferred sites
we have. We have on occasion not let that hold up the transfer
of property, but rather, you know, with eyes open to whoever is
receiving the property either agreed to clean it up after the
fact or made an agreement or arrangement to have it cleaned up
after transfer.
Mr. Tonko. And, Mr. Gomez, do private parties face these
given obligations?
Mr. Gomez. That is something I would have to get back to
you, Mr. Tonko. I have to get back to you on that.
Mr. Tonko. OK.
I am sure that our ranker, Mr. Pallone, and others on the
subcommittee will delve into the details more. But it is clear
that there are a lot of potentially contaminated sites on
Federal land that still need to be assessed and cleaned up, but
a good deal already has been done, as I indicated earlier.
Mr. Conger, can you describe the progress that DOD has made
in cleaning up its inventory of Superfund sites?
Mr. Conger. Certainly. And I won't just limit it to
Superfund, because we track all of our cleanup sites together
in a fairly large--it is 39,000 sites together in a single
database. And I could probably break it out, but I don't have
that available. I can get that for the record.
But, frankly, we are complete with cleanup at 80 percent of
our sites. We set fairly aggressive goals a few years ago to
get to 90 percent by 2018. We are on track for that. We are
looking at getting 95 percent of our sites cleaned up by 2021.
We will have some complex sites that are left over at that
point. I am not going to pretend that it is going to be done in
a few years at that point, those last 5 percent. But that is
why we use R&D. We attack the difficult problems with some our
research funding to try and figure out how we are going to be
able to accelerate timelines or to clean it up better.
And when we do come up with something, like the
bioremediation techniques that we came up for cleaning up
groundwater, that is applicable to the private sector, as well,
and they use those techniques, as well, once we figure it out
for our own purposes.
Mr. Tonko. Yes.
And, Mr. Whitney, can you describe the progress with DOE?
Mr. Whitney. Yes, sir. As I mentioned, we have cleaned up
91 of our sites across 20 states, and we have 16 sites
remaining.
We have reduced the footprint, the cleanup footprint, in
Environmental Management, the DOE complex, by 90 percent. And
when we talk about our sites, we talk about square miles and
not square acres. And we are down to about 250 square miles,
and we were previously around 3,000 square miles when we
started with the program.
So we have had significant accomplishments across the
complex. Now, as my colleague here has stated for DOD, we have
some complex challenges remaining ahead of us. And probably the
most difficult challenges remain ahead of us.
Mr. Tonko. Yes.
I see my time is up, so I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Mississippi,
Mr. Harper, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thanks to each of you for being here.
And I am just curious, Mr. Stanislaus, how many times have
you now testified before a committee or subcommittee?
Mr. Stanislaus. I think I should get an honor of some type.
Mr. Harper. Surely.
Mr. Shimkus. Oh, you are going to get one.
Mr. Harper. Have you kept up with the number of times
that----
Mr. Stanislaus. I have to get back to you.
Mr. Harper. Yes, yes. That was the answer I was looking
for. Thank you very much.
I am going to remember that one, Mr. Stanislaus.
Mr. Gomez, you just testified, and, obviously, your 2015
report noted that, while Interior and USDA have identified
thousands of contaminated and potentially contaminated sites,
they don't have a complete inventory of sites. Can you
elaborate on that a little bit? And then tell me, how do you
remedy that?
Mr. Gomez. Sure.
So, as I noted in the opening statement and also in our
report, Interior and Agriculture have identified thousands of
contaminated sites, but their inventory, particularly for
abandoned mines, is incomplete, and in some cases not reliable.
In the case of the Forest Service, the different regional
offices have different ways of gathering information.
And just one example on the Interior side is, for example,
the Bureau of Land Management estimated an additional 100,000
mines that have yet to be inventoried in three States. And
those are the States of California, Nevada, and Utah. So they
have, we believe, quite a bit of work to do when it comes to
abandoned mines.
Mr. Harper. And, also, Interior and USDA disagree over some
of the docket listings that exist now. Tell us what the
disagreement is about or if that is significant.
Mr. Gomez. Sure.
One disagreement is between EPA and Interior with regards
to the overall approach to listing sites on the docket that are
not reported to EPA by the agencies. Interior believes that
CERCLA does not give EPA the discretion to list sites unless
Interior reports those sites to EPA and that EPA should limit
listing only sites that agencies report to it.
Now, both Interior and USDA also believe that abandoned
mines should not be listed on the docket. And the idea there is
that these sites have contamination that wasn't caused by the
agencies. EPA's view on that is, regardless of whether the
contamination was caused by someone else or the Federal agency,
these sites are now under the ownership of the Federal
Government, and the Federal Government needs to take
responsibility for it.
Mr. Harper. So how do we get one list? How do we ever get
to one list?
Mr. Gomez. It is a work in progress at the moment. And that
is why we call attention to it, the inventories are not
complete, and there is disagreement about what should be added
to the docket.
Mr. Harper. And assuming we had a uniform list, it is not
necessarily static, because you can have new sites that develop
or become----
Mr. Gomez. Correct.
And, also, for example, the docket includes sites that no
longer need to be addressed. So it has sites that are
contaminated sites, that are potentially contaminated, and then
sites that don't need to be addressed. There is no method
currently to remove those sites from the docket.
Mr. Harper. Gotcha.
Mr. Gomez. The docket is more of a historical record.
Mr. Harper. In your written testimony, you had mentioned
that there is a lack of interagency agreements between DOD and
EPA. Can you elaborate on that and explain why this could be a
problem or is a problem?
Mr. Gomez. So we did work a number of years ago where we
looked at 11 DOD installations, those installations had yet to
enter into interagency agreements with the EPA, even though
they had already been listed on the National Priorities List,
in some cases for years. And we found that the lack of these
interagency agreements resulted in delays of cleaning up those
sites.
Now, as of March 2013, when we looked into the issue again,
most of those sites had interagency agreements. There were only
two that did not. And, currently, there is only one site that
doesn't have an interagency agreement.
Mr. Harper. OK.
Are there similar problems with other Federal agencies
conducting cleanups under CERCLA?
Mr. Gomez. So the work that we did had focused on the
Department of Defense because they have the majority of
National Priorities List sites. We didn't look at the other
agencies, so we don't know if that problem also exists there.
Perhaps our witness from EPA might be able to shed some light
on that.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Gomez.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
The chair now recognizes the ranking member of the full
committee, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Superfund cleanups are essential for public health, the
environment, and the economic vitality of communities around
these sites. And, unfortunately, in many of these communities,
the wait for a cleanup drags on because funds and resources are
limited, and the backlog of potentially contaminated sites is
huge.
So I wanted to ask Mr. Gomez, with that in mind, can you
share some recent estimates of the number of potentially
contaminated sites with regard to USDA and Department of
Interior?
Mr. Gomez. Sure. Thank you.
So, with regards to the Department of Agriculture, they
have identified almost 1,500 sites that are contaminated or
potentially contaminated. Also, the Forest Service estimates
that from 27,000 to 39,000 abandoned mines on its land, and
approximately 20 percent of those may pose some level of risk
to public health or the environment.
Now, on the Interior side, Interior has identified over
4,700 sites with confirmed or likely contamination. And the
Bureau of Land Management has also identified over 30,000
abandoned mines that were not yet assessed for contamination.
And I would also mention that, in addition to that, there
was those additional 100,000 mines that need to be inventoried
in three states.
Mr. Pallone. What about the number of sites under control
of Defense or Department of Energy?
Mr. Gomez. Sure. So the work that we did, which was issued
in January of this year, focused on the Department of
Agriculture or the Department of the Interior. We have not
looked at what the Department of Energy or Department of
Defense have in its inventory.
Mr. Pallone. OK.
Are there additional Federal sites controlled by other
agencies?
Mr. Gomez. Yes. There are some, for example, NASA sites
that are out there. There was some work that the NASA IG was
doing. So we didn't look at NASA in our work.
Mr. Pallone. These numbers are staggering themselves, not
to mention the departments that you haven't looked at, but I
think they are only part of the story.
Can you share recent estimates of the cost to clean up
these Federal sites?
Mr. Gomez. Sure. So the estimates, as I noted also, are in
the hundreds of millions of dollars.
And just to give you some examples, maybe some examples
that I didn't mention, is the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
for example, allocated in fiscal year 2013 over $22 million to
do environmental cleanup and then also reported $176 million in
environmental liabilities.
The Department of Defense spent almost $30 billion from
1986 to 2008 across all environmental cleanup and restoration
activities at its installations. And then in its fiscal year
2014 financial report, DOD reported $58.6 billion in
environmental liabilities.
Mr. Pallone. So if you look at the amount of money that is
being spent versus what is needed, there is a huge gap,
obviously.
Let me turn to the three agencies on the panel.
Are consistent and reliable appropriations important for
completing cleanups in a timely manner, in your opinion?
Mr. Conger. I will start.
Mr. Pallone. Sure.
Mr. Conger. I think they are, and I think that is what we
have had. As I have noted before, we spend about a billion-and-
a-half dollars a year. That is a very stable amount of money.
And we have the ability to plan with that amount of money,
where we work out schedules with the EPA and the states.
Everybody knows the pace of the work that is going to be going
on, and I think there is a comfort level with that.
And just a clarification point on the environmental
liabilities that were mentioned earlier. The cleanup liability
is smaller than the number that was cited. That is the entirety
of all of our liabilities that include all of our nuclear ships
and the eventual cleanup for those and a variety of other
items. But the cleanup liability is closer to $27 billion.
Mr. Pallone. Let me just ask quickly ``yes'' or ``no,''
because then I want to ask one last question, could more
cleanups be completed with greater resources? Just yes/no.
Mr. Conger. I think that there are also possibilities, but
we have a stable program right now, and I think----
Mr. Pallone. How about the other two guys? Yes or no?
Mr. Whitney. Yes, sir. I think it could be--we know what
our cleanup lifecycle is. So I don't know if more cleanups
could be completed, but the cleanups that we have could be
completed quicker.
Mr. Pallone. And your----
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, I would say yes. And we have been
subject to about a 20-percent cut of our resources to oversee
the subset of sites that we have direct responsibility for, so
that has, in fact, impeded the pace of work.
Mr. Pallone. All right.
Let me just ask quickly, because I know my time is up. I
just wanted to know if more investment in--I will ask Mr.
Stanislaus.
Could more invest in Federal cleanup efforts lead to the
development of new technologies and best practices that can
improve the cleanups nationwide? Quickly.
Mr. Stanislaus. I would say generally the answer is yes.
And I think, as Mr. Conger noted, there are unique issues at
the DOD and DOE sites. So, clearly, some technologies would
help in some cases.
Mr. Pallone. All right.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Latta, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And to our panel, thanks very much for being here.
If I could start with you, Mr. Stanislaus, since I guess
you have won the record as being here the most, so I will start
with the questions.
Do you believe that current and formerly owned Federal
facilities should have to comply with the same state
requirements as a private entity conducting a cleanup under
CERCLA?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, I think CERCLA does, in fact, provide
for that.
Mr. Latta. How often do you--let me just follow up. How
often do Federal facilities comply with state laws and
regulations? Is it all the time?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, yes, I could only speak about those
that we have direct responsibility for. So we do, in fact,
engage the states continuously with respect to their role
throughout the process of the investigation, the application of
state requirements. So, with respect to those sites, the states
play a partnership role.
Mr. Latta. When you say that it depends on what your role
is, what is the percentage that you would be involved in those
sites then?
Mr. Stanislaus. I will get you the exact percentage. It is
relatively small, because we only have direct oversight
responsibility on those sites that are listed on the National
Priorities List, which, as I described earlier, there are lots
of other sites under the responsibility of DOD, DOE, and the
Department of Interior and Forest Service and----
Mr. Latta. OK.
Let me ask this. Is sovereign immunity often invoked by
Federal agencies?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, we have not found--from our role in
oversight, that has not been an issue, from our perspective,
but that is as much as I know.
Mr. Latta. OK.
And, also, do you believe that section 120 of CERCLA is
evidence that Congress intended to waive sovereign immunity
under CERCLA and to require Federal entities to comply with
state cleanup laws?
Mr. Stanislaus. I may have to get back to that. I don't
know the answer to that question. Let me get back to you on
that.
Mr. Latta. OK.
Let me ask this then. Do you think that section 120 of
CERCLA needs to be amended to make sure that Federal agencies
do comply with state regulations and laws dealing with cleanup?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, again, just within the sliver of
sites within our responsibility, we largely have the states as
a party to Federal facility agreements so they have equal
rights as the EPA. And, at least from where we are involved in
Federal facility sites, we view the states as a partner. And I
really can't speak to those sites that we don't have a role in.
Mr. Latta. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Conger, if I could turn to you, if I could ask, does
DOD recognize and comply with state land use control laws and
regulations related to environmental cleanups?
Mr. Conger. So the answer is it depends. It is complicated,
and my lawyers will, I am sure, hope that I don't give a simple
answer to your question. So I will take that for the record
formally, but let me give a sort of first-level answer to the
question.
Yes, of course, on those sites that we no longer own--on
BRAC sites. Those are not Federal property, generally, and so
those controls would apply. Where it is Federal property, it
gets more complicated. And, again, not being a lawyer, I will
take that specific instance for the record.
Mr. Latta. Do you all look at, when you are doing your
reviews, do you look at the state land use laws and how that
deals with the environmental cleanup?
Mr. Conger. Yes. And we are partners with the states when
we do our cleanups. And, as Mathy indicated, most of the sites
that we have, or at least a significant number, are regulated
by the state regulators. We work with them. We work schedules
out together, we work remedies out together. This is something
we do in partnership. I am unaware of significant discontent in
the states with how we are doing our program.
Mr. Latta. OK.
Let me follow up with another question, if I may. Would you
please describe in detail how DOD measures success or, to the
use of the term you used in your written testimony, achieves
``response complete''?
Mr. Conger. Yes.
So, in every cleanup, there is a process, as you well know.
There is an investigation, which includes the preliminary
assessment, the site inspection, the RI, the FS, et cetera, et
cetera. The actual remediation, once we have a remedy in place
and once have conducted all of the operations, all the remedial
operations, and satisfied the regulators at a particular site,
then we have achieved ``response complete.''
We will have some long-term monitoring in some places so
that we go back and double check that the contamination hasn't
recurred. But once we have taken all of the actions that we are
supposed to take at the site, we achieve ``response complete.''
Mr. Latta. One last real quick question. Do you measure
that cleanup, then, with respect to the acres you clean up? Or
how do you do that on----
Mr. Conger. With respect to--I am sorry.
Mr. Latta. On the amount of acres you have cleaned?
Mr. Conger. No. Because not everything is about acres.
Sometimes it is about groundwater. There are a whole variety of
ways to measure, so we don't normally think of it just in terms
of acres.
Mr. Latta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time has expired,
and I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Oregon, Mr.
Schrader, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Stanislaus, I would like to kind of move--in our area,
one of the biggest sites we have to deal with is the Portland
Harbor as a Superfund site. And defense industry, big partner
in contaminating that during World War II and now not so much
of a partner in cleaning the thing up at the end of the day,
for a lot of the reasons that have been mentioned here.
But I am concerned about EPA's approach to that harbor. You
have a number of businesses that have stepped up, formed this
Lower Willamette Group, trying to figure out a way to actually
clean this up or be a partner in cleaning it up without the
Federal Government, frankly, at this stage of the game. And I
am worried about the science that is involved in this.
And, particularly, I guess I wanted to know from you, is it
common practice to a qualitative and not a quantitative
analysis of the cleanup alternatives?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, I think we have, in fact, done a
quantitative analysis of----
Mr. Schrader. See, I would disagree with that. There is not
a quantitative analysis done. In the report I saw on the
feasibility study, there is no evaluation of what the
concentrations of various contaminants would be, after
different remedial actions have been taken.
I think most of the businesses that are going to be funding
this, anybody that is doing any scientific analysis, you are
supposed to do a cost-effectiveness analysis. Once you have
determined the health risk, then what are the most cost-
effective ways to take care of this stuff? And that is not what
I am seeing in the report.
I guess I would like you to get back to me with that
information, where there is a quantitative analysis of that.
The other question I had is regarding natural recovery. Is
it common for natural recovery to be ignored by EPA when they
do remedial action analyses?
Mr. Stanislaus. No, if I can give a broad answer. So we
have conducted a remedial investigation that identifies----
Mr. Schrader. I am asking about natural recovery. What----
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes. So as part of the alternative
analysis, we would look at the various alternatives, including
that kind of alternative----
Mr. Schrader. Well, I appreciate you saying that, because
that is not what is done in this particular feasibility study
on the Portland Harbor. The natural recovery aspects, the
quantitative aspects of what natural recovery are, are not
being included at all.
As a matter of fact, you can't, I would argue respectfully,
scientifically evaluate how a particular remedial action,
capping dredging, is going to work, what benefit you are going
to get from that, unless you know what the natural recovery
benefit is going forward.
As a matter of fact, just up the river, at Willamette
Falls, there is a site that was grossly contaminated. It was a
paper mill. And environmental agencies have determined that it
does not pose any real contamination risk because natural
recovery has completely wiped that out. Admittedly, it is a
higher-flowing river at that particular point.
So I am not seeing that going forward.
The other thing I am worried about is, in this particular
case, is how they have evaluated these alternatives. Is it
normal for EPA to assume that dredging is going to go on 24
hours a day, 6 days a week, in a water work window? Is that the
normal way you would evaluate?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, it would depend on the facts of the
particular circumstance. So we evaluate alternatives, be it----
Mr. Schrader. Would you assume that the dredging operation
would go 24 hours a day, 6 days a week, in a recovery action?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, I can't say a generalized rule. It
would depend----
Mr. Schrader. I think most people--I apologize for
interrupting you, but I would think most people would say that
is unrealistic. That is not the way any operation works, at the
end of the day. And what happens with that is then you are
underestimating the costs of some particular remedial actions.
And I see that in this particular feasibility study. I think
that is unfair and unrealistic, and you end up skewing the
results of your feasibility study and the effectiveness of
different remedial actions when you do that.
Question, also, on principal threat waste. How do you
determine the levels of different contaminants so that they
constitute a principal threat waste? What procedure do you use?
Mr. Stanislaus. Let me get back to you regarding that. But
the whole purpose of the draft feasibility is actually to
entertain----
Mr. Schrader. The reason I ask that particular question--
again, sorry to interrupt; I only have a limited amount of
time--is that, I think that is important. What we are seeing
here now is that there are low and unprecedented levels, I
would argue, of determining these principal threat waste levels
in this feasibility study for the Portland Harbor, and, as a
result, you are doing treatments in addition to removal, in
addition to capping, I mean, without any analysis as to is that
treatment of this so-called principal threat waste going to
give you any additional benefit.
Again, the science that I see EPA not using in this group,
with this willing set of businesses wanting to step up and do
the right thing without any Federal largesse, and they are
being cast aside. I think it is a terrible reputation that the
EPA is developing, unfortunately, in our region.
And it could drive the cost--we have heard costs of
hundreds of millions of dollars. The whole defense industry,
maybe a billion dollars a year. They are talking billions of
dollars for this one little Superfund site. And I think that
there are estimates by others that it could be in the millions
to maybe hundreds of millions of dollars.
So there is a big difference, respectfully, between what
EPA is looking at and the assumptions they are using that their
reasonable business and scientific experts would get to to do
the same amount of cleanup at the end of the day. So I
appreciate you getting back to me on some of that information.
And I yield back.
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes, I will get back to you. And I can
assure you that we have discussed the science with all the
stakeholders. And, in fact, we really appreciate the
responsible parties stepping up. From the very beginning of the
process, we looked at the scope of the science, conducted the
science in an open and inclusive way, and we will continue to
do so.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Johnson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank the panel for being here.
Mr. Stanislaus, I was thinking earlier, as we were talking
about how many times you have testified, if this were baseball,
your number of at-bats and your own base percentage would be
one of the highest in the league. So I commend you for
continuing to step into the batter's box. I know these are
tough issues.
Mr. Whitney, I represent many of the hardworking people
that are helping to clean up the former Portsmouth Gaseous
Diffusion Plant in Piketon, Ohio, and many others who are
dependent upon that work getting done so that they can
reindustrialize that site and make it a productive, job-
creating site for the people that live there.
I am shocked that the Department of Energy has now extended
the deadline or the timeline for completing that cleanup
approximately another 30 years. It makes absolutely no sense to
me. The people who the commitments were made to, many of them
could possibly be dead by the time the Department of Energy
gets done doing what they committed to do.
And it is very unfortunate that, for the third year in a
row, jobs are at risk because the administration has failed to
request adequate funding to complete this work. The Ohio
delegation has repeatedly urged the administration to present a
fully funded, comprehensive plan for decontamination and
decommissioning activities at the site.
Unfortunately, financial instability continues year after
year. Back in May, the House of Representatives approved full
funding, $213 million, for D&D operations, which surpassed the
administration's request by $48 million, and yet we see this
dragging-out process again.
We are ready to work with the administration and you folks
again this year on funding, but we got to have a willing
partner here and a commitment on the part of DOE to move this
project forward and meet the commitment, stand up and honor the
promises that were made to the people of southern Ohio.
So, with that said, what are DOE's plans to address this
issue?
Mr. Whitney. Thank you, sir.
Yes, and we are committed to the cleanup of Portsmouth, and
it is unfortunate that WARN notices had to be issued at the end
of August.
Our request for 2016 is actually a little bit more than the
President's request for 2015 for Portsmouth, and it is about
$227 million for 2016 in our request.
Unfortunately, the request, as well as the House--even
though the House mark was a very large increase over the
President's request--and the Senate mark did put us in a
position where we had to provide funding guidance that was
lower than the 2015 request.
Now, as you know, sir, on top of the $227 million request,
we were able to take advantage of barter of uranium, which
probably the proceeds, depending on the price of uranium at the
time, is another $160 million approximately. So that is almost
a $400 million investment in the----
Mr. Johnson. I get that. I get that. But, see, the citizens
of southern Ohio, they were not party to developing the formula
that determined how this was going to be funded. They were the
recipient of a promise by the Federal Government and the
Department of Energy. I think the Department of Energy has a
responsibility, as does Congress, to work together to figure
out a formula.
And I understand that the sale of uranium has caused a
wrinkle, but we need to resolve the wrinkle and develop a new
formula, if we have to, and not make it at the expense of the
workers and the folks that live there.
So, I would urge you to take back to your leadership, at
least from my perspective--and I can't speak for all of the
Ohio delegation, but I feel very, very certain that they would
agree--this is unacceptable, to think and ask the people of
southern Ohio to wait another 30 years to trickle this process
along. It is just not right.
Mr. Conger, in your written testimony, you state that DOD
works together with Federal and state environmental regulatory
partners to prioritize sites for cleanup based on worst first.
Would you please explain the process that DOD uses to
determine which sites are the worst?
Mr. Conger. So, generally, it is a risk-based process that
is looking at the risk to human health and the environment.
Well, I say ``generally.'' I have heard the term ``risk
plus.'' And what that means is there are other factors that we
take into account, as well. If there is a low-risk site that
happens to be collocated with a high-risk site, we might do
them both because it is economical to do them both at the same
time. So that low-risk site might be lumped in and done
earlier.
But, generally, as we rack and stack this list, it is based
on risk to human health and the environment.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's----
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chairman, I have a lot more I could ask,
and I appreciate the committee's indulgence to ask that first
question, but I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. And the gentleman knows that you can submit
questions for the record in written form.
Mr. Johnson. And I will.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Colorado, Ms.
DeGette, for 5 minutes.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thanks, everybody, for coming today.
As you know, in Colorado, we not only have contaminated
Federal munitions and chemical sites, but we also have legacy
mines on Federal lands. And there are often questions of
liability regarding the abandoned mine lands since many
companies might have had those properties over the course of
decades.
Of course, a prime example of this is the Gold King Mine,
which we saw this summer. And you all saw this on the national
news. This is what the Gold King Mine looked--this is what the
Animas River looked like. Why those people are kayaking there I
don't know. But the Animas River was orange as it flowed down
through Durango and down into New Mexico, and Cement Creek was
also turned orange.
So this is kind of the backdrop for the questions that I am
going to be asking today.
I want to ask you, Mr. Stanislaus, if the EPA is going to
be pursuing reimbursement from the companies that left these
millions of gallons of contaminated water at Gold King Mine to
pay for the remediation of the site.
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. That is good news to hear.
I would like to know, if there were private owners, which
there were, of that site and the adjoining mine, why was the
EPA cleaning up the site in the first place?
Mr. Stanislaus. Because there was a risk identified by the
State of Colorado and the stakeholders that risk be addressed
immediately. Roughly about 330 million gallons on a yearly
basis was going into the Animas River.
Ms. DeGette. And that is before it all came----
Mr. Stanislaus. That is right.
Ms. DeGette [continuing]. Rushing out and turned the river
orange.
Now, that site was not listed on the Superfund National
Priorities List, correct?
Mr. Stanislaus. That is right.
Ms. DeGette. What the National Priorities List does, it
targets the cleanup of sites without viable responsibility
orders, and it puts it in priority for funding. Is that right?
Mr. Stanislaus. That is correct. It identifies those sites
that have the most risk in the country. It also makes that site
eligible for Superfund resources.
Ms. DeGette. And do you think the Gold King Mine would be a
candidate for the National Priorities List?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, there have been discussions, and I
was just in Silverton last week at the invitation of local
stakeholders to continue that conversation.
Ms. DeGette. So the decision has not yet been made?
Mr. Stanislaus. No. We are continuing to have those
conversations.
Ms. DeGette. When do you think you will make that decision?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, again, we are engaged in that
conversation. There is also kind of a technical evaluation of
data, so we are in the process of evaluating that right now----
Ms. DeGette. Right. So would that, like, 6 months? Twelve
months?
Mr. Stanislaus. I will get back to you on the timeframe.
Ms. DeGette. That would be really fabulous. And what would
be even better is if we had a very short timeframe to get that
on the list.
There are thousands and thousands of mines, as all of you
have said, that are similar to the Gold King Mine across the
West.
Mr. Gomez, in your testimony, you note that both the USDA
and DOI have significant inventories of abandoned mines that
could potentially pose threats to health and the environment.
Do either of these agencies have a system for prioritizing
their most contaminated mines?
Mr. Gomez. Yes. They go through the process of identifying
the mines, and they are making their own assessments of it. But
we didn't look specifically at that process. We were looking
mainly at identification. Those are good questions that we can
follow up with.
Ms. DeGette. I would appreciate that, because it is my
understanding that they actually don't have a priority list,
and that would be really helpful.
Gold King is the perfect example of a mine where everybody
knew it needed to be cleaned up. But I think everybody could
now stipulate that, in hindsight, the preparation for the
cleanup, the recognition of the seriousness of the problem was
grossly underestimated.
Now, based on GAO's analysis of contaminated sites on USDA
and DOI properties, do each of the agencies have sufficient
environmental expertise of their own to plan and oversee
cleanup of the sites?
Mr. Gomez. So, for those cases that do end up on the
National Priorities List, EPA does oversee those sites----
Ms. DeGette. Right.
Mr. Gomez [continuing]. And so EPA does provide that
expertise.
Ms. DeGette. To USDA and DOI?
Mr. Gomez. Do they have that expertise?
Ms. DeGette. Right.
Mr. Gomez. Again, we weren't looking at the workforce of
the agencies to see if they have the expertise or not. But, as
I said, for those sites that end up on the National Priorities
List, EPA is doing the oversight.
Ms. DeGette. OK.
Now, I want to ask you, Mr. Stanislaus, it is my
understanding that USDA and DOI don't want mines that were
Superfund cleanup to be listed on the National Priorities List.
Does that impede the EPA's ability to oversee and ensure proper
cleanup at the sites?
Mr. Stanislaus. Our only ability to oversee sites is for
those sites that are on the National Priorities List.
Ms. DeGette. OK. So if they are not on that list, then we
can't clean them up.
Mr. Stanislaus. That is right.
Ms. DeGette. So I guess, Mr. Gomez, I would like you to
supplement your testimony to see what, in fact, the position of
those two agencies is of putting their mine sites on that list.
Mr. Shimkus. Would the gentlelady yield for a second?
Ms. DeGette. I would be happy to.
Mr. Shimkus. So we invited----
Ms. DeGette. I am out of time.
Mr. Shimkus. That is right. I am the chairman.
Ms. DeGette. Yes. Seize control.
Mr. Shimkus. We invited Department of Interior to testify.
They, in essence, said they wouldn't. They did say they would
submit a statement. They only sent it when we reminded them
that they said they would send a statement. So maybe some
followup on the Department of Interior might be appropriate.
Ms. DeGette. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I think that is a great
idea. Because if you can't list these on the list, then the
agency with the expertise to clean it up won't be able to do
it.
Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. And maybe they will reconsider coming back
next time we ask them.
So thank you.
Now I would like to recognize my colleague from North
Carolina, Mr. Hudson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hudson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I would like to thank the witnesses for being here
today. Really appreciate your testimony. It has been very
informative and helpful for me to understand this process.
I would like to start with Mr. Conger.
What percentage of DOD's hazardous waste facilities have
been identified on the Federal Facilities Hazardous Waste
Compliance Docket as required in CERCLA?
Mr. Conger. So I can't tell you what percentage of our
sites are actually on the docket because we track all of them
as a larger group. The 39,000 sites that I have talked about
during my testimony include those on the docket, but we have
far more sites than those that are on the docket.
A couple years ago, we did a docket scrub. We went and
looked at our database and EPA's database, the docket, to make
sure that everything that needed to be on the docket was on
there. And so we have done that reconciliation. But I couldn't
tell you, out of all the sites we have, exactly how many are on
the docket.
Mr. Hudson. Would you mind following up with us with that
number?
Mr. Conger. Sure.
Mr. Hudson. I would appreciate it.
What percentage of DOD sites that you have identified have
the required preliminary assessments been completed on?
Mr. Conger. Well, out of the 39,000 sites that we have, I
think only 4 percent of them are still at the preliminary
assessment and site inspection phase. The breakout between PA
and SI we can get you, but it is--so I would say, by
definition, it is less than 4 percent are still in that phase.
Mr. Hudson. Great.
For those that you have completed the required assessment,
have copies of those assessments and other relevant information
been provided to the State and the EPA?
Mr. Conger. Absolutely.
Mr. Hudson. Great.
What is the typical, on average, length of time it takes
for DOD to complete one of these initial assessments?
Mr. Conger. So I actually pulled the data out of the
database because I saw that question coming. We have an average
of 1.6 years for a preliminary assessment out of all the sites
that we have cataloged.
Mr. Hudson. So you would disagree with the assessment from
GAO that it takes 2 to 3 years typically for----
Mr. Conger. It can. So that is an average, 1.6 years. There
are sites that are longer, without a doubt. It depends on the
complexity of the analysis that you are doing. So some are
shorter, some are much shorter; some are longer.
Mr. Hudson. Gotcha.
If Congress were to establish a deadline, as has been
recommended, for completion of these assessments, would that
help DOD complete these in a more timely fashion? Or do you
think it is more just a factor of the complexity of----
Mr. Conger. I think it is a factor of the complexity. I
don't have a lot of folks coming back to us and saying that we
are dragging our heels. We work out these schedules with the
regulators, and so I think everybody is comfortable with the
pace at which we are doing the assessments.
Mr. Hudson. Well, thank you for that.
Mr. Conger. But if there are specific cases, we can look
into it.
Mr. Hudson. Thank you.
Mr. Whitney, I will sort of go down the same line of
questioning with you. What percentage of DOE hazardous sites
are actually on the list?
Mr. Whitney. Yes, sir. I think it is a little easier for
DOE because we do know the universe of our facilities, and,
while the sites are large, the number of sites are not. And so
all of our sites have been through that preliminary assessment
process, the site evaluation process, and they either ended up
on the National Priorities List or they did not.
Mr. Hudson. Great.
Well, for those that have gone through and completed the
assessments, have copies of those been passed on to the
relevant agencies--state, EPA, others?
Mr. Whitney. Yes, sir.
Mr. Hudson. Great.
And how many of the sites that have been assessed required
some level of cleanup?
Mr. Whitney. Well, the 21 sites that were on the National
Priorities List, all of those sites required some level of
cleanup--has 11 of those sites remaining.
Mr. Hudson. OK. I appreciate that.
Mr. Stanislaus, going back to the issue of abandoned mines
on Federal properties, how does EPA oversee the cleanup of
these if they are on Federal property?
Mr. Stanislaus. Only those sites that rise to the level of
being Superfund sites. So we have 130 on the National
Priorities List that are abandoned mine sites, but, clearly,
there are a lot more, as other individuals talked about it. So
we would only have oversight of just that small number.
Mr. Hudson. OK. Well, of those, does EPA have a sense of
how much contaminated mine drainage discharges from these mines
on a daily, weekly, monthly, yearly basis?
Mr. Stanislaus. I don't have that information in front of
me, but I can see what I can pull together.
Mr. Hudson. OK. Thank you.
What steps do the various Federal agencies routinely take
to prevent and stop these types of discharges?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes, I really can't speak for the other
agencies. When we get involved, we would do what are called
removal actions, which are shorter-term actions, to abate some
of the most immediate risks and, when there are longer-term
risks, looking at listing on the National Priorities List for a
more permanent solution.
Mr. Hudson. Gotcha.
What are the impacts on stream water quality from these
discharges?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, tremendous. In the Gold King Mine,
about 330 million gallons were being emitted into the Animas
River on a yearly basis. Basically, for a 10-mile distance on
the Animas River, you basically have severely degraded water
quality. Basically, fish survival was seriously compromised.
Mr. Hudson. So who is legally responsible for cleaning up
when you have these discharges on these sites that you have the
jurisdiction over?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, when we have jurisdiction over that,
we oversee the work. Sometimes it is by responsible parties,
sometimes through Superfund resources. And the complexity of
these sites makes it quite challenging.
Mr. Hudson. So who is legally responsible?
Mr. Stanislaus. Oh, who is legally responsible? I am sorry.
If there is a responsible party, meaning the owner or operator,
that party would be responsible for doing the cleanup.
Mr. Hudson. Great. Thank you.
And, Mr. Chairman, I believe I have exceeded my time.
Mr. Shimkus. Your time has expired.
Just a point of clarification. This Executive Order 12580
is an answer to why we have--and Mathy is talking about items
on the National Priorities List, but there are many that aren't
on there. And then the question is, who is responsible for
those? That is part of the hearing.
Now I recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, for
holding the hearing on Superfund today.
I represent a district in Houston, and, up until recent
redistricting, my district bordered in east Harris County one
of the more significant Superfund sites, on the San Jacinto
waste pits bordering our district. At that time, Congressman
Poe had the site, but I got the downstream.
And EPA was very quick in putting it on the Superfund site.
The site has been polluted since the mid-1960s. It was a
dumping ground for paper mill waste, and it was left undetected
for over 40 years. The local community is very concerned about
the fears it may negatively be impacting human health and the
environment.
My questions are, Mr. Stanislaus, what opportunities will
communities in east Harris County have to give input on the
proposed cleanup plans?
Mr. Stanislaus. Opportunity throughout the process.
Mr. Green. OK.
Dioxins are the primary hazard at the waste pits, which
were used during the paper production process 50 years ago. Mr.
Stanislaus, has the EPA taken any action to limit the use of
dioxins and similar dangerous chemicals in paper production?
Mr. Stanislaus. Limit the use of dioxin in paper?
Mr. Green. Yes.
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, that is outside of my office. I will
get back to you on that.
Mr. Green. OK.
Does the EPA have a timetable for when the feasibility
study report would be released?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes, I don't have that timetable, but I
should note that we put in place certain measures to abate the
release of dioxin from the site itself.
Mr. Green. And I have been there; it is encapsulating. And
what happened, because of subsidence in our area over the last
50 years, those containment facilities may have been great in
1965, but the subsidence, we actually have some of those
containment facilities that are below water level in the San
Jacinto River. And, so far, there is different evidence that
the encapping of it is working. I think the last test I showed,
it is doing well.
What are the primary factors for EPA in its determination
for the cleanup of waste?
Mr. Stanislaus. The exposure and the various options to
address that exposure. In some cases, we would completely clean
it up. In other cases, they put a barrier to prevent further--
it all depends on the factors at the site.
Mr. Green. Is the EPA taking under consideration the
vulnerability? The site actually can be flooded because it is a
tidal river, but, over my lifetime, we have also had floods
coming down the river, and so it can dislodge it. Is that part
of the EPA study also, the danger of a hurricane coming in or
floodings upstream?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, typically, we would look at all those
factors, but let me get back to you specifically on how we
would consider that at this site.
Mr. Green. OK. I appreciate it. The site is now in
Congressman Babin's district. It is a neighbor of mine. And we
are getting him the information that we have been working on
for a number of years.
These are questions for all the agencies on the panel.
How does your agency ensure that states and local
communities are involved in every stage of the cleanup under
your control?
Mr. Conger. I can start.
We work closely with the state regulators. As Mathy had
pointed out, a lot of our sites are overseen directly by the
state regulators, so we work with them on remedies and on
timetables.
We also have restoration advisory boards that we set up
with local communities to make sure that everything is
transparent so that they know what is going on.
It is very important for us to work with local and state
stakeholders.
Mr. Whitney. Yes, and we have a variety of avenues to
achieve that type of involvement, as well, first and foremost,
the states of course being regulators on the cleanup that we do
at our sites. But that relationship with the local communities
and other folks in the state is also very important to us, and
we have site-specific advisory boards made up of citizens of
the surrounding communities around our sites.
We also provide grants to many organizations, such as ECOS,
the Environmental Council of States, such as National Governors
Association, the State and Tribal Government Working Group----
Mr. Green. I only have a few seconds. I need to get one
more question in, though.
If a state preferred one cleanup remedy over another, how
would the preference influence the decision over the cleanups?
Would the Federal Government defer to the state agency?
Mr. Whitney. It truly is a tri-party. For us, it is tri-
party.
Mr. Green. So it is a cooperative issue?
Mr. Whitney. Yes, sir.
Mr. Green. OK.
I appreciate it, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. Let me just chime in with your last 10
seconds.
I think what we have heard is everyone views the States as
a partner, but no one is required to treat the State as a
partner. And that is part of what our hearing is trying to get
to.
So, with that, now we would like to welcome a member of the
full committee, not on the subcommittee. We welcome here to the
subcommittee Mr. Luj AE1an from New Mexico.
And you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Luj AE1an. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank the
ranking member for holding this important hearing today.
As you all know, where this breach ran into was in the
Third Congressional District of New Mexico, into San Juan
County, into the Animas River, which flows from Colorado to New
Mexico, as well as to the Navajo Nation and to our brothers and
sisters out in Utah and Arizona, as well as Colorado, that were
all impacted.
One of the concerns that I had as we began to learn about
this issue, it wasn't through an alert from law enforcement
officials, from officials that work for the Federal agencies;
it was through a news feed, may have even been a Twitter feed,
that our office was alerted to.
And so we need to figure this out, to make sure that when
there are disasters like this that are created, created by
people as opposed to a natural disaster, that everyone is
alerted promptly and timely.
Since this incident, it appears that the State of Colorado
is working to improve their communication systems to local
governments, but I am not certain that we have seen what we are
going to do with the EPA and, for that matter, for every
Federal agency that there could be a system like this that
sadly could hurt communities with a mistake that is made.
So, Mr. Stanislaus, according to an EPA memorandum, the
release occurred on August 5 at 10:51 a.m. However, EPA
headquarters, Region 6, and Region 9 were not notified until 11
a.m. The next morning. I just shared that my office found out
through news accounts. San Juan County officials, Navajo Nation
leaders, and the New Mexico Environment Department were not
notified. They found out the same way that we did, is my
understanding.
So that is unacceptable, and we need to fix this and learn
from this. So what are we doing to improve notification
procedures down to downstream communities as well as impacted
communities?
One of the suggestions that I shared with Administrator
McCarthy yesterday was looking to see what we could do to
piggyback off of the AMBER Alert system for abducted children
or to the national natural disaster alert system and weather
disaster system, which notifies everyone with their mobile
phones, on billboards, as everything happens. There is no
reason that when something like this that tells people you
can't drink water, you can't get in the water, you can't water
your animals, you can't irrigate, that we can't use something
like this.
So can you share a little bit with what we can do and how
we might be able to work with you, with the committee, to see
what we could do to work with a system like that for alerts in
the future?
Mr. Stanislaus. Sure. Immediately after the event, I issued
a directive to all the regions to work with states and local
communities to make sure the notification is broad.
So we currently have a notification system in place. And in
the State of Colorado we had a plan in place where the State of
Colorado took leadership of notifying. They in fact notified
Durango and other folks, and those decisions were made to close
off the water intakes.
And you are entirely correct that the notification for New
Mexico, for the Navajo Nation did not occur simultaneously, and
we agree we need to do a better job of that.
Mr. Luj AE1an. It didn't occur for days.
Mr. Stanislaus. It occurred the next day. Yes.
And just to be clear, all the notification occurred before
the spill impacted any of those areas. In fact, we were able to
do pre-incident sampling before any of the impact of the spill
occurred in any of those areas.
Mr. Luj AE1an. Ute Mountain tribal officials are the ones
that reached out to their neighbors in San Juan County to say,
this spill is passing us, you need to get ready for it, it is
coming our way. That wasn't on the alert system that was put in
place. That was one group of neighbors caring about another
group of neighbors and doing their due diligence.
This was a dismal failure from a communication perspective,
and we have to fix it. I hope that the urgency for this--not
just here but in any other part of the country. We need to just
get this right so that people know what is coming their way.
The other urgency that I would suggest is we need to make
sure that we are working with all of the impacted communities
to the utmost degree: both of the Ute tribes that were
impacted, the Navajo Nation, the County of San Juan in New
Mexico, the State of New Mexico, as well as our brothers and
sisters in the other impacted States.
There has been a frustration by the leadership of the
Navajo Nation, and we need to make sure that we are working
closely with them, that someone is appointed to work directly
with them, whether it is from Region 9 or from headquarters, so
we can make sure that all of their concerns are addressed.
One of the other concerns that I have, Mr. Chairman, is, it
is my understanding that the EPA's work order at the Gold King
Mine site called for the construction of a holding pond to
capture and treat contaminated water but that the pond was not
completed before the accident. In addition, EPA Deputy
Administrator Meiburg said that provisions for a worst-case
scenario were not included in the work plan.
I think it is important that we understand that, that we
make sure that anytime work will be done in the future that we
get to the bottom of that.
And then lastly, Mr. Chairman, as we get an assessment of
all of the abandoned mines that we have in the United States
and especially those that are in a condition like the Gold King
Mine, where a breach or an accident can impact the water supply
for millions of people in surrounding communities, we need to
have a real conversation in the Congress to make sure that we
are working to fix this.
Because this devastated not just the irrigators and water
users in the district that I represent and in Colorado but
entire water drinking supplies in the States of Nevada and
Arizona that could be impacted depending on the kind of a
breach that we see.
So just, Mr. Chairman, I look forward to working with you.
Thank you for the time today. And I look forward to submitting
some additional questions to the record and getting some
responses.
Thank you, sir.
Mr. Stanislaus. I would just add, I share those concerns.
And we did an internal review, and the pond, in fact, was
constructed, from my internal review team. But again, we were
there because of the very risk that was identified in the work
plan, that the State of Colorado and local stakeholders
identified that risk. That is the reason that EPA was brought
in to address that risk.
Mr. Luj AE1an. But, Mr. Chairman, if I may just there, if
the pond was built, why didn't it work? Something didn't work.
With the amount of stuff that came out of that, which was
originally estimated at 1 million gallons and then it turned
out to be 3 million gallons, someone didn't do their job. If
something was built, then it wasn't built the right way,
because the breach still went and all this garbage still went
into the river.
So those are questions that we do need to get to the bottom
of. If something was constructed, clearly it did not meet the
means of what should have been done with an assessment of what
was being held behind there. It didn't work. So, according to
that mitigation plan, something needs to get better here, and
that is what we are just trying to get to the bottom of.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired. And we thank
him for his attendance, look forward to working with him.
Again, the open question submissions for the record for
about 10 business days, if you could get back to us. And I
think there will probably be some followups.
We appreciate it. We have a ways to go. And I do want to
encourage you to stay tuned for the second panel, because I do
think there is a--states are, in many cases, good partners and
work well, but there are some concerns, as I think we will hear
in the next panel.
So I appreciate it. And, with that, we will recess this
hearing for the second panel next week.
[Whereupon, at 10:42 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

OVERSIGHT OF FEDERAL FACILITY CLEANUP UNDER CERCLA, DAY 2

----------

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 16, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment and the Economy,
Committee on Energy and Commerce
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 4:04 p.m., in
room 2322, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John Shimkus,
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Shimkus, Harper, Pitts, Murphy,
Latta, McKinley, Bucshon, Tonko, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff Present: Will Batson, Legislative Clerk; David
McCarthy, Chief Counsel, Environment and Economy; Tina
Richards, Counsel, Environment; Chris Santini, Policy
Coordinator, O&I; Chris Sarley, Policy Coordinator, Environment
and Economy; Dan Schneider, Press Secretary; Dylan Vorbach,
Staff Assistant; Jacqueline Cohen, Minority Senior Counsel; and
Alexander Ratner, Minority Policy Analyst.
Mr. Shimkus. We are going to call the hearing back to
order. This is the second day and the second panel of a hearing
that we started on Friday.
We are glad to have you here. So all the opening statements
have been done, so you don't have to listen to that.
I will introduce you individually. You will have 5 minutes
for your opening statement, and then your official statement is
filed in the record already. And then we will go to questions.
So thanks for coming.
OK. So first we have Ms. Elizabeth Dieck, director of
environmental affairs for the South Carolina Department of
Health and Environmental Control, on behalf of ECOS,
Environmental Council of the States, who have become good
friends of mine.
And we are glad that you are here. Welcome. You are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF ELIZABETH DIECK, DIRECTOR OF ENVIRONMENTAL
AFFAIRS, SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND ENVIRONMENTAL
CONTROL, ON BEHALF OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL COUNCIL OF THE STATES;
BONNIE BUTHKER, CHIEF SOUTHWEST DISTRICT OFFICE, OHIO EPA, ON
BEHALF OF THE ASSOCIATION OF STATE AND TERRITORIAL SOLID WASTE
MANAGEMENT OFFICIALS; AND MICHAEL HOULEMARD, JR., EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, FORT ORD REUSE AUTHORITY

STATEMENT OF ELIZABETH DIECK

Ms. Dieck. Thank you.
Chairman Shimkus, Ranking Member Tonko, and members of the
subcommittee, good afternoon. My name is Elizabeth Dieck, and I
am here today in my capacity as secretary/treasurer of ECOS,
whose members are the leaders of the state and territorial
environmental protection agencies. I serve as the director of
environmental affairs for the South Carolina Department of
Health and Environmental Control.
I appreciate the opportunity to share with you the states'
views on the progress of cleanup of contaminated Federal
facilities and what solutions may help address the related
challenges.
ECOS commends the subcommittee for holding these hearings
on the state of Federal facility cleanups in our Nation. Your
attention to these sites is relevant to nearly every state and
territory in our Nation where contaminated sites exist on lands
managed by Federal agencies such as the U.S. Department of
Defense, Department of Energy, Department of Agriculture, and
the Department of the Interior.
Your oversight of these cleanups, the resources being
devoted to them, and the legislative actions that can be taken
to advance cleanup progress is critical, as all Americans have
a collective interest in seeing the hundreds of millions of
dollars we allocate to these sites annually yield the most
effective results.
State environmental regulators are involved in every stage
of the cleanup process, from identifying and reporting sites to
staffing and overseeing cleanup efforts. We are on the front
lines of answering questions from our citizens about the risks
these sites may pose to their health and welfare, the scope of
the contamination, the status of the cleanup progress, and the
management of waste streams from building debris to more
hazardous waste.
We share with you and our Federal partners a priority
interest in responding to these complex sites as expeditiously
as possible and, when we can, returning them to productive use.
I would first like to highlight for you where states have
seen an improvement by Federal agencies in site remediation
progress and in maintaining communication with us during the
remediation process. This progress is due not only to
thoughtful process improvements within the agencies but also in
response to your oversight and legislation which passed the
House last Congress and a series of GAO reports calling into
question whether the Federal Government is moving expeditiously
and with sufficient resources to achieve the needed results at
these sites.
It is important to know that the creation of state-Federal
groups has allowed states and DOD to work towards mutually
acceptable cleanup solutions. In addition to these DOD sites,
states have played a major role, working with DOE, in the
cleanup of heavily contaminated sites affected by the nuclear
weapons complex. States work closely with DOE and U.S. EPA to
eliminate risks posed by these sites and oversee the cleanup of
sites within the complex through Federal facility agreements,
permits, and consent orders.
Collaboration between the states and Federal agencies has
resulted in significant financial savings from reduced future
maintenance costs that can be put towards further cleanup of
sites within the complex.
ECOS commends Federal agencies on progress. However, we are
concerned that there are instances where the interests of the
states are not being considered as thoughtfully as needed. We
have three overarching concerns.
First, the state voice in cleanup decision-making should be
further strengthened.
Where States have clear regulatory and enforcement
authority under legislation, much progress has been made at DOD
and DOE sites across the Nation, as Mr. Whitney and Mr. Conger
have testified this past week. States are concerned, however,
that assertions of sovereign immunity and CERCLA-led agency
authority under Executive Order 12580 by Federal agencies have
led to inappropriate or inconsistent interpretations of state
law and have not supported cleanup to the same standards as
private parties. This hampers states' abilities to oversee
effective cleanup efforts and be accountable to their citizens.
We encourage Congress to implement legislation that will
acknowledge state authority and regulatory responsibility for
oversight of removal and cleanup actions at current and
formerly owned or operated Federal facilities and fully
recognize states' regulatory roles at Federal facilities. There
is no reason for Federal agency environmental cleanup
activities to be subject to less oversight than private
parties.
Secondly, states frequently see the Federal agencies
unilaterally changing site cleanup schedules and goals, pushing
ultimate completion out by years and sometimes decades and
compromising the sites' ultimate usability. Federal agencies
effectively change cleanup schedules by failing to seek or
allocate sufficient funding for their cleanup commitments.
When a Federal agency unilaterally changes the terms of a
cleanup by extending a deadline or changing other goals, the
trust-based relationship breaks down, and it can lead to
tension, and then it can lead to costly litigation, and that
takes away from cleanup efforts. Federal agencies should
consult meaningfully with states before seeking to change
schedules or cleanup goals.
Third, we are concerned that the available budget
determines the remedial approach at some sites, meaning we may
not be implementing the most effective and appropriate cleanup
approach at a given site. Due to the complexity of the
contamination of these sites and the proximity of many of them
to communities, states recommend that Federal agencies, in
consultation with the states, determine the most appropriate
remedy and then work together to pursue sufficient and stable
funding solutions to implement that remedy. Transparent
statements about the actual funding necessary to achieve
results are imperative.
Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee, I hope that
my testimony today sheds some light both on the progress that
has been made as well as additional areas that are in need of
attention in the area of Federal facilities. I look forward to
answering any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Dieck follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much. Great to have you.
And now I would like to turn to Ms. Bonnie Buthker, chief
of Southwest District Office for the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency, on behalf of ASTSWMO.
You are recognized for 5 minutes. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF BONNIE BUTHKER

Ms. Buthker. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Chairman Shimkus, Ranking Member Tonko, and
members of the subcommittee. I thank you for the opportunity to
be here today to represent the Association of State and
Territorial Solid Waste Management Officials and provide
testimony.
Our membership includes managers from the state
environmental protection programs, including those responsible
for overseeing the restoration and reuse of current and former
Federal facilities. While Ohio EPA is a member of ASTSWMO and I
work for Ohio EPA, today I am here representing ASTSWMO.
While states do not assume primary CERCLA authority, we do
play a role in implementation. States share a common goal with
the Federal Government in ensuring that risks to human health
and the environment are appropriately addressed. Like U.S.
EPA's in NPL Federal facilities, the states' role is to ensure
that remedies implemented will be protective of human health
and the environment and in compliance with Federal and state
law.
While states try to work in partnership with both the
Federal agencies and U.S. EPA, there are times when we disagree
on what cleanup standards should be used and what remedies
should be implemented. For these partnerships to work, all
parties must focus on the technical and practical issues rather
than focusing on the legal authorities, including sovereign
immunity. Discussions involving legal authorities lead to
protracted posturing, no-win situations, and delayed
investigation and cleanup of these facilities.
ASTSWMO has consistently supported any mechanism that
encourages greater state collaboration with our Federal
partners while ensuring that our voice and opinions are not
diminished. ASTSWMO and our members actively engage with
representatives of the U.S. EPA, DOD, DOE, and Federal land
management agencies on national policy issues.
ASTSWMO has had a long history of working collaboratively
with DOD that began in the 1990s. In recent years, DOD and the
military components have worked closely with ASTSWMO and the
states to effectively resolve issues concerning the
investigation and remediation of their current and former
facilities.
Since 2008, DOD and the military components have formed
three different committees with states and ASTSWMO to resolve
difficult challenges that were ongoing problems for several
years. All three committees provide for collaboration among
States and Federal agencies on several challenging cleanup
issues, including remediation technologies and interim risk
management, which can be especially challenging on property no
longer owned by DOD.
ASTSWMO continues to support legislation that clarifies
that Federal agencies, like private companies, are subject to
appropriate state regulations. While ASTSWMO appreciates the
leadership DOD has shown in recent years by focusing on
resolving issues with states versus their legal authorities,
this has not always been the case.
Throughout the years, states have had several experiences
with Federal agencies being unwilling to ensure their
investigation and cleanups were done in accordance with state
regulations. When states tried to use their authorities to
compel Federal agencies to comply with these laws, Federal
agencies invoked sovereign immunity in an attempt to prevent
state oversight.
Because of this, ASTSWMO has had longstanding policy
positions opposing the assertion of sovereign immunity by
Federal agencies. These positions have not changed over time,
because our members continue to have experiences where Federal
agencies use sovereign immunity to avoid compliance with state
requirements. These experiences involve all Federal agencies,
including DOD, the Department of Interior, and the Department
of Agriculture.
For example, in 2013, ASTSWMO did a survey of state and
Federal facility managers asking if they recently experienced
Federal agencies' invoking sovereign immunity during the
application, implementation, and enforcement of CERCLA or state
regulations. Of the 19 states that responded, the states listed
12 cases where they had had such experiences.
And though Federal agencies have accomplished a great deal
of cleanup at their facilities over the last 20 years, there
are still difficult issues left to address, including
complicated groundwater contamination, emerging contaminants
unique to Federal facilities, and sites contaminated with
munitions. Sovereign immunity could still be a barrier to
states in ensuring compliance with state requirements and
Federal agency decisions concerning such issues.
States need funding so that they can provide necessary
resources to be engaged in Federal facility investigations and
cleanups. Both DOD and DOE have programs that provide funding
to states for their involvement in the investigation and
cleanup of their facilities. These programs have provided
numerous benefits to both these agencies and the states,
including cost savings, reduced litigation, expedited cleanup,
and increased public trust in their investigations and
cleanups. ASTSWMO, therefore, supports legislation that
requires Federal agencies to reimburse states for costs
associated with state involvement and oversight.
Thank you for this opportunity to offer testimony, and I
would be pleased to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Buthker follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
And, finally, I will turn to Mr. Michael Houlemard,
executive officer of Fort Ord Reuse Authority.
And before I ask him to begin, I think the minority staff
is pretty smart or they got lucky. The Monterey area and Fort
Ord is my last duty station. So I served there when it was a
jewel. And there are great locations there--beautiful golf
course, new housing. I was just there a couple years ago--and
University of California Monterey, which is very exciting. But
obviously, there is a lot of the post that still has issues and
challenges.
So we are happy to have you here. Monterey is the second-
most-beautiful spot on the face of the Earth, right behind the
15th District of Illinois. And so we are glad to have you here.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL HOULEMARD, JR.

Mr. Houlemard. Chairman Shimkus, Ranking Member Tonko, all
distinguished members of the subcommittee, I want to just thank
you for that acknowledgement of how great Monterey is, but it
is no better than Rantoul in Illinois.
I would also like to note that, as the executive officer at
the Fort Ord Reuse Authority, I have spent quite a bit of my
last 20 years spending many hours back here in Washington,
D.C., representing communities across the Nation. So I want to
thank the committee for its decision that it would include
communities as part of the testimony on this very important
committee.
I am honored to have spent those last 25 years of my career
serving military communities. I served some of that time
working with the Association of Defense Communities that has a
Defense Communities Caucus support effort. And I know that it
is important for all of you to recognize that the communities
that have served this Nation by supporting military services
have done it in a way that helps the Department of Defense
increase its mission-effectiveness.
I also want to take the time to acknowledge our colleagues
in U.S. EPA that are tasked with the regulatory oversight that
is required to address the many environmental conditions
between military communities and their adjacent communities,
whether they be active installations or closing or closed
installations.
Today I want to focus my comments on the Superfund
relationship with military services and defense communities,
which is at least an uphill battle given the limited resources
and the potential for hazards, both recognized and emerging, to
be present.
I also, Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, assert
that our defense in part relies on how DOD addresses the
sensitive mix of downsizing and the burden of excess
infrastructure in the future and its relationship to the
ongoing environmental hazards that remain in many of our
military installations. Our communities suffer from the many
technical, regulatory, processing, resource, and other delays
that affect our ability to have access to property in a safe
and reliable way.
And many communities across this Nation are provided
partial or inadequate information about Federal or other agency
contamination that will affect their exposure to potential
catastrophic hazards. This is particularly acute with recent
past property transfers from the Department of Defense to local
communities after downsizing and closing former properties and
then abandoning them to local jurisdictions.
Remedial actions are often governed under the resource
application decisions by and within the primary polluter's
oversight. Those decisions are often determined to be under the
regulatory control of the Antideficiency Act, even when DOD has
determined them to be exempt from such limitations. In those
cases, communities have to wait for the annual funding process,
which often causes significant delays in mobilizing and
demobilizing. In our case, we are looking at the possibility of
another 7 to 10 years before getting full access to the Fort
Ord National Monument for an installation that was announced
for closure 25 years ago.
Another item is, as a Superfund site due to subsurface
remediation, we at the former Fort Ord are ineligible for
funding resources and other support under brownfields that
would greatly assist us in addressing these aboveground issues.
We think that there is a conflict of the regulatory controls
here and that Congress should look at that and understand the
potential for helping communities. We now have projects that
cannot survive even in the great Monterey Bay, with our
underlying land value, because we are left with the burden of
buildings that are contaminated, with considerable cost putting
them under water economically.
Another critical item--and this is not brand-new; I guess
you have heard this repeatedly--but the long-term stewardship
of properties that is being transferred from Federal hands to
local communities is critical. In many, if not nearly every
case nationwide, Federal agencies are motivated to complete
cleanups that enable property transfers in a way that reduces
long-term Federal obligations. And while that may be a great
goal for the Federal agencies, it is real important for the
communities to be able to have an economic recovery, which
demands access to property and ability to manage the long-term
stewardship.
This is especially important that that long-term burden be
provided in a way that is a part of a remedial action and
assessed economically in the remedial action what is being left
to local communities.
How such responsibility transference is assessed is crucial
under CERCLA. This is especially key as the EPA addresses
emerging contaminants such as PFCs that may exist on properties
already transferred but yet there is no current way for the
Federal agency to return to take care of those problems.
Five on my item list--I just finished the fourth--community
voices are often not heard. It is my assertion that communities
are often only provided the minimum opportunity to participate
in the process, including CERCLA. Superfund regulatory
requirements read like a checkoff list to meet certain public
comment requirements, but those regulations fall woefully short
of meeting the intent for engaging the community in the
process.
A true engagement process goes well beyond these citizen
participation minimums, community involvement review timelines,
or news publication requirements to encourage--that would allow
for encouraging active engagement in communities in the forms
and methods that solicit input in the way that communities
interact.
These technical assistance programs that are currently
being funded must be proactive and not responsive to just those
few communities that respond. Further, the EPA and other
agencies need to help communities build capacity so that they
strengthen their local knowledge base and that their comments
are of value.
I assert that the community engagement process is a full-
contact sport, and it has to be done in the full spectrum of
what 21st-century communications are all about.
Ultimately, I would like to add that this is a resource
issue, as well. And given the limits of certain Federal
support, U.S. EPA must be given the combination of
decisionmaking power that allows flexibility between programs
and supplemental authority that allows for an increase in the
interface with states and local communities.
This collaborative effort would greatly enhance our
interactions over the serial reviews that we have today. In
fact, we are under a process of collaboration that has been
extremely effective at Fort Ord that brings all the parties to
the table in a concurrent manner rather than in a serial
fashion.
So I assert that we have learned quite a few things: that
it is difficult for citizenry to get up to speed with this
complex, sophisticated effort; and it is important that we have
property transfer and project delivery delays that are
collaborative and use 21st-century communications. I ask that
we eliminate contravening regulatory issues through focused
oversight. And that is essential to community understanding.
That also leads to community voices being heard that may not be
heard today.
And, finally, we must move to address the long-term
stewardship issues that are current a major potential unfunded
mandate to local communities and states.
Chairman Shimkus, thank you for the communities' having a
voice here at the table.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Houlemard follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. You are welcome, and it is great to have you.
So I will now open it up for the line of questions, and I
will recognize myself, 5 minutes for the first round.
And I asked this line of questions to our Federal witnesses
last week, but I am guessing that I will hear different
responses from the witnesses on the panel. I did talk to them
and say please tune in to hear your voices when I spoke to them
a couple times on Friday.
My question stems from the issue of the delegation of the
present CERCLA authority under Executive Order 12580 to other
Federal agencies who are also potential responsible parties.
And it is really the same question to all of you, and we will
just go first to Ms. Dieck.
Is there a conflict when a Federal agency is a potential
responsible party because it caused the contamination or owns
the contaminated property but the same agency is also the lead
agency responsible for making cleanup decisions? Why or why
not?
Ms. Dieck. I would have to say there is a conflict. If you
have the Federal agency that has created the contamination is
responsible for the cleanup and is also responsible for
selecting the remedial action, that is an inherent conflict.
It has to be something that is coordinated clearly with the
states so that our voice is heard and so that there is an
understanding of what the appropriate remedial action would be
so that the land can be protected and the proper protective
measures are in place.
Mr. Shimkus. Ms. Buthker, same question. And I can restate
it if you need it, but----
Ms. Buthker. No. I would say there is definitely a
conflict. Because the Federal agencies, they are trying to look
at the funding that they have and trying to do as much as they
possibly can, and if they can put in a cheaper remedy at a
facility than what maybe the state wants or the community
wants, then they can use that money somewhere else. And so,
definitely, there is a conflict.
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. Houlemard?
Mr. Houlemard. Thank you, Chair. I concur with my
colleagues.
I would add a quick note that the former Fort Ord, we had
an experience that the United States Army, which serves as the
president for the cleanup at the former Fort Ord--we elected to
do our own cleanup under contract. And during the course of
that process, we have attempted to be collaborative, but it
breaks down at certain points.
The United States Army had a certain concern about what the
language was going to look like that directly related to the
return of the United States Army to cover under 120(h). EPA had
a difficult language issue. It took over 18 months to get that
resolved, and we wound up with delays. Similar things have
happened in Kansas and in Texas on similar kind of, but
different, issues that create the delays.
So I concur with my colleagues.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
And a followup to Ms. Dieck: Your written testimony
acknowledges that States are concerned that when Federal
agencies assert sovereign immunity and when they assert a
CERCLA lead agency authority under Executive Order 12580 that
this has led to, in quotations here, ``inappropriate or
inconsistent interpretations of state law that have not
supported cleanup to the same standards as private parties,''
close quote.
Can you explain what you mean by this?
Ms. Dieck. Sure.
Assertion of sovereign immunity or lead agency authority
enables Federal agencies to bypass or partially meet state
requirements that normally would apply to private parties. For
example, if the lead agency does not deem that a state
requirement is applicable, relevant, or appropriate, then that
agency does not have to meet that particular requirement. So
that is problematic.
Mr. Shimkus. And, in my final time, in this debate of
cleanup, the cost, the agency that could have created the
problem is directed to clean up, but of course they do it based
upon the money available.
If you were to object--first of all, do you have a right to
object? And then is that where the claim of sovereign immunity
comes in, saying, well, thank you, but we can do whatever we
want anyway?
Ms. Dieck. Certainly that would be the case for sites on
the NPL list. And, generally, the way they are reading it with
the Executive Order 12580 and the language in CERCLA, that is
the way that it is being applied, and that is problematic.
Mr. Shimkus. Anyone else have----
Ms. Buthker. I would say, definitely what you see happening
is, because of the cost issue, a lot of times Federal
facilities will look at the state requirements and say, well,
if I can whittle down these state requirements that I have to
meet, then I might be able to implement a cheaper remedy.
So that definitely has that impact where you see that, and
because they are lead agency and they are the final say on how
that remedy is going to be implemented and what happens, then
yes, the state can try to challenge that, but then that is when
you have a situation with sovereign immunity. If the state
says, well, I am going to sue you because you are not doing
something consistent with what we would want you to do in this
particular instance, they are like, OK, fine, sue me, but we
have sovereign immunity.
Mr. Shimkus. And you would agree, Mr. Houlemard?
Mr. Houlemard. Yes, I would. I think the collaborative
process is going to serve us all a lot better. In the case
where we have--our experiences, the collaborative process
treats the remediation as what is most effective rather than
what is most cost-effective.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. And I apologize for going over.
Now the chair recognizes the ranking member of the
subcommittee, Mr. Tonko, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you for
convening this panel today so that we can hear from states and
communities affected by the Superfund cleanups.
At last week's panel, we heard that a lot of progress has
been made to address dangerous contamination at Federal
facilities owned by the Department of Defense and Department of
Energy. So I would like to start by asking the panel, have you
seen that progress in your states and communities? And what do
these cleanups mean for communities around those sites?
Ms. Dieck, if you want to start.
Ms. Dieck. Sure.
I would start by saying we do have a collaborative--a
strong working relationship with DOE, and we have seen some
tremendous successes at SRS. I think that the problems arise
when, as I think I mentioned earlier in my testimony, there can
be unilateral decisions that are made with regard to
milestones, with regard to funding, that create a tension and
make it difficult for the states to have that trust
relationship.
And so, while good things are happening, we have been able
to achieve a lot, specifically at SRS, I think that we could do
better.
Mr. Tonko. Ms. Buthker?
Ms. Buthker. There has been a lot of progress made in
Federal facility cleanups, not just in Ohio, but throughout all
our member states have said that. And a good deal of it has to
deal with the fact that we have been able to collaborate with
DOD and DOE on the cleanups and work through these issues.
The problem, where it breaks down is when, whatever the
Federal agency is all of a sudden decides that they don't want
to collaborate anymore and they want it their way or the
highway. And when that situation happens, then that is when we
start having less progress. That is when we start getting into
a lot more of these battles over jurisdiction.
But there has been a great deal of cleanup that has been
done because states have been working collaboratively. Most
Federal facilities are not on the NPL, so the state is the only
regulatory agency involved.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
And Mr. Houlemard?
Mr. Houlemard. Well, yes, Ranking Member Tonko, I would
agree that there has been a lot of progress made, but then
there is still so much more to do. We still have 8,000 acres of
property that we are seeking access at the former Fort Ord, and
I could describe another dozen cases where access to property
is crucial to their economic recovery.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
And it seems that some cleanups have progressed more
smoothly than others and can offer best practices for how to
work with states and engage communities. So can you cite for us
observations of best practices to foster community involvement
and strong cooperation amongst the stakeholders?
Mr. Houlemard?
Mr. Houlemard. Yes, I would give as examples McClellan Air
Force Base in California; McClellan Army in Anniston, Alabama;
and the Fort Ord Reuse Authority, where we as communities chose
to collaborate with military services and the regulatory
agencies to undertake a portion of our own cleanup and to make
sure that we understood how it was happening, under effective
cost working relationships, using private-sector companies to
make sure that happened, with an insurance company that would
assist us, and using collaborative processes. That worked for
us, and we suggest that that is a formula that works many other
places.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
Ms. Buthker?
Ms. Buthker. I would say that some of the successes that I
have experienced--Wright-Patterson Air Force Base. And it was
very much that collaboration of working with the Air Force, the
state, and U.S. EPA together, focused on how do we do the
cleanup quicker, easier, more efficient. And we did a lot of
things there.
Several of our base closure sites in Ohio--Defense
Electronic Supply Center, again, where we were working with not
just U.S. EPA and the Air Force, but we were also working with
the local community to ensure that, when that facility was
cleaned up and transferred to them, that they could use it how
they wanted to us it.
So, yes, there definitely are those experiences.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
And Ms. Dieck?
Ms. Dieck. I would echo what these folks have said. It is
critical to have significant communication outreach efforts in
place when you are dealing with contaminated sites in any area
of your state. To have the education, the outreach, the
understanding of what the contamination is, the status of the
cleanup, what the implications are is critical. And you find
that, with that collaborative approach, you can really see
tremendous benefit.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much.
I think my time is exhausted. I was going to sneak one more
question in, but thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time, and we
thank him.
The chair now recognizes the vice chair of the committee,
Congressman Harper, from Mississippi, 5 minutes.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Appreciate it very
much.
And thanks to each of you for being here to shed some light
on a very important issue.
I will start with you, Ms. Buthker. Your written testimony
gives an example of DOD historically asserting sovereign
immunity in order to unilaterally decide issues such as what
constitutes a state applicable or relevant and appropriate
requirement. And we also understand that Federal agencies
assert or threaten to assert sovereign immunity and thereby
discourage states from enforcing otherwise applicable state
laws.
Obviously, this is a problem for states, but can you please
explain the issue?
Ms. Buthker. Well, the biggest problem with it for states
is that, when states inconsistently apply their cleanup
regulations from private parties to Federal facilities, then
the private parties can raise the issue about, why are you
picking on me? We hear a lot about Federal agencies wanting to
be treated by private parties, but when it really comes down to
it, they don't necessarily want to do that.
How that also creates problems with us is that, if ARAR is
not consistent--applicable or relevant and appropriate
regulation isn't consistently applied, then U.S. EPA can come
in and say, well, since you are not consistently applying that
on both your private-party cleanups and your Federal facility
cleanups, we can waive that ARAR on our future cleanups because
you are not consistently doing it.
So both of those ways can impact the state.
Mr. Harper. OK.
You also mentioned that DOD previously took the position
that enforcement actions taken by the state could constitute a
breach of the Defense-State Memorandum of Agreement. Could you
first explain what the Defense-State MOA is and then tell us
why this is problem for states?
Ms. Buthker. The Defense-State Memorandum of Agreement is
the mechanism by which DOD and a state would come to agreement
on how states would be reimbursed for their costs. It outlines
what particular services the state provides. It doesn't say
state oversight; it says the state will provide these services
to DOD. But it also outlines the agreement that the state would
agree to a prioritization system for funding, making sure that
the most funding goes to the worst sites.
But then it also had a provision in most DSMOAs that before
the state could take an enforcement action on a facility that
was listed under the DSMOA, then they were supposed to go
through the dispute resolution process; it also had a dispute
resolution process in it. And, initially, what states thought
that that meant was that, for the cleanup part of the--because
the DSMOA only covers cleanup--that that was where States
needed to go through dispute resolution if they had a
disagreement. Like, for number of monitoring wells or number of
soil samples being collected, that is when they would use
dispute resolution. But if there was something that was a
violation of state law and it was even outside of the cleanup
program, we felt that was off limits; we could still use our
regulatory authority.
And, before 2008, where the DSMOA program really started to
have problems was that DOD started to any interpret that any
regulatory program that the State was involved in that dealt
with those facilities under our DSMOA, that would apply.
And I can give you an example. If a base had their own
drinking water system and they exceeded a contaminant level and
were issued an NOV, there were concerns that states would end
up jeopardizing their funding under the DSMOA and actually be a
breach of DSMOA if they sent a violation letter to the facility
for that.
So that was pre-2008 when that was happening.
Mr. Harper. Does DOD ever--do they ever currently assert
this position?
Ms. Buthker. In 2008, where the big shift in all this was,
we actually formed--ASTSWMO states and DOD formed the DSMOA
Steering Committee, where we worked through all these issues.
And they clarified that that was not their intent, that the
leadership at the time had misinterpreted what that clause was
in the state's DSMOA. And it doesn't apply to any violation. It
only applies to disagreements about the cleanup program itself.
And they actually modified their guidance in 2011 in order to
address that specific issue.
But, again, that is guidance and policy statement that is
in place now. If the leadership at DOD would change, we could
have something that would happen again back to that same
situation.
Mr. Harper. I know we don't have time for you to answer and
explain, but are there other agencies besides DOD that are
doing the same thing in asserting sovereign immunity in order
to decide what constitutes an ARAR?
Ms. Buthker. Yes, there are other agencies. When we----
Mr. Harper. Just tell me which agencies they are, and maybe
somebody else will follow up.
Ms. Buthker. Department of Interior and Department of
Agriculture are two that specifically our members have cited.
Mr. Harper. Thank you very much.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time members.
And, for us members, DSMOA is Defense-State Memorandum of
Agreement. So I am watching acronyms here.
So the chair now recognizes the ranking member of the full
committee, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
I am trying to get through these questions because I wanted
to get through a bunch of them. So, first of all, I wanted to
ask about the funding limitations that can delay and complicate
cleanups.
Mr. Houlemard, can you describe some of the economic
impacts cleanup delays have on communities around Federal
facilities. And then, secondly, what about the economic impacts
of successful cleanups? How do they help local communities?
Mr. Houlemard. Thank you, sir.
I would like to first address the second one. As we have
been able to get access to the property at the former Fort Ord
and the economics in our region have changed in the last
several years, we have seen a boost in our activities,
including the fact that, at the current time, we have about a
billion dollars of construction underway, with new hotels, new
residential, and many other activities. Getting access to the
property is crucial. We had funding early that enabled us to
get access to those properties.
On the other side, we have not been able to get access
fully to all of the properties on the former Fort Ord because
of annual funding restrictions under the Antideficiency Act.
While that means annually Congress has to approve, I know that
DOD sometimes is able to overcome that because there is a DOD
allowance that requires or allows multiyear funding. When you
can use that kind of funding, you don't have to lose the time
in mobilization and demobilization that we have lost every
single year in creating new contracts, going through the USACE,
United States Army Corps of Engineers, to be able to do that
oversight.
That saves time in processing, it saves time in
mobilization and demobilization, and gets the properties
cleaned quicker.
Mr. Pallone. OK.
Let me move to the second question. When Congress fails to
fund agencies consistently because of sequestration, shutdown,
or just short-term extensions that unfortunately become the
norm, it can have a significant impact on cleanup schedules.
So let me ask Ms. Buthker and Ms. Dieck: From the state
perspective, are these budget fluctuations and schedule changes
disruptive? Quickly, if you can.
Ms. Buthker. Speaking on behalf of the members of ASTSWMO,
having a stable level of funding for the cleanups so that can
ask plan and prioritize definitely makes things work a lot
easier. States can meet with DOD and say, these are the things
we want to try to accomplish.
In addition, because our funding that we receive from DOD
is based on a set work plan, the activities under that work
plan, if those things do not happen, then states don't get
money. So they also have the issue about potentially having to
pull off staff that were assigned to work with DOD on those
particular Federal facility cleanups. So it could definitely
cause some disruption there.
Mr. Pallone. And let me ask Ms. Dieck quickly, because then
I have a third question.
Ms. Dieck. Well, very briefly, when Federal agencies--they
don't always ask for the money that they need to meet the
commitments that have been made to the states. And that becomes
very problematic. That is why transparency is critical.
We work with Federal agencies to come up with a plan that
has certain goals and milestones put in place, and when we miss
those goals, it can have economic impacts. If we don't have the
land returned to productive use, it is problematic.
So it is critical that we have reliable funding that we can
count on.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Thank you.
Let me go back to Mr. Houlemard about the brownfields
program. I was one of the--myself and Congressman Gillmor put
together the first brownfields authorization years ago, and I
am very interested in ways to strengthen the program and make
it more effective.
Could you just elaborate briefly on your suggestion that a
flaw in the brownfields legislation must be fixed to allow
unique sites like Fort Ord to qualify for the program?
Mr. Houlemard. Yes. In the case of the former Fort Ord,
fence line to fence line, we are Superfund under CERCLA for
reasons having to do with groundwater contamination. The United
States Army has a process that they are undertaking to remove
the groundwater problem. It still has 15 years to go before it
is going to be complete, maybe more. As a consequence,
brownfields funding to support our efforts above ground are--we
are not eligible because we are fence-line-to-fence-line
Superfund.
And so that is the way that the legislationhas been
written. We have asked U.S. EPA about this issue in the past.
They themselves recognize that there is a little bit of a
conflict because our other environmental concerns of asbestos,
lead, PCBs, and other things that are left to us by the United
States Army cost significant amounts of dollars to remove.
In fact, California State University, Monterey Bay, is
spending $30 million just to remove buildings over the coming
years. We have already spent $45 million just to remove
buildings, and we don't have any kind of assistance or
brownfields program that can help us with that kind of problem.
Mr. Pallone. All right.
Let me just say to the chairman and to the ranking member
of the subcommittee, I hope we have an opportunity to work on
potential improvements to brownfields in the coming months.
When I worked with Congressman Gillmor years ago and President
Bush signed the bill, we did it in a very bipartisan way, and I
would like to see if we could do that again in terms of a
reauthorization.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
We thank you for that suggestion. And we all mourn the
passing of Paul, and that is a good memory of Paul, of
successful legislation, bipartisan, that was moved and passed.
So now I would like to recognize, looks like, obviously,
the member who took the seat of Paul Gillmor, Bob Latta, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, thanks very much, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you very much for our witnesses for being here. I
really appreciate it.
And if I could start with you, Ms. Buthker, I am going to
assume from your testimony that you believe that current and
formerly owned Federal facilities should have to comply with
the same state requirements as a private entity conducting a
cleanup under CERCLA?
Ms. Buthker. Yes.
Mr. Latta. OK.
And let me ask this: With your leadership at--and I hope I
am pronouncing this right--at ASTSWMO, how often do Federal
facilities comply with state requirements?
Ms. Buthker. How often?
Mr. Latta. How often, in your experience, at ASTSWMO do you
see that the Federal Government, Federal agencies are complying
with state requirements?
Ms. Buthker. This issue of Federal agencies complying with
state requirements and not saying that--or waiving them has
pretty much been a constant issue for the 20 years I have been
involved at ASTSWMO.
Mr. Latta. OK.
And do you believe that section 120 of CERCLA is evidence
that Congress intended to waive sovereign immunity?
Ms. Buthker. I believe that it is. But I am not an
attorney, so I am saying that. But I would believe it is
because they were--the way that I read it when I read it is
that they are supposed to, especially the non-NPL facilities,
they are supposed to be meeting state requirements.
Mr. Latta. And does the current waiver of sovereign
immunity in CERCLA result in less oversight of Federal agency
cleanups than in cleanups by private parties?
Ms. Buthker. I would say for the non-NPL sites that are
under state oversight, yes, because you always have that
specter of sovereign immunity in the picture.
If you have good collaboration with DOD, DOE, or the other
Federal agencies, then you can work through these issues and
these problems and these disagreements as you have them. But if
you have a Federal facility project manager who doesn't want to
listen to the state or the community, then they can basically
shut down the program because they are lead agency, and if the
state tries to sue, then sovereign immunity raises its head.
Mr. Latta. OK.
One last question, with my remaining time here. Last
Congress, I introduced and the House passed H.R. 2318, which
was the Federal Facility Accountability Act--and kind of
following up with what you were talking about--which ensures
that current and formerly owned Federal facilities will have to
comply with the same State requirements as a private entity
doing a cleanup under CERCLA.
And then, in your testimony, you discuss the need for this
type of legislation and how your association's positions have
not changed over time because your members continue to have
experiences where Federal agencies use sovereign immunity to
avoid compliance with state requirements during investigation
and cleanup of Federal facilities.
And can you describe some of the state requirements that
the Federal agencies are trying to avoid?
Ms. Buthker. Probably the biggest one or one of the biggest
ones is land use control, state regulations that implement
restrictions on property. A lot of states have developed their
own environmental covenant programs, and Federal agencies do
not like to use that format for restricting property. They want
to use their own mechanism.
How that causes problems for the states is, when there
isn't a consistent means to restrict property, there is the
potential that those restrictions can fail over time. And that
is a very big issue for states. That is one.
Cleanup standards. Some states have set generic standards
for cleanup, and DOD may or may not or the Federal agencies may
or may not want to clean up to those levels.
There is also things such as how landfills should be
capped. A lot of states have their own regulations for those,
and there are times when DOD says, no, those--or I shouldn't
say just DOD--all the Federal agencies will say those shouldn't
apply.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
And, Mr. Chairman, in the interest of time, I am going to
yield back my time and also say it is a privilege to hold the
seat that Paul held.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes. Thank you.
The gentleman yields back his time.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from West Virginia,
Mr. McKinley, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I missed the first portion last week when we began, so
perhaps this question has come up, but I am just curious on
your perspective, because you are coming at, it looks like,
from a different panel than we had before. But I am curious
about some of the discussion about the Animus River out in
Colorado. And I know it is about 126 miles long, and the EPA
caused some problem there. They caused the issue to occur at
the Gold King Mine.
Now, two things here with that is, are you hearing, from
your perspective, did they solve it in a quick way? Do you
think that--again, because we were talking earlier about if it
is federally--if the Federal Government caused the problem,
they can take a long time to get it resolved, or not, or they
can find ways to cut corners, perhaps. I have heard some of
this.
Do you think they did a pretty good job out there? Have you
heard anything from the states, from other people talking about
how they cleaned up the river? Let me just start with that. Any
comments about the--you haven't heard? You don't know anything
about it?
Ms. Dieck. I have to say, I know some things about it, but
I would like to refrain from commenting on that.
Mr. McKinley. OK. I am just thinking, since it touched
several states and it had some impact on--again, it goes back
to what you were saying, sir, about individual input. With 126
miles long, there were a lot of people that were affected by
that. Their farms were affected by it. I don't know whether or
not they had a chance to participate in a solution of how--I
know it is going to clear up themselves naturally, I understand
that, but the damage has been done.
So part of my point would be--or the second question would
be, who should pay for the cleanup? The taxpayers? Or should
the government pay for that out of their current funding? Who
would you think? It is kind of input. We are sitting around a
table now where maybe you don't have an official position, but
who do you think should pay for the damage the government
caused by what they did? Is that something we are going to ask
the taxpayers to come up with the money, or do you think maybe
it should come out of their budget?
Does anyone have the courage to speak on this?
Ms. Buthker. I really don't know enough about the
situation. It hasn't----
Mr. McKinley. But just in general, if a government causes a
problem, should the government clean it up on their dime, or
should they pass that on to the taxpayers of the country?
Ms. Buthker. Well, I would say, when you are looking at
Federal agencies and Federal agency cleanup and those Federal
agencies caused the contamination, some of it were from
practices that they didn't know were bad things to do at the
time. And, in that case, the Federal agencies are cleaning it
up, but that is also taxpayer money that is funding that.
Mr. McKinley. Yes.
Ms. Buthker. So I don't know if that answers your question
or not, but----
Mr. McKinley. It doesn't. It doesn't. Because this one is
something--they directed the work to be done; it caused a
problem. And I am just questioning--if they were a private
person in the mining industry--I come from the coalfields of
West Virginia. When they cause a problem, the mines are fined
immediately, and they have to come up with the money.
I am just curious on this, whether or not this is something
that fits into some of this discussion about responsibility,
where the Federal Government should be. So it is more of just a
general discussion. It may be very generic rather than specific
to the Gold King Mine, whether or not they should pay for it
out of their budget rather than a separate appropriation to
clean it up. Because it is going to be millions of dollars in
damages to the farmers and the fisheries and all that are
affected by that.
So I go back to your point again, do the people have a
chance to speak? Because from what I can understand from
reading the newspapers out there, there are a lot of people who
have been damaged out there, and I am just wondering whois
going to compensate them. Is it going to be the taxpayers, or
is it going to be the EPA for calling the wrong shot?
Mr. Houlemard. I am not aware of the circumstances, sir,
but I would always encourage the EPA and all Federal agencies
to engage in a very active way with the local community, and
the same would be for this case.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you very much.
I yield back my time.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
That is all the members seeking time to ask questions. We
appreciate you all being here. I think there is--with the
comments from the ranking member of the full committee, there
may be some issues that we can talk--on brownfields, and we
will see where we go from here.
That is why we have hearings, to identify problems and
maybe address solutions. And I look forward to working with my
ranking member, Mr. Tonko, as we have successfully in the past,
and maybe there is something we can do.
With that, I will adjourn the hearing. Thank you for
coming.
[Whereupon, at 4:59 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
