- EPA'S CO
2
REGULATIONS FOR NEW AND EXISTING POWER PLANTS: LEGAL PERSPECTIVES

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EPA'S CO2 REGULATIONS FOR NEW AND EXISTING POWER PLANTS: LEGAL
PERSPECTIVES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 22, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-90

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

98-876 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California7
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               JERRY McNERNEY, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        PAUL TONKO, New York
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREGG HARPER, Vice Chairman          GENE GREEN, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     LOIS CAPPS, California
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             KATHY CASTOR, Florida
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   PETER WELCH, Vermont
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILL FLORES, Texas                   FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma               officio)
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     3
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................   141

Witnesses

Elbert Lin, Solicitor General, State of West Virginia............     8
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Allison Wood, Partner, Hunton & Williams, LLP....................    33
Prepared statement...........................................    35
Richard Revesz, Lawrence King Professor of Law, Dean Emeritus,
and Director, Institute for Policy Integrity, New York
University School of Law.......................................    61
Prepared statement...........................................    64
Answers to submitted questions...............................   166
Emily Hammond, Associate Dean for Public Engagement, Professor of
Law, George Washington University Law School...................    89
Prepared statement...........................................    91
Answers to submitted questions...............................   169
Raymond L. Gifford, Partner, Wilkinson Barker Knauer, LLP........    96
Prepared statement...........................................    98

Submitted Material

Report by the Electric Reliability Council of Texas, ``ERCOT
Analysis of the Impacts of the Clean Power Plan,'' October 16,
2015, submitted by Mr. Olson...................................   143
Presidential Message, ``Proposed Legislation--`Clean Air Act
Amendments of 1989,''' House Document 101-87, 101st Congress,
1st Session, submitted by Mr. Griffith.........................   157

EPA'S CO
2
REGULATIONS FOR NEW AND EXISTING POWER PLANTS:
LEGAL PERSPECTIVES

----------

THURSDAY, OCTOBER 22, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:03 p.m., in
room 2123 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed Whitfield
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Whitfield, Olson, Shimkus,
Pitts, Latta, Harper, McKinley, Griffith, Johnson, Long,
Flores, Mullin, Hudson, Rush, McNerney, Tonko, Engel, Green,
Capps, Doyle, Castor, Welch, Loebsack, and Pallone (ex
officio).
Staff present: Will Batson, Legislative Clerk; Leighton
Brown, Press Assistant; Allison Busbee, Policy Coordinator,
Energy and Power; Rebecca Card, Staff Assistant; Tom
Hassenboehler, Chief Counsel, Energy and Power; Mary Neumayr,
Senior Energy Counsel; Chris Sarley, Policy Coordinator,
Environment and the Economy; Dan Schneider, Press Secretary;
Peter Spencer, Professional Staff Member, Oversight and
Investigations; Christine Brennan, Democratic Press Secretary;
Jeff Carroll, Democratic Staff Director; Caitlin Haberman,
Democratic Professional Staff Member; Rick Kessler, Democratic
Senior Advisor and Staff Director, Energy and Environment; John
Marshall, Democratic Policy Coordinator; Alexander Ratner,
Democratic Policy Analyst; Timia Crisp, Democratic AAAS Fellow;
and Josh Lewis, Democratic EPA Detailee.
Mr. Whitfield. I would like to call the hearing to order
this afternoon. And I know we have a number of our friends on
that side of the aisle and a number over here, and I know that
Mr. Rush and Mr. Pallone are on their way. And I am sure by the
time I finish my statement, we can go right to them for their
statement.
So at this time I would like to recognize myself for a 5-
minute opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Two weeks ago, we reviewed the substance of EPA's
CO
2
regulations for new and existing power plants,
all 3,000 pages of them, with EPA Acting Assistant
Administrator Janet McCabe. Today's hearing will focus on the
legality of this complicated and far-reaching scheme to
commandeer each State's electricity system and replace it with
a cap-and-trade approach similar to the ones that Congress has
repeatedly rejected. And I say that because I think that is
what the Federal Implementation Plan is going to be.
There is nothing in the Clean Air Act that even suggests
such sweeping agency action is authorized. Indeed, these rules
are unprecedented in the 45-year history of this statute. If
Congress wanted to authorize a comprehensive transformation of
the way America gets its electricity, it would have said so. If
Congress wanted to see a wholesale Federal takeover of State
authority on electricity policy, it would have said so. And if
Congress wanted to largely write fossil fuels out of America's
energy future, it would have said so.
In my view, the discrepancy between what EPA is trying to
do and what the Clean Air Act actually allows it to do is so
wide that I, along with others, would be flabbergasted if the
Court ruled this action is legal. I might also say there are
serious constitutional concerns with what many see as an
executive branch power grab at the expense of the legislative
branch and the States.g
I might add that some of the same reasons EPA's power plant
rules are bad law are also the reasons they are bad policy,
particularly in the way the Agency treats the States. The 1970
Clean Air Act set out a working partnership between the Federal
Government and States stating clearly that air pollution
prevention and control are the primary responsibility of State
and local governments. In contrast, unilateral EPA
micromanagement of electricity generation is a recipe for
higher bills, reduced reliability, and job losses that are well
out of proportion to any environmental benefit.
The fact that 16 States--and we think there are even going
to be more--believe they have no choice--they can't sit down
and talk to EPA about this--they have no choice but to sue the
Agency over these rules is a sure sign of an unhealthy Federal-
State relationship and a policy that won't work. The House
passed the Ratepayer Protection Act to address the legal and
policy shortcomings of the rule for existing power plants. This
bill would extend the State compliance deadlines so that the
rule's costly provisions would not take effect until judicial
review is complete.
We all recognize that even EPA itself had reversed 20 years
of legal opinions about the use of 112 and 111(d). And without
accusing anyone of anything, it is very easy to conclude that
the reason they reversed this was that it was the only way that
they could institute this extreme, radical, unprecedented plan
in time for the President to go to Paris next month and
proclaim that American is doing more than anyone else.
And that is OK, but if it is illegal, that should be of
concern to all of us. And there are many people who believe it
is illegal. But we will have the opportunity to get into this
because we have a lot of legal scholars here today, and this is
one of those issues that many legal scholars are really focused
on, as are many Americans, whatever they may be doing in our
society.
So I look forward to our discussion today with the legal
issues, with EPA's power plant rules, and the concerns that are
raised because of this extreme, unprecedented action.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Ed Whitfield

Two weeks ago we reviewed the substance of EPA's
CO
2
regulations for new and existing power plants,
all 3,000 pages of them, with EPA Assistant Administrator Janet
McCabe. Today we continue our scrutiny of these rules as the
agency begins the process of imposing its requirements on the
States.
Today's hearing will focus on the legality of this
complicated and far-reaching scheme to commandeer each State's
electricity system and replace it with a cap-and-trade approach
similar to the ones that Congress has repeatedly rejected.
There is nothing in the Clean Air Act that even suggests
such sweeping agency action is authorized. Indeed, these rules
are unprecedented in the 45-year history of this statute. If
Congress wanted to authorize a comprehensive transformation of
the way America gets its electricity in order to address global
warming, it would have said so. If Congress wanted to see a
wholesale Federal takeover of State authority on electricity
policy, it would have said so. And if Congress wanted to
largely write fossil fuels out of America's energy future, it
would have said so as well.
In my view, the discrepancy between what EPA is trying to
do and what the Clean Air Act actually allows is so wide that I
am confident that these rules will not withstand judicial
scrutiny. There are also serious Constitutional concerns with
what many see as an Executive branch power grab at the expense
of the legislative branch and the States.
I might add that some of the same reasons EPA's power plant
rules are bad law are also the reasons they are bad policy,
particularly in the way the agency treats the States. The 1970
Clean Air Act set out a working partnership between the Federal
Government and States stating quite clearly that air pollution
prevention and control are the primary responsibility of State
and local governments. In contrast, unilateral EPA
micromanagement of electricity generation is a recipe for
higher bills, reduced reliability, and job losses that are well
out of proportion to any environmental benefits.
The fact that 16 States believe they have no choice but to
sue the agency over these rules is a sure sign of an unhealthy
Federal-State relationship and a policy that won't work. The
House passed the Ratepayer Protection Act to address the legal
and policy shortcomings of the rule for existing power plants.
This bill would extend the State compliance deadlines so that
the rule's costly provisions would not take effect until
judicial review is complete.
The value of this ``time out'' was clearly demonstrated by
the recent Supreme Court decision finding EPA's Mercury MACT
rule to be legally flawed. Unfortunately, this decision came
after many affected utilities had already initiated costly
compliance steps, including the irreversible decision to close
several coal-fired power plants. Similarly, the existing source
rule as written would require costly and potentially
irreversible steps to be taken before we know the legal status
of the rule. I believe that the EPA has made clear by their
comments following this decision that their goal is to compel
States to begin complying with the existing plant rule now so
that in the event that the Supreme Court rules against them,
decisions will have already been made.
The whole regulatory scheme before us today rests on an
implicit deception--a bait and switch. The plain words of the
statute make clear the limited authority EPA has to regulate
performance standards for fossil-fueled power plants. But rules
before us, as we'll hear today, go well beyond mere performance
standards. In the guise of performance standards the agency has
created a compliance schedule and complicated incentive scheme
that lock States into making expensive and far reaching choices
concerning their electricity systems as soon as possible,
before the long term implications of their decisions can be
evaluated, or the long term implications of EPA's regulatory
overreach can be understood.

Mr. Whitfield. And at this time, I yield back my 11 seconds
and recognize the distinguished gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Rush, for a 5-minute opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, today, we are holding yet another in what has
now become an endless series of hearings on the Clean Power
Plan. Today, we will once again be focusing on the legal
perspectives, which was exactly the same focus of a similar
hearing on this very same topic back in March of this year.
Mr. Chairman, this subcommittee has taken valuable time to
repeatedly examine the costs of the CPP, the legality of the
plan, and ways to repeal or eliminate or hinder or obfuscate
the CPP in using legislative means or whatever means that your
side might find usable at the time.
However, Mr. Chairman, I must bring to your attention that
this very same subcommittee of jurisdiction has yet to hold a
single hearing in this Congress on the underlying reason why a
plan such as this is even necessary, not a single hearing, Mr.
Chairman, to address the very important critical issue of
climate change, global climate change. In fact, Mr. Chairman,
it would appear that the majority's side is even hesitant to
even utter the phrase climate change unless it is doing so in a
mocking, sneering, or contemptuous manner. Mr. Chairman, your
side is still bent, still determined to keep their head buried
deep beneath the ever-changing sand of ignoring climate change.
Mr. Chairman, in the midst of all these hearings on the
CPP, I urge, plead with the majority to also hold at least one
hearing--you can set a time limit, 15 minutes, a half an hour,
hour, 2 hours, whatever time limit you want to set on the
hearing--just hold a hearing on the issue of climate change.
As a matter of fact, Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to say
that the ranking member of the full committee and I will be
formally submitting another letter to you and Chairman Upton
requesting a hearing in the very near future on climate change.
Mr. Chairman, I want to underline our request by asking you
and the members of the other side, let's bring this issue of
climate change up for discussion. Let's hold a transparent and
substantive debate on the merits of both sides of the argument.
Is there something called climate change, or is that just a
figment of most of the American people and the scientific
community and the experts, is that just a figment of our
imagination?
Mr. Chairman, the American people deserve to hear their
elected representatives voicing their opinions on what many
believe to be the most consequential issue facing our time. If
my colleagues on the other side of the aisle truly believe that
the overwhelming majority of the world's scientists and
climatologists are either wrong, they are misguided, or they
are in some ways in cahoots in pulling off a global hoax, then
let's discuss this openly in a public hearing.
Even as we sit here today debating whether the EPA has the
authority to legally put forth rules to increase the Nation's
common emissions, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration released a report just yesterday stating that
September was the warmest month globally in the history of this
Nation, the history of this world that we live in. The NOAA
reports that the average global surface temperature in
September was 1.62 degrees Fahrenheit warmer than the 20th
century average.
Additionally, the agency noted that September was the fifth
straight month to bring the high temperature mark this very
year, and that January through September saw the warmest
temperatures since 1880--you and I can remember that--since
1880 when this data was first reported.
Mr. Chairman, the NOAA reports that the temperatures on
land were 2.09 degrees Fahrenheit higher than the average in
September, and that the U.S. experienced its second warmest
September on record. We cannot afford to simply ignore science,
ignore data, ignore the experts, and ignore the signs that
Mother Nature continues to show us.
Mr. Chairman, as we finish today's exercise in futility,
this exercise of debating the legality of this rule which the
courts will ultimately decide anyway, I would urge the majority
to immediately, again, plead with the majority to immediately
schedule a hearing on the merits of global climate change.
Mr. Chairman, with that I yield back the balance of my
time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rush follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Bobby L. Rush

Mr. Chairman, today we are holding yet another, in what has
now become a series of hearings on the Clean Power Plan.
Today, we will again be focusing on the legal perspectives,
which was the exact same focus of a similar hearing on this
very same topic back in March.
Mr. Chairman, this subcommittee has taken valuable time to
repeatedly examine the cost impacts of the CPP, the legality of
the plan, and ways to do away with the Clean Power Plan
legislatively.
However, this subcommittee of jurisdiction has yet to hold
a single hearing in this Congress on the underlying reason why
a plan such as this is even necessary, namely to address
climate change.
In fact, Mr. Chairman, it would appear that the majority
side is hesitant to even utter the phrase climate change,
unless it is doing so in a mocking, sneering, or contemptuous
manner.
Mr. Chairman, it the midst of all of these hearings on the
Clean Power Plan, I urge the majority to also hold a hearing on
the issue of climate change.
In fact, Mr. Pallone and I will be formally submitting a
letter to you and Chairman Upton requesting a hearing in the
very near future on climate change.
Let's bring this issue of climate change up for discussion
and hold a transparent and substantive discussion on the merits
of the arguments of both sides of this debate.
Mr. Chairman, the American people deserve to hear their
elected representatives voice their opinions on what many
believe to be the most consequential issue facing our time.
If my colleagues on the other side truly believe that the
overwhelming majority of the world's scientists and
climatologist are either wrong, misguided, or are in cahoots in
pulling off a global hoax, then let's discuss this openly in a
public hearing.
Mr. Chairman, even as we sit here debating whether the EPA
has the authority to legally put forth rules to decrease the
Nation's carbon emissions, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration released a report just yesterday stating that
September was the warmest month globally on record.
NOAA reports that the average global surface temperature in
September was 1.62 degrees Fahrenheit warmer than the 20th
century average.
Additionally, Mr. Chairman, the agency noted that September
was the fifth straight month to break the high temperature mark
this year, and January through September saw the warmest
temperatures since 1880 when this data was first recorded.
Mr. Chairman, NOAA reports that temperatures on land were
2.09 degrees Fahrenheit higher than average in September, and
the U.S. experienced its second-warmest September on record.
Mr. Chairman, this subcommittee cannot afford to simply
ignore science, ignore data, ignore the experts, and ignore the
signs that Mother Nature continues to show us.
After we finish today's exercise of debating the legality
of this rule, which the Courts will ultimately decide anyway, I
would urge the majority to immediately schedule a hearing on
the merits of the climate change debate.
The members of this subcommittee, as well as the American
people, would be well served to hear from the experts so that
well-informed decisions can be made regarding this issue.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and with that I yield back.

Mr. Whitfield. Now, Mr. Rush, I want you to know I let you
go 8 minutes in that opening statement----
Mr. Rush. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield [continuing]. Because I wanted you to be
sure----
Mr. Rush. I feel very, very passionate about this issue.
Mr. Whitfield. I wanted you to have plenty of time to talk
about climate change.
Now, Mr. Upton is not here today. Is there anyone on our
side of the aisle that would like to make a comment or discuss
the legality or talk about China or----
OK. Seeing no one, the Chair will recognize the gentleman
from New Jersey, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me begin by quoting President Obama, who recently said
``climate change is no longer some far-off problem. It is
happening here. It is happening now. We can't wait for some
future generation to take action, and we know that any
meaningful action must include drastically reducing our carbon
emissions in order to have any chance of preventing the worst
impacts of a changing climate.''
And that is why EPA has taken action by finalizing a
workable plan to reduce emissions of carbon pollution from
power plants, which are the largest uncontrolled source of
manmade greenhouse gases in the U.S. The Clean Power Plan
outlines a path to cleaner air, better health, a safer climate,
and a stronger economy. And the rule also gives States
flexibility to choose how to achieve their emission-reduction
goals, which are State-specific and cost-effective.
And this is a moderate and reasonable approach and falls
well within the legal authority and responsibility of the EPA
to address carbon pollution from power plants. But I am sure we
are going to hear a different story from our Republican friends
today. Today's hearing is the seventh on this particular rule
and the second hearing purportedly to examine the legal
problems with the Clean Power Plan.
We should not heed the absurd arguments made on behalf of
companies that profit from the status quo. Make no mistake,
many of the arguments presented today are well-known, that
EPA's plan is not legal, that it is unworkable, that some
States may refuse to participate. We have heard these claims
during previous hearings and debates on the House Floor. We
have heard them in the numerous premature attacks on the Clean
Power Plan and EPA's carbon standards for new power plants that
have already been rejected by multiple Federal courts.
And despite the zeal of the rule's opponents, all of these
arguments have been soundly refuted and dismissed at every
turn. Constantly repeating misguided assertions will not
magically make them legitimate or true. Frankly, these
frivolous lawsuits are just wasting taxpayer dollars in the
name of attacking any action by this administration to address
climate change and carbon pollution.
And all of this is to say that we are on a well-trodden
path, and I believe committee time could be put to better use.
The truth is Congress overwhelmingly passed the Clean Air Act,
a Republican President signed it into law, and now EPA is
fulfilling its executive duty to take care that the laws be
faithfully executed. EPA is doing the job we asked them to do,
and it is time Members accept that the Clean Power Plan is on
solid legal ground and just move on.
As I have said before, Mr. Chairman, those making the
arguments heard today aren't really interested in finding
solutions to our carbon pollution problem. They aren't
interested in developing a plan to help us reduce emissions
while still maintaining a safe, reasonably priced electricity
system. They are more than welcome to ignore the facts and more
than welcome to reject any reasonable plan to address climate
change, but history will not treat them kindly. History is on
the side of those who want to act on climate change, those who
believe in the power of American innovation and our ability to
successfully meet any challenge, and who look to the future
rather than the past.
We have already wasted too much time listening to the
arguments against the Clean Power Plan and on legislation to
``just say no'' to climate action. Now, Congress must turn the
page, and what we cannot do, as President Obama said--and I
will quote him again--is ``condemn our children to a planet
beyond their capacity to repair.''
I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Let me begin by quoting President Obama, who recently said,
``Climate change is no longer some far-off problem; it is
happening here, it is happening now.'' We cannot wait for some
future generation to take action. And we know that any
meaningful action must include drastically reducing our carbon
emissions, in order to have any chance of preventing the worst
impacts of a changing climate.
That is why EPA has taken action by finalizing a workable
plan to reduce emissions of carbon pollution from power plants,
which are the largest uncontrolled source of man-made
greenhouse gases in the U.S. The Clean Power Plan outlines a
path to cleaner air, better health, a safer climate and a
stronger economy. The rule also gives States flexibility to
choose how to achieve their emission reduction goals, which are
State-specific and cost-effective. This is a moderate and
reasonable approach, and falls well within the legal
authority--and responsibility--of the EPA to address carbon
pollution from power plants.
But I'm sure we will hear a different story from
Republicans. Today's hearing is the seventh on this particular
rule, and the second hearing purportedly to examine the ``legal
problems'' with the Clean Power Plan.
We should not heed the absurd arguments made on behalf of
companies that profit from the status quo. Make no mistake,
many of the arguments presented today are well known: that
EPA's plan is not legal, that it is unworkable, and that some
States may refuse to participate. We have heard these claims
during previous hearings and debates on the House Floor. We
have heard them in the numerous premature attacks on the Clean
Power Plan and EPA's carbon standards for new power plants that
have already been rejected by multiple Federal courts.
And despite the zeal of the rule's opponents, all of these
arguments have been soundly refuted and dismissed at every
turn. Constantly repeating misguided assertions will not
magically make them legitimate or true. Frankly, these
frivolous lawsuits are just wasting taxpayer dollars in the
name of attacking any action by this administration to address
climate change and carbon pollution.
All of this is to say that we are on a well-trodden path,
and I believe committee time could be put to better use. The
truth is, Congress overwhelmingly passed the Clean Air Act, a
Republican President signed it into law, and now EPA is
fulfilling the executive's duty to ``take care that the laws be
faithfully executed.'' EPA is doing the job we asked them to
do, and it is time members accept that the Clean Power Plan is
on solid legal ground and move on.
As I've said before, those making the arguments heard today
aren't really interested in finding solutions to our carbon
pollution problem. They aren't interested in developing a plan
to help us reduce emissions while still maintaining a safe,
reasonably priced electricity system. They are more than
welcome to ignore the facts. They are more than welcome to
reject any reasonable plan to address climate change. But
history will not treat them kindly. History is on the side of
those who want to act on climate change; those who believe in
the power of American innovation and our ability to
successfully meet any challenge, and who look to the future
rather than the past.
We have already wasted too much time listening to the
absurd arguments against the Clean Power Plan and on
legislation to ``just say no'' to climate action. Now Congress
must turn the page. What we cannot do, as President Obama said,
is ``condemn our children to a planet beyond their capacity to
repair.''
Thank you.

Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back. And that
concludes the opening statements.
And I want to welcome our panel today of five all well-
versed legal scholars on these issues. And I am going to
introduce each of you individually before you give your opening
statement rather than doing it in advance. And so for the first
introduction of our first witness, I am going to call on the
distinguished gentleman from West Virginia for that purpose,
Mr. McKinley.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am pleased to welcome the Solicitor General of West
Virginia, Elbert Lin. The Solicitor General, Mr. Lin, oversees
the Office of the Attorney General's appellate practice, legal
opinions, and Federal litigation. Formerly a partner at Wiley
Rein, he assisted clients with a wide variety of litigation in
regulatory matters with a particular expertise in
administrative, appellate, and constitutional law.
West Virginia is lucky to have his expertise, and I thank
you, Mr. Lin, for coming before our committee today, and we
look forward to your testimony.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. So, Mr. Lin, you will be recognized for 5
minutes, and then we will go to the other panelists. Thank you.

STATEMENTS OF ELBERT LIN, SOLICITOR GENERAL, STATE OF WEST
VIRGINIA; ALLISON WOOD, PARTNER, HUNTON & WILLIAMS, LLP;
RICHARD REVESZ, LAWRENCE KING PROFESSOR OF LAW, DEAN EMERITUS,
AND DIRECTOR, INSTITUTE FOR POLICY INTEGRITY, NEW YORK
UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF LAW; EMILY HAMMOND, ASSOCIATE DEAN FOR
PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT, PROFESSOR OF LAW, GEORGE WASHINGTON
UNIVERSITY LAW SCHOOL; AND RAYMOND L. GIFFORD, PARTNER,
WILKINSON BARKER KNAUER, LLP

STATEMENT OF ELBERT LIN

Mr. Lin. Thank you, Congressman McKinley, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. I am honored to testify about the
legality of EPA's carbon dioxide standards for fossil fuel-
fired power plants.
As noted by Congressman McKinley, I am the Solicitor
General for the State of West Virginia. My boss, West Virginia
Attorney General Patrick Morrisey, has been a leader over the
last year in litigation concerning the so-called Clean Power
Plan, EPA's effort to regulate carbon dioxide emissions from
existing fossil fuel-fired power plants under section 111(d) of
the Clean Air Act.
So while there are numerous legal deficiencies with all
aspects of EPA's new carbon dioxide standards, I will focus on
two of the major legal defects with the section 111(d) rule.
First, EPA has exceeded its authority under section 111(d) by
using three wide-ranging building blocks to calculate statewide
carbon dioxide emission limits. Block 1 assumes a reduction in
carbon dioxide emissions based on greater efficiency from coal-
fired power plants. Block 2 then assumes an additional
reduction based on substituting coal-fired power generation
with natural gas-fired generation. And block 3 reduces the
carbon dioxide target further based on substituting coal-fired
power with renewable energy like wind and solar.
These building blocks attempt not just to regulate the
efficiency of power plants themselves but to favor one form of
electric generation over another and to require States to
completely reorder their energy portfolios. Indeed, the White
House fact sheet released with the final rule described it as
an effort to ``drive a more aggressive transformation of the
domestic energy industry.'' This is sometimes described as
EPA's attempt to regulate beyond the fence line of the
individual power plants, and it is not lawful.
By its plain text, section 111(d) concerns only the
reduction of emissions through measures that can be applied to
improving an individual source's performance. What EPA claims
is what the Supreme Court once called ``an unheralded power to
regulate a significant portion of the American economy without
a clear statement from Congress.'' The last time that happened
in a case called Utility Air Regulatory Group v. EPA, the
Supreme Court reversed the Agency.
EPA's obvious goal is to push States toward a cap-and-trade
system. The Agency describes emissions trading as an integral
part of its analysis, its proposed Federal plan is a cap-and-
trade regime, and it puts great weight on the fact that
Congress passed a cap-and-trade program for sulfur dioxide in
Title IV of the Clean Air Act. But that is precisely the point.
The cap-and-trade regime in Title IV is a clear statement from
Congress. The one advanced by the rule, in contrast, was
specifically rejected by Congress in 2009.
A second problem with the section 111(d) rule is that EPA
is already regulating fossil fuel-fired power plants from
mercury and other emissions under section 112 of the Clean Air
Act. The text of section 111(d) in the U.S. Code says it does
not apply to any air pollutant emitted from a source category
which is regulated under section 112. This is the so-called 112
exclusion. As EPA itself has long admitted, a literal reading
of this text means that EPA cannot use section 111(d) to reach
emissions from a source category already regulated under
section 112.
To escape this literal reading, EPA argued in the proposed
rule that this text doesn't tell the whole story. It argued
that in 1990, Congress actually passed two versions of the 112
exclusion, which the EPA means the statute is ambiguous and
subject to the Agency's interpretation.
In our litigation and in comments to EPA, we pointed out
the significant flaws with this theory, and as a result, in the
final rule EPA changed tactics. Now, for the first time in 25
years, EPA claims that the literal text of the 112 exclusion as
it appears in the U.S. Code is ambiguous. According to EPA,
Congress was unclear when it referred to sources ``regulated
under section 112.'' That phrase, EPA contends, can be read to
limit the exclusion not only to sources regulated under section
112 but also to pollutants listed under 112. And because carbon
dioxide is not listed under section 112, EPA argues, the
exclusion does not apply.
But this novel approach, EPA's backup to its previous
backup position, does not get EPA out from under the 112
exclusion. Despite its claim, the statute is quite clear. It
refers to source categories regulated under section 112, not
air pollutants listed under section 112. So what EPA is doing
is rewriting the statue, which it is of course not permitted to
do.
The section 111(d) rule is thus unlawful in at least two
ways: It relies on expressly picking winners and losers in the
energy field, and it violates the section 112 exclusion.
Thank you again for this opportunity, and I look forward to
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lin follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much, Mr. Lin.
And our next witness is Allison Wood, who has testified
here before. She is a partner at Hunton & Williams. And, Ms.
Wood, thank you for joining us today, and you are recognized
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ALLISON WOOD

Ms. Wood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good afternoon. It is an honor to appear again before this
subcommittee to offer testimony on EPA's regulations for power
plants under section 111 of the Clean Air Act.
I am a partner, as you said, in the law firm of Hunton &
Williams, and I have practiced environmental law for over 17
years. And for the past decade, my practice has focused almost
exclusively on climate change.
On August 3, EPA released three rules to limit carbon
dioxide emissions from power plants. The most controversial
rule regulates those emissions from existing power plants under
section 111(d) of the Clean Air Act. EPA also released a
proposed Federal plan to implement the existing power plant
regulations, accompanied by two model trading rules, one for a
mass-based cap-and-trade program and one for a rate-based cap-
and-trade program.
The third rule regulates carbon dioxide emissions from new,
modified, and reconstructed power plants under section 111(b)
of the Clean Air Act. All of these regulations will be
published in tomorrow's Federal Register, and they all suffer
from legal deficiencies that are certain to be subject to
litigation.
With regard to EPA's final rule for existing power plants
under section 111(d), that rule continues to suffer from
numerous legal deficiencies, including the two issues that I
raised before this subcommittee in March. The first issue is
whether EPA even has authority under section 111(d) to issue
the regulations for existing power plants in light of the fact
that electric-generating units are already regulated under
section 112 of the Clean Air Act, which addresses hazardous air
pollutants.
The second issue is whether EPA's final regulations for
existing power plants can properly be considered to be a system
of emission reduction under the Clean Air Act, even assuming
EPA has authority to issue a section 111(d) rule for electric
generating units.
The proposed Federal plan seeks to implement the
regulations for existing power plants in the form of a cap-and-
trade program for States that do not submit acceptable State
plans. The accompanying model trading rules seek to provide
rules that States can adopt to be part of a cap-and-trade
program. Because the underlying regulations are unlawful, the
proposed Federal plan and model trading rules also cannot be
lawfully promulgated.
With regard to the final regulations for new, modified, and
reconstructed power plants, it should be noted that the
emissions rate for these new plants is higher than the rates
for existing power plants. This has never before been the case.
The new source regulations also suffer from legal
infirmities. For example, the final performance standard for
new coal-fired power plants is based on the use of post-
combustion; partial carbon capture and sequestration, or CCS;
and requires that carbon dioxide be captured, compressed, and
safely stored over the long-term. CCS has not been adequately
demonstrated.
In the final rule, EPA improperly relies on projects that
received funding under the Energy Policy Act of 2005 to find
that CCS is adequately demonstrated, which violates that act.
The only project that EPA cites that did not receive such
funding is a small Canadian unit that does not provide adequate
support for EPA's determination.
In addition, the subcommittee should be aware that a legal
prerequisite for regulation of existing sources under section
111(d) is that their first must be regulation of the same new
sources under section 111(b). This means that if the final
regulations for new power plants are overturned by a court, the
legal foundation for EPA's regulating existing power plants
would disappear.
All of these legal issues give rise to a great deal of
uncertainty regarding all three rules and cast serious doubt
over whether they will be able to survive review by the courts.
In the meantime, however, anyone wanting to build a new power
plant must comply with the standards for new sources. For
existing sources, States face a firm September 6, 2016,
deadline for the submission of a State plan or an extension
request, or they face the risk of the Federal cap-and-trade
program being imposed on them.
Meanwhile, the owners of existing power plants have to
begin preparing as though they are going to have to comply with
the rule. These preparations take many years, and the owners of
the power plants do not have the luxury of waiting to see
whether these rules would survive legal review.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Wood follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Ms. Wood, very much.
And our next witness is Mr. Richard Revesz, who is the
Lawrence King Professor of Law and Dean Emeritus and Director
of the Institute for Political Policy Integrity at New York
University School of Law. You are recognized for 5 minutes, Mr.
Revesz.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD REVESZ

Mr. Revesz. Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee, I
am very grateful to have been invited again to testify before
this subcommittee. I will discuss why EPA's flexible cost-
minimizing approach to setting performance standards for
existing power plants is consistent with the Clean Air Act and
the Constitution.
First, EPA has authority to implement the Clean Power Plan
under section 111(d) of the Clean Air Act. Interpreting section
111(d) presents an unusual situation because in the 1990
amendments, the House and the Senate each used different
language in amending the same statutory provision, and the two
amendments were never reconciled in conference. Both amendments
appear in the final bill reported by the conference committee.
Both amendments were approved by both chambers and signed by
the President, and both amendments appear in the Statutes at
Large. Both amendments are, therefore, the law of the land.
Opponents of the Clean Power Plan argue because a House
amendment appears in the U.S. Code, it should be the
controlling version. However, it is well-established that when
the Statutes at Large and the U.S. Code conflict, the text in
the Statutes at Large controls.
The decision to include only the House amendment in the
U.S. Code was made by a staff member in the Office of the Law
Revision Counsel, but this staff member cannot supplant the
will of Congress. In fact, to follow the approach urged by the
opponents of the Clean Power Plan would lead to a serious
constitutional problem. Law would be made without following the
constitutional requirements of bicameralism and presentment.
The Supreme Court made clear in Immigration and Naturalization
Services v. Chadha that such an approach would be
unconstitutional.
Opponents also argue the House amendment should take
precedence because the Senate amendment was labeled as a
conforming amendment in the Statutes at Large. However, the
courts have made clear that such labels are irrelevant and that
an amendment labeled conforming may well be substantive.
Moreover, the House amendment itself is labeled as
miscellaneous guidance. This label lends no more substantive
weight than the conforming label attached to the Senate
amendment.
Opponents further argue the Senate amendment should be
ignored because a line in the Senate report states that the
Senate recedes to the House, but the Senate managers explicitly
indicated the statement was not reviewed or approved by all the
members of the conference committee, and the language pertains
only to the section of the bill where the House amendment
appears and does not address the section where the Senate
amendment appears. And perhaps most significantly, regardless
of this language, the Senate amendment remained in the text of
the bill and was ultimately approved by both chambers and
signed by the President. A statement in a Senate report cannot
override expressed statutory language.
Furthermore, even if one does assume that the House
amendment controls, EPA still has the power to issue the Clean
Power Plan. Opponents argue the House amendment forbids EPA
from regulating greenhouse gas emissions from existing power
plants under section 111(d) because EPA has already regulated
emissions of hazardous air pollutants from the same plants
under section 112. However, as EPA has thoroughly explained in
the Clean Power Plan, the House amendment is subject to
multiple interpretations.
Under its interpretation, which is entitled to deference,
EPA cannot use section 111(d) to regulate pollutants that it
already regulates under section 112, but it can invoke section
111(d) to regulate sources that are already regulated under
section 112, as long as a different polluted is at issue.
Second, there is no merit to the beyond-the-fence-line
arguments made the opponents of the Clean Power Plan. EPA's
approach is consistent with the relevant statute provision
under which EPA must determine the best system of emission
reduction for the regulated sources. It is important to
underscore that the product at issue in the Clean Power Plan is
electricity, not electricity generated from coal. So it is
appropriate for EPA to base its determination of the best
system of emission reduction for power plants on a shift from
more carbon-intensive forms of electricity generation to ones
that are less carbon-intensive.
Of course, in doing so EPA must comply with all the
relevant statutory factors. In particular, it must consider
cost and energy requirements, and it must show that the
standard is adequately demonstrated. EPA explained in great
detail that the Clean Power Plan meets each of these statutory
requirements.
Decades of agency practice have shown that standard of
performance can involve shifting from a dirtier method of
producing a product to a cleaner method of reducing the same
product. For example, EPA has issued standards and guidelines
requiring the owners of solid waste combustors to implement
recycling and material-separation programs designed to reduce
the use of the combustors themselves.
The 1997 standards and guidelines for medical waste
incinerators require the units' owners to develop waste
management programs that could include paper, cardboard,
plastics, glass, battery, or metal recycling, and were designed
to reduce the volume of waste to be incinerated and thereby
reducing the amount of air pollution emissions associated with
the waste.
EPA's approach to the regulation of interstate pollution
under the Clean Air Act's Good Neighbor provision, which was
upheld by the Supreme Court last year in EPA v. EME Homer City
Generation, lends further support to the Clean Power Plan. The
Good Neighbor provision by its terms imposes requirements on
particular sources that cause interstate problems. But EPA,
under administrations of both parties for a period of two
decades has interpreted that provision----
Mr. Whitfield. Excuse me, Mr. Revesz, I have let you go
over over a minute, so if you could wrap it up.
Mr. Revesz. Twenty seconds.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Mr. Revesz. EPA, under interpretations of both parties for
a period of two decades, has interpreted that provision to
allow sources to meet their emission-reduction obligations
collectively through participation in emission-trading schemes,
much like the ones that the Clean Power Plan contemplates.
I am very grateful to have been invited and will be
delighted to answer any questions you might have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Revesz follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much.
And our next witness is Ms. Emily Hammond, who is Associate
Dean for Public Engagement and Professor of Law at George
Washington University School of Law. Thank you, Ms. Hammond.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF EMILY HAMMOND

Ms. Hammond. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you,
distinguished members of the committee, for having me back to
testify before you.
Today, I will speak primarily about how EPA's
CO
2
regulations relates to the electricity markets
and why the regulations are important from a policy standpoint.
I will also address the regulatory framework underlying the
Clean Air Act and the legality of EPA's regulations.
Delivering electricity to consumers involves a complex
interaction between energy resources and markets and the
physical needs of the grid. The electricity markets operate on
the basis of short-run marginal costs, but in doing so, they
fail to value fuel sources' reliability or environmental
attributes. This has resulted in a variety of dysfunctions.
To take one example, consider nuclear power. It is clean,
reliable, and safe, but it is struggling to operate in the
wholesale markets notwithstanding these beneficial attributes.
Without policies that fold reliability and environmental
attributes into the electricity markets, we will see decreased
diversity in our mix of electricity sources. This threatens
both grid reliability and our ability to flexibly respond to
the climate change imperative.
EPA's CO
2
regulations represent measured
approaches to correcting some of these flaws. Could EPA have
done more? Yes. And, as Mr. Rush commented, this institution
could do even more. But EPA's new regulations do make headway
toward correcting fuel sources' environmental externalities
while also promoting diversity of resources on the grid.
The Energy Information Administration projects that the
electricity fuel mix of 2040 will be more diverse under the
CPP, the Clean Power Plan, than it is today. It will include a
larger share of renewables, non-generation resources, and
natural gas. It continues to include nuclear. And contrary to
popular perception, it will still include a significant amount
of coal. Overall, the CO
2
regulations take a step
toward a cleaner portfolio of sources that are complementary to
one another in maintaining grid reliability.
The key point is that energy decision-making must include
consideration of the relative mix of fuel sources, as well as
the environmental implications of that mix. Given the current
suite of statutes related to energy and the environment, no
Federal agency is better suited to undertake that task than
EPA.
When this institution passed the Clean Air Act and its
various amendments, it recognized that Congress cannot
anticipate every future air pollution problem. The statute is
crafted to permit EPA, which has the expertise, to regulate air
pollution consistently with the purposes of the statute. And
EPA has done so here.
With respect to the regulations for new power plants, EPA
has properly exercised its discretion to regulate
CO
2
from fossil fuel sources given its finding
upheld in Federal court that greenhouse gases endanger the
public health and welfare.
With respect to EPA's authority under section 111(d), I
submit that in addition to the reasons provided by Professor
Revesz, a reviewing court should uphold EPA's regulations by
taking the approach that the Supreme Court used in King v.
Burwell, the Affordable Care Act decision. There, the Court
determined that the issue was too important to leave to the
shifting whims of the executive branch, and the Court itself
interpreted the provision at issue consistently with
legislative intent. A reviewing court should do the same here.
It should hold that EPA's regulations are consistent with the
Clean Air Act's purposes of protecting public health and
welfare, and in so doing, we can take a step in the right
direction toward better grid reliability and climate change
mitigation.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Hammond follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Ms. Hammond.
Our next witness is Mr. Raymond Gifford, who is a partner
at Wilkinson Barker & Knauer. And we appreciate your being with
us. You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF RAYMOND L. GIFFORD

Mr. Gifford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee. I appreciate the opportunity to speak to you today
about the Clean Power Plan.
My focus today is going to be on the stateside
implementation of the rule. What is the rule mean for States,
how will State institutions need to be reorganized to deal with
the rule, and what will States do in practice based on the
rule's design and incentives?
First, the traditional State institutional arrangements for
the electricity sector will need to be changed to comply with
this rule.
Second, the rule will gain and is gaining prescriptive
authority while the legal challenge is pending. Absent a stay
of the rule, States and utilities must move forward with
resource planning that incorporates the carbon-reduction
mandates of the rule.
Third, the design of the rule inexorably leads States
toward adopting a plan of mass-based trading. This is popularly
known as cap-and-trade. In addition, States will face strong
incentives to undertake what the EPA calls ``State measures''
meaning State legislation authorizing new renewable and energy
efficiency programs will be a compelling compliance path.
Let me explain to the committee how this might well play
out. The ambition of this rule toward the electric sector is
totalistic. That is, it needs to fundamentally reorder the
traditional Federal-State division in the power sector, enforce
rearrangement of the State institutions dealing with
electricity. In practice, this means that prerogatives that
once belonged to State utility commissions or under the self-
regulatory models of rural cooperatives and municipal utilities
give way to State-unified carbon resource planning under the
auspices of the State air regulator.
My second point is that States and utilities are already
incorporating the assumptions and carbon rations in the rule
into their resource-planning decisions. The planning horizons
in the electric power industry extend out 7 to 10 years and
further. That means to meet the interim goal in 2022, a utility
needs to make the decision soon, if not now, whether or not to
retire generation, replace coal with gas-fired generation, or
to begin substantial increases in renewable-generating
capacity.
In recent months, the trade press has noted utilities
submitted integrated resource plans that put them on a path
toward compliance under the rule's assumptions. The rule,
therefore, is having its effect before the legality is ruled
upon by the courts.
Finally, I want to point the committee to where the rule is
headed as a matter of State compliance. When you study the
rule, the States are essentially presented with a Hobson's
choice where the most palatable and achievable State plan is a
mass-based trading platform across the region or across the
country. Though the term may be politically laden, the States
will inevitably gravitate to a national cap-and-trade platform
instituted through each State plan.
As the Agency makes plain in the final rule ``the EPA
believes that it is reasonable to anticipate that a virtually
nationwide emissions-trading market for compliance will emerge
and that ERCs will be effectively available to any affected EGU
wherever located, as long as its State plan authorizes
emissions trading among affected EGUs.''
For those uninitiated with the rather ineuphonious acronym
ERC, that means emission reduction credit. EPA anticipates a
nationwide ERC trading system whereby carbon emissions are
capped by the rule and then traded across the States to achieve
compliance. This is nationwide cap-and-trade.
However, there are reasons to believe that mass-based
carbon trading will be a heavier lift that past trading
programs. For one, the size of the transfer payments required
will be larger than ever before seen. The net effect of the
rule has to make a generator prefer to shut down or reduce
output rather than buying ERCs.
Second, we can expect a great deal of special pleading to
break out in the States surrounding ERC allocations under State
plans. Coal-centric smaller utilities without much scale--say,
a municipal utility or cooperative--will advocate for low-cost
or no-cost ERC allocations under State plans. Indeed,
Government-run markets often feature these special set-asides
for favored constituencies.
In closing, I hope I have given the committee a sense of
the legal and policy complexity confronting the States and want
to underscore the fact that compliance with the rule's carbon
rationing starts now.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gifford follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Gifford. And thank all of you
for your testimony.
At this time, we will open it up for questions, and I will
recognize myself for 5 minutes of questions to begin with.
Some people have made the argument that the challenges to
the Clean Power Plan have been soundly refuted by the courts
already, some people say that these are frivolous lawsuits, and
some people say that they have already been rejected. So I
would ask Mr. Lin and Ms. Wood, has the court really addressed
the Clean Power Plan in a legal way at this point?
Mr. Lin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The lawsuits I think that you are referring to, two of them
that were brought by West Virginia last year and then earlier
this fall, given what we read as the clear illegality of the
rule, we thought that these were efforts worth making to save
massive amounts of taxpayer dollars both at the Federal level
and at the State level to stop EPA from even moving forward
with what is, in our belief, an unlawful rule no matter what
form it takes.
The courts have not ruled on the merits of our arguments.
The courts have only ruled on the procedural grounds as to
whether the lawsuits were----
Mr. Whitfield. And was that because the regulation had not
been printed in the Federal Register so it was not final? Was
that the reason for the ruling or was there another reason?
Mr. Lin. That is, in short, the reason on the first one.
The second one was slightly different and involved the timing
of publication. But yes, it was essentially that it was not
final, and it will be final tomorrow.
Mr. Whitfield. Do you have a comment, Ms. Wood?
Ms. Wood. No. Mr. Lin has covered it.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. So it will be final tomorrow, so
lawsuits would be proper at that time, is that correct?
Ms. Wood. Yes, under section 307(d) of the Clean Air Act,
once a final rule by EPA is published in the Federal Register,
it may be challenged in the DC Circuit.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Now, is it true--I have heard the
arguments, I have read the various memos, there have been
statements about this in the hearings--that EPA actually
reversed its legal opinion within the department about whether
or not it could regulate under 111(d)? Is that your
understanding? Is that correct, or is that not correct?
Mr. Lin. Well, the one thing that--and I mentioned this in
my oral testimony--hthat they have changed is they have, for 25
years since the amendments in 1990, taken the position that the
text of the 112 exclusion that is in the U.S. Code is clear,
and they have always had one reading of that. Now, as Professor
Revesz has mentioned, they have said that there is this two-
amendment theory that makes it ambiguous, but they have always
had one reading of the text that is in the United States Code.
In the final rule they have taken a brand-new position that
they now do not think that that text is clear, that they don't
understand it, it is ambiguous, and based on that, have come up
with a new reading of the text.
Mr. Whitfield. You are not speaking for EPA. I am assuming
they have a goal that they want to reach. Their traditional
legal opinions would not get them to that position, so they
have got to invent a new legal authority to give them the
position to use the power to use 111(d) is what I would assume
it. They can't get there any other way.
Mr. Lin. Well, as you said, Mr. Chairman, I can't speculate
as to what EPA was thinking, but there was a lot of commentary
and litigation on the two-amendment theory, and they have now
relegated that theory to a footnote as an alternative.
Mr. Whitfield. And basically, they are not really arguing
the two-amendment theory anymore, I don't believe.
Mr. Lin. That is not their primary basis.
Mr. Whitfield. I mean they have even admitted in documents
that the substantive amendment is the one and not the
conforming amendment.
Mr. Lin. Back in the early '90s when they promulgated the
landfill rule under section 111(d), they said that the
substantive amendment, which is the one that originated in the
House and is in the U.S. Code, is the controlling amendment.
Mr. Whitfield. Right. Now, the bottom line is I am assuming
what they are arguing now is that CO
2
is not listed
as a hazardous air pollutant, and therefore, they can regulate
under 111(d). Would that be where they are on this?
Ms. Wood. Yes. Basically, what EPA is now saying--and you
are correct, Mr. Chairman, that they have changed their
position on this--is that you only are precluded from
regulating under 111(d) if the pollutant in question is listed
under 108 as a criteria air pollutant, which CO
2
is
not. And if under 112 you are listed as a source category and
the pollutant is regulated--and it is that last part that is
new; it used to just be is the source category regulated----
Mr. Whitfield. Right.
Ms. Wood [continuing]. This source category is regulated
under 112.
Mr. Whitfield. There is no question about that.
Ms. Wood. No, there is not.
Mr. Whitfield. And so the issue is CO
2
is not
listed as a hazardous air pollutant, so that is an argument,
which good lawyers do to make up to win their case, I am
assuming. OK.
My time is expired. Mr. Rush?
Mr. Rush. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dean Hammond, in your testimony you say that it is
important to have policies in place that are both
environmentally conscious and that place a premium on
reliability, and you cite nuclear power as a clean, reliable,
and safe fuel source but one that is struggling to operate in
the wholesale markets. In your professional opinion, are the
New Source Performance Standards and the CPP examples of
reasonable policy approaches to increasing greenhouse gas
emissions while also keeping the lights on?
And the second part of the question is how does this plan
impact the value of the Nation's nuclear fleet in States such
as Illinois and others who rely heavily on nuclear power
plants?
Ms. Hammond. Thank you, Mr. Rush. First of all, the Clean
Power Plan and the New Source Performance Standard do take a
step toward ensuring that our electricity sources incorporate
those negative externalities so that the market operates more
efficiently.
Do I wish the EPA had done more for nuclear power? Yes. It
could have gone farther and it didn't. It does provide credits
for new nuclear construction, but it doesn't really incentivize
the reactors that are currently struggling to stay open, and
that is something for which more could be done.
Mr. Rush. Does the CPP mandate any particular approach for
States to reduce their carbon emissions, or is there
flexibility for States to take measures based upon each State's
circumstances and the work that is already undertaken?
Ms. Hammond. One of the strengths of the Clean Power Plan
is that it provides flexibility for the States.
Mr. Rush. Well, can you elaborate--I am interested in your
recommendations or your desires for the EPA to further
incentivize and protect and propagate nuclear power plants. Can
you give us some examples of some ideas that you might have
wanted to see the EPA promote as it relates to nuclear power?
Ms. Hammond. Sure. So, as I mentioned, the Clean Power Plan
does give States credit for new nuclear construction. It also
gives States credit for upgrading existing plants. But it
doesn't really recognize that we have significant portions of
the fleet that are having trouble on these wholesale markets
because of the market dysfunctions that I have identified. And
so to have given credits to States for keeping those plants
open would have been a very beneficial step toward encouraging
that fleet to stay in place.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you very much for your testimony.
Mr. Chairman, I want you to note that I have given 1 minute
and 27 seconds of the 3 minutes that I used in excess for an
opening statement, so I want to get credit for that.
Mr. Olson [presiding]. So noted. The gentleman yields back.
I recognize myself for 5 minutes for some questions.
Before I ask a few questions, last week, the grid operator
in my home State of Texas, ERCOT, released a report on the
Clean Power Plan, the CPP, and its impacts on our State's grid.
ERCOT is nonpartisan. They have one job, to keep the lights on
for all Texans they serve. Here are a few of their quotes about
the CPP's impact in my home State: ``ERCOT estimates that the
final CPP, by itself, will result in the retirement of at least
4,000 megawatts of coal generation capacity. This amount of
unit retirements could pose challenges for maintaining grid
reliability, and these impacts are likely to intensify ... when
the effects of the CPP are combined with other environmental
regulations.''
ERCOT continued, ``energy costs for customers may increase
by up to 16 percent by 2030 due to the CPP alone, without
accounting for the associated costs of transmission upgrades,
higher natural gas prices caused by increased gas demand,
procurement of additional ancillary services, and other costs
associated with the retirement'' of plants.
I ask unanimous consent to submit ERCOT's report for the
record. Without objection.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Olson. So costs are going up without any explanation
from EPA about the benefits. A few weeks ago, EPA's clean air
guru Janet McCabe could not give me any details at a recent
hearing about the impacts of the CPP on our climate. And this
was despite the fact that she admitted that a major driver for
the CPP is climate change. She started dancing, danced around
questions on temperature and sea level because she had no
answer.
Take time to read EPA's Regulatory Impact Analysis. You
will find no specifics because they don't know. They do know
that this sweeping rule threatens my home State's grid, and it
may violate the Clean Air Act.
My first questions are for you, Ms. Wood, and you, Mr. Lin.
For the first time ever, EPA is proposing a rule which goes
beyond the fence line. Mr. Lin mentioned in his opening
statement, but please share your thoughts and details of the
legal impacts of this new rule and what kind of precedent it
sets for future actions by EPA. Ms. Wood, you get the first
crack, ma'am.
Ms. Wood. Thank you. As I described to the subcommittee the
last time I was here, there is an analogy that I think makes it
easier for, you know, most people to understand what is going
on here. And when you start talking about the grid and, you
know, shifting dispatch, et cetera, I think it is difficult to
understand. So an easier way to think about it, the analogy is
with cars. And I am not suggesting that EPA could regulate cars
under section 111. In fact, it couldn't. Those are regulated
under a different title of the Clean Air Act.
But what EPA is doing here is akin to instead of just
saying we are going to put, you know, a catalytic converter on
your car to limit air pollutants, which would be permissible--
that would be the equivalent of building block 1 here where
they are doing energy efficiency--we are also going to require
that 1 or 2 days a week if it is available to you, you need to
take public transportation. You need to take the bus or the
train. That is equivalent to what is happening with the re-
dispatching to gas. And what EPA is saying here is if you have
sufficient capacity to generate your electricity using natural
gas, you must do that.
And then the final thing that EPA is doing is it is now
dictating what kind of car you can buy and it says that, say,
for example every third car you buy, it must be electric. And
here what they are saying is you have to build a lot more
renewable solar and wind generation.
The one thing that EPA did do between the proposal and the
final rule would be to eliminate building block 4, which was
going to require programs be put in place to force consumers to
reduce their use of electricity. EPA has now conceded that it
can't force consumers to do that and that the owners and
operators of power plants can't have that done. So that has
been removed, but that at the time was equivalent to requiring
folks to telecommute.
Mr. Olson. In the spirit of bipartisanship, I am over 45
seconds, so to follow my friend's lead here, I yield back and
now recognize the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Pallone from New Jersey.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
We have heard quite a few hyperbolic legal arguments today,
so I would like to spend some time setting the record straight
in my opinion. Since 1970, the Clean Air Act has had several
key features that have helped make it one of the most
successful environmental laws on the books. Science-based,
health-protective standards keep our eye on the prize: healthy
air for everyone. Cooperative federalism allows EPA to set the
clean air goals and States decide how best to achieve them. EPA
retains backstop enforcement authority ensuring that every
citizen of the United States receives the minimum level of
protection from environmental risks even if their State fails
to act.
Now, some have claimed that this cooperative federalism
arrangement violates the Tenth Amendment. I have heard from one
of the panelists it basically says that if States refuse to
submit State plans, EPA will impose its own Federal plan
imposing a Federal takeover of the generation of interstate
energy. Essentially, that is what--I don't know if it is a
direct quote but one of the panelists essentially said that.
So I just want to ask Professor Revesz, does the Clean Air
Act's State plan-Federal plan provisions, essentially this
cooperative federalism, violate the Constitution, in your
opinion?
Mr. Revesz. Thank you, Mr. Pallone. It does not. In fact,
the Federal-State allocation responsibility under section
111(d) is exactly the same as the allocation of responsibility
for meeting the National Ambient Air Quality Standards with
State Implementation Plans. These are the centerpiece of the
Clean Air Act, as you noted, and they have been in place since
1971. So this is a 44-year history that has served us very
well, has saved tens of thousands of lives every year.
Section 111(d) by its terms says, ``the administrator shall
prescribe regulations which shall establish a procedure similar
to that provided by section 7410 of this title,'' which is the
State Implementation Plan provision under which the National
Ambient Air Quality Standards are met. So we have been doing
this for 44 years.
There is no constitutional problem because the States are
not required to do anything. They are given an option. They can
come up with State plans if they wish to do so, and if they
don't, the Federal Government has the authority to implement
the Federal Implementation Plan. In fact, under the Clean Power
Plan, unlike under the National Ambient Air Quality Standards,
EPA has made clear that it will not withhold highway money.
There will not be highway sanctions for States that refuse to
put together State plans.
So there is no compulsion here. This is in no way similar
to any of the cases that were decided in which commandeering of
State institutions was at issue. This is a plain vanilla
cooperative federalism program of the sort that we have had for
almost half-a-century.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Let me just ask you quickly this
next one because I want to ask Professor Hammond something. Is
the Clean Power Plan any different than previous Clean Air Act
rules?
Mr. Revesz. Well, it is different in that it is directed at
greenhouse gases. It is not different in many of the ways that
were discussed earlier. As I indicated, the Good Neighbor
provision is implemented by EPA through a broad cap-and-trade
system, and it has been done by the administrations of
Presidents Clinton, George W. Bush, and Barack Obama for over
20 years. I mentioned the incinerator rule where owners of
incinerators are required to come up with recycling plans.
The features that have been found or have been said to be
problematic by the Clean Power Plan can find historical
antecedents in other Clean Air Act programs over a period of
several decades implemented by administrations of both
political parties.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Let me ask Professor Hammond,
Robert Nordhaus recently said that ``although global warming
likely wasn't on the minds of lawmakers working on the Clean
Air Act in 1970, they were aware that the science of air
pollutants was still evolving and 111(d) was written to account
for this issue, that the statute itself, in my views, anyway,
it was really designed to be forward-looking.''
So, Professor Hammond, what do you think about this
comment? Is the flexibility reflected in the regulatory
framework that Congress established in the Clean Air Act?
Ms. Hammond. Yes, it is. And I agree with that comment.
Just to the terms, air pollutant, as we know from the Supreme
Court's decision in Massachusetts v. EPA, is a capacious term.
It is meant to accommodate new circumstances in the future. And
with respect to section 111(d), it is meant to fill a gap. If a
pollutant is not regulated as a criteria pollutant or as a
toxic, this is the place for EPA to do that. And so it is meant
to have a holistic approach to air pollution.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Shimkus.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to go and
talk to and ask Mr. Gifford a line of questions.
Is it correct that the proposed rule and the final 111(d)
rule EPA scaled back its expected carbon dioxide reduction for
existing coal plant efficiency improvements?
Mr. Gifford. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. And so from what your report or your testimony
says from 6 percent to 2.1, that is 4.2 percent depending upon
the region of the country. With lower performance requirements
for actual existing sources, I would assume that EPA would
produce smaller carbon dioxide reduction mandates, but that is
not the case. EPA actually increased the overall carbon
reduction mandates under the rule. Is that correct?
Mr. Gifford. That is correct.
Mr. Shimkus. Are the carbon dioxide caps derived from what
can be achieved at existing fossil fuel-fired power plants?
Mr. Gifford. No. In fact, the increased carbon dioxide
reductions in EPA's, you know, carbon rationing, you know,
methodology all come from increased assumptions of an addition
of renewable capacity to the grid.
Mr. Shimkus. I had a similar line of questions in the last
hearing we had, and there is really terrible faulty
assumptions, and we are going to continue on this line of
questioning.
My understanding is that you have examined the numbers and
identified that EPA assumes a massive increase in renewable
energy to reach its carbon reduction mandates. Can you explain
what assumptions EPA appeared to use to generate its assumed
massive growth of renewables?
Mr. Gifford. Sure. How EPA increased the final carbon
budget for each State while changing the methodology to reduce
the amount of carbon reductions they could get from building
blocks 1, 2, and eliminating building block 4, is what they
said is let's assume that you can add renewable resources at
the largest historic number from years 2010 to 2014 that have
been added to capacity year-over-year, and let's assume that is
potential to add that amount of renewable energy year-over-year
from 2025 to 2030. Where they really got that number high and
pumped it up is if you picked, as EPA did, the year 2012 when
we added twice the amount of wind to the system that we did in
any other year historically.
Mr. Shimkus. And I agree with you. How do EPA's assumptions
stack up against--and I used this agency last time, too--the
U.S. Energy Information Administration's assumption for
renewables over the same period?
Mr. Gifford. EPA is larger by about a factor of 2.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes. And we found that to be true in the last
hearing.
If EPA is overestimating its renewable energy assumptions
in its baseline, is it underestimating the potential impacts of
the rule?
Mr. Gifford. Well, based on what EPA is calculating, which
is a best system of emission reduction, if you can't
conceivably add that much renewable at least notionally, you
are obviously imposing far too heavy a carbon reduction budget
than is actually feasible.
Mr. Shimkus. And that is why it is significant, right----
Mr. Gifford. Correct.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. Because it is just an
unachievable analysis of where we can get to.
Mr. Gifford. Yes. And, Congressman, the reason that the
year 2012 was so anomalous in the amount of wind that was added
nationally was because there was a dash to add wind because of
the expected expiration of the production tax credit. So if you
look at the amount of wind capacity added year-over-year in
that time period, all of a sudden 2012 pops way up by a factor
of 2. Then, EPA takes that number and then you use that number
year-over-year to show potential carbon reduction.
Mr. Shimkus. So what might we see in the electricity sector
if EPA's assumptions about renewables are wrong and the energy
information agencies are correct and there is a smaller
renewable build-out?
Mr. Gifford. Well, I think what you will probably see is
less renewable energy than is actually assumed by EPA. What you
will probably see more practically is a, you know, massive
build-out of new gas plants and gas capacity because that is
the simplest and most reliable way to do it. Now, that is not
free but that is, I think, probably the first option given many
of the issues that Professor Hammond mentioned about nuclear,
which isn't really on the table these days for the reasons she
mentioned.
Mr. Shimkus. Which I wish they were also.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
McNerney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I thank the chairman.
And this is a hearing that I don't think we really need to
have, but we will go ahead.
Mr. Lin, West Virginia's moving forward with the lawsuit
regarding the Clean Power Plan basically unless the EPA were to
withdraw the plan. You are going to go forward with that
lawsuit, is that correct?
Mr. Lin. Congressman, my boss the Attorney General has made
very clear that we intend to challenge the rule, together with
a growing bipartisan coalition of States.
Mr. McNerney. So what would be the ideal outcome of your
lawsuit?
Mr. Lin. Well, in any kind of a challenge like this, what
you are looking for is a vacatur of the rule and remand to the
Agency. And so, you know, under the two arguments that I have
articulated today, the EPA doesn't have the authority to do
what it is doing, and so the rule should be struck down.
Mr. McNerney. So in other words, you would stop the
administration from curbing carbon dioxide emissions
altogether?
Mr. Lin. Well, what we would do is we would corral the
Agency within its statutory authority. I think the question of,
you know, whether this is good policy is an entirely different
question. I don't think there is----
Mr. McNerney. Because that would be the effect. It would
curb the administration's ability to curb carbon emissions?
Mr. Lin. It would stop this particular rule from going
forward.
Mr. McNerney. Well, Mr. Revesz, how long do you think the
adjudication is going to be lasting on these lawsuits?
Mr. Revesz. There will be a case filed at the D.C. Circuit.
It will then depend whether the D.C. circuit, after having a
decision by the panel, takes the case en banc. I assume----
Mr. McNerney. Is your microphone on?
Mr. Olson. Microphone on, please, sir.
Mr. Revesz. All right.
Mr. Olson. Thank you.
Mr. Revesz. It would go before the DC Circuit first. The
length of time will depend on whether once the panel of the DC
Circuit decides the case, whether the whole court decides to
take it en banc, I assume that whoever loses in the DC Circuit
will petition the court for cert. If the court grants cert, it
will add time.
So I would say that it would take between 1 and 3 years to
get this case finally adjudicated depending on various moving
pieces.
Mr. McNerney. But didn't the EPA delay some provisions of
the Clean Power Plan about that length of time?
Mr. Revesz. Yes, EPA delayed two provisions. It delayed the
period for State compliance. It is true, as Ms. Wood indicated,
the period. The States have to comply in roughly a year, but
very easily they can get a 2-year extension. It is very, very
easy for States to do that and EPA basically said it was
essentially a pro forma thing. So EPA essentially added 2 more
years from the proposed rule to the final rule. And it also
delayed the period for compliance by roughly the same period of
time.
Mr. McNerney. Do you feel that a hearing like this can have
any impact on the adjudication?
Mr. Revesz. I don't think so. I mean this case will be up
the courts. I assume that by tomorrow or Monday it will be
before the courts, and the judges will interpret the statute in
the way they see best. I don't think they will be affected by
this conversation.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Ms. Hammond, would you tell us how the Clean Power Plan has
addressed the reliability issue?
Ms. Hammond. Yes. The Clean Power Plan relies on the
interconnected nature of the grid to promote reliability even
with some shifts in our electricity fuel sources. It relies on
the fact that the grid is built to be resilient by connecting
electricity generation from all sorts of fuel sources. By also
correcting at least some of those market dysfunctions, it
permits those other fuel sources to compete, at least some of
them to some extent, on those markets in a way that further
promotes reliability because diversity is important to the
reliability of the grid as well. Different fuel sources have
different characteristics that enable not only baseload but
peak demand can be met as well.
Mr. McNerney. So you do feel like their provisions for
reliability will be effective in helping to ensure that we have
reliable electricity?
Ms. Hammond. Yes. I think that the lights will stay on.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. That is all, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Latta,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And to our panel,
thanks very much for being here today.
Mr. Lin, if I could ask my opening questions to you. You
argue that the 111(d) rule was unlawful, would not withstand
judicial scrutiny. How is EPA's rule influencing electricity-
sector planning today?
Mr. Lin. Thank you, Congressman. I think that is a very
good question. And maybe the best place to look at it is--well,
to answer the question directly, I think it is having a
tremendous effect. The utilities, as I understand it, have a
very long time line in terms of what they do in terms of their
planning and their decision-making. And of course the States
are taking steps as well.
And I think the thing to take note of is what happened
recently with what has been commonly called the MATS decision,
the Mercury and Air Toxics Standards under Section 112. That
litigation, sort of consistent with what Professor Revesz said,
took 3 years from publication of the rule to the Supreme Court
decision this last June. And after the EPA lost that decision,
which they did, they said, to reassure their supporters, that
it was not really a big deal because a majority of the power
plants were already in compliance.
And that gives us great pause and great concern about the
decisions that are already happening here, and that compliance
is going to happen before judicial review is completed. And we
could have what essentially amounts to a Pyrrhic victory.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much.
Mr. Gifford, would you like to comment?
Mr. Gifford. No, I think Solicitor General Lin is exactly
right. In recent weeks we have seen what are called Integrated
Resources Plans, which are plans that utilities file with the
State utility commission that have been presented that
incorporate the assumptions of the rule. And that is what a
prudent utility has to do given their planning horizons.
So as Solicitor General Lin said, if you are an electric-
generating unit or a vertically integrated utility right now,
you have to, in your planning process, incorporate your carbon
budgets that EPA has handed you. And I think the same thing is
happening is if this rule were overturned by the Supreme Court
in 2018, 2019, you could have a situation where a good chunk of
the Nation's coal fleet is already scheduled to be retired
under State planning processes.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. Mr. Lin, back to you if I may. If I
understand your testimony, you indicate the rules are a
disguise for broader regulatory planning. Would you like to
elaborate on that?
Mr. Lin. Thank you, Congressman. I think the thing to look
at is building blocks 2 and 3, and the way that EPA itself
describes them is those are about substituting electric
generation of another type, whether it is natural gas under
building block 2 or renewables under building block 3, for
coal-fired power plants. So they use those building blocks to
set the target level of emissions reduction, so they are
assuming in their calculation that there will be a shift in the
kind of energy generation.
There has been a lot of talk today about flexibility and
that the States are being given flexibility and that they don't
have to do these particular things, but the fact of the matter
is the reductions that are being required build in these
assumptions of shifting generation. And if you look at my State
of West Virginia, we have to meet a 37 percent emissions
reduction, and we rely almost entirely on coal-fired energy. So
practically speaking, there is no way to get where they want us
to go without shifting from one type of generation to another.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Ms. Wood, under the construct of section 111, is the power
plant the source of the pollution or is the electricity the
source of the pollution?
Ms. Wood. Thank you, Congressman. That is an excellent
question. The title of section 111 is standards of performance,
you know, for sources. And the source is in fact here the
electric-generating unit. It is not the product that that
electric-generating unit produces, which is electricity. It is
whatever the thing is that is actually creating the emissions.
So in the case of a power plant, it is the electric-generating
unit. If you were talking about a petroleum refinery, it would
be the refinery. It wouldn't be the gasoline that it made. And
that is how it is controlled and that is how section 111 works.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much.
And, Mr. Chairman, I see my time is about ready to expire
and I yield back.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Tonko, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
One of the current statements those who oppose the Clean
Power Plan keep making is that this rule mandates, mandates an
emissions-trading scheme. As I read it, there is no mandate to
use emissions trading as the way to meet the standard.
Assistant Administrator McCabe confirmed that at the hearing
about 2 weeks ago. And it was the utilities and system
operators who advocated for including this compliance option in
the final rule, not just State governments that were already
participating in these systems.
So my question to you, Mr. Revesz, is is there anything in
the Clean Air Act that precludes States from using an
emissions-trading system to achieve compliance with this rule?
Mr. Revesz. There is nothing in the Clean Air Act,
Congressman, that would preclude States from doing that. And in
fact, under other really important programs of the Clean Air
Act like the Good Neighbor provisions, we already use trading
schemes of that sort. And the Supreme Court a year ago upheld
that program.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And is there anything in the Clean
Air Act that prevents EPA from allowing emissions trading as an
option for achieving compliance?
Mr. Revesz. There is not, Congressman, and EPA has done
that in the past under other programs.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And we keep hearing that this rule is
unprecedented. Well, considering that it is the first time that
EPA has regulated carbon emissions specifically from power
plants, that is true, but hasn't EPA regulated other emissions
by, for instance, setting mass or rate limits for new and
existing sources?
Mr. Revesz. EPA has. It is very clear that the term
standard of performance--which actually the statute doesn't say
standard of performance for a source; it is just standard of
performance--does not involve necessarily the use of end-of-
pipe technologies. It can involve changes in production
processes. If there are three ways of producing the same
product and one way is a lot dirtier than other ways, EPA can
decide that a standard of performance is to produce the product
in a cleaner way. EPA and the courts have made very clear that
changes in production processes are a perfectly fine way of
meeting standard-of-performance requirements.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. Given that the States are given
flexibility to achieve compliance with pollution limitation
through the preparation of individual State plans, I would
believe that offers great flexibility----
Mr. Revesz. It does.
Mr. Tonko [continuing]. To our States? And further,
Assistant Administrator McCabe also confirmed that two of the
factors that led EPA to include emissions trading as an option
in the final rule are 1) the extensive experience that States
and power plants already have with emissions trading, and 2) a
strong interest on the part of many States' utilities and grid
operators in using emission trading to help meet their
obligations. Is that not true?
Mr. Revesz. That is true. Once the limitations are set,
trading provides a lower-cost way of meeting the requirement,
and that is why market operators find it attractive.
Mr. Tonko. Well, thank you. I think this is noted in the
preamble to the rule, and I think it just needs to be further
clarified. And so I appreciate your response to the questions
concerning whether or not there is a mandate that is brought to
bear with an emissions-trading scheme that is placed on all the
operators out there.
So with that, I thank you for the clarification. And, Mr.
Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair would like
to announce when the bells ring, we have votes being called.
That will be about an hour, so we intend to recess for an hour,
try to do two more questions, one Republican, one Democrat,
after the bell rings. So calm down, OK?
I now recognize Mr. McKinley from West Virginia for 5
minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gifford, there is a Mildred Schmidt in every community
of West Virginia, and I am just curious if West Virginia does
indeed have to reduce its CO
2
emissions by 37
percent, is Mildred Schmidt going to have to pay more for her
electricity?
Mr. Gifford. Without a doubt.
Mr. McKinley. OK.
Mr. Gifford. Right. And that is the feature of this rule to
the proponents is it induces you to close down your coal-fired
power plants.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you.
Ms. Wood, 111(b) is based on the use of carbon capture and
storage. I just had the opportunity to visit China and India to
inspect their carbon capture facilities, and the officials
there have already determined that CCS is not commercially
viable, and they are not going to implement it on their people,
recognizing the cost that they would be burdened with. And
there are none in America operating commercially, is that
correct?
Ms. Wood. That is correct. Right now, there are none.
Mr. McKinley. So 111(b) is a predicate for 111(d). I that
not correct?
Ms. Wood. Yes, it is.
Mr. McKinley. If 111(b) is struck down, what is going to be
the impact on 111(d)?
Ms. Wood. You can't have a 111(d) existing-source rule
without first having or simultaneously having a 111(b) new-
source rule. So if the new-source rule were struck down,
regardless of everything we are talking about, the legal
infirmities of the 111(d) rule, it would not have its legal
foundation and could not exist.
Mr. McKinley. I just find this incredible that major
producers, major users of coal are saying it is just not
commercially viable. So we will follow up with that.
Mr. Lin, in your testimony you raised a remark about the
building blocks. Some of the building blocks are illegal
partially because they are aimed at reducing the use of coal-
fired energy. Could you elaborate a little bit on that?
Mr. Lin. Of course. There are two points I think that are
worth making. The first is that the scope of EPA's power under
section 111(d) is to set standards that lead to standards of
performance. And we are talking about performance of individual
coal-fired power plants.
And one thing that I wanted to address is Professor Revesz
has said a number of times, you know, that he has got a lot of
examples talking about the method of producing the product and
that there is plenty of precedent for that. Well, that belies I
think an important distinction here. EPA is not talking about
changing the method of--at these particular--the method of
generating electricity is a very, very different question from
shifting generation from one power plant to some other power
plant. And so I think, you know, all of his examples talk about
ways to improve operations at one particular facility, and that
is what we are talking about. That is the scope of authority
under 111(d), and that is not what they have done here.
Mr. McKinley. OK. Again, Mr. Chairman, in consideration of
the time, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair recognizes
the gentlelady from--sorry, the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Green, slipped in there.
Mr. Green. I thank my neighbor. Mr. Chairman, I would like
to place a short statement into the record so I can go straight
to questions.
Professor Revesz, I have repeatedly stated it makes more
sense to address climate change by legislation without
congressional action. However, Federal agencies have acted
under existing authority. There are many attorneys in
Washington and around the country doing very well advising
their clients on the version of the House and Senate amendments
to the Clean Air Act or the law.
In their relatively recent Supreme Court decision, what is
your view on whether Congress spoke directly to that question
at issue? Do you believe that the Court will rule with the
Agency on interpretation?
Mr. Revesz. As long as an agency interpretation is not
inconsistent with the clear intent of Congress, the Court,
under traditional doctrines, will defer to the Agency's
interpretation. And in this case, the Clean Air Act talks about
the regulation of air pollutants. The Congress in 1970 didn't
specify which those were because it understood over time the
science around air pollutants would change. The Supreme Court
in 2007 held that greenhouse gases are air pollutants. And then
the administration in 2009 found that they endangered public
health or welfare, and therefore needed to be regulated under
the existing provisions of the Clean Air Act.
Mr. Green. OK. The EPA believes that the House bill's
exclusion from 111(d) apply only to hazardous air pollutants,
not any air pollutant. What are your thoughts on that?
Mr. Revesz. As I indicated in my opening statement, I think
EPA has interpreted this statute in the correct way, that if
sources' emissions are regulated under section 112, that same
emission can't be regulated under section 111(d) as well. But
if a source's hazardous emissions are regulated under section
112, the other emissions of a source can be regulated under
section 111(d) because otherwise it would be a gap in the Clean
Air Act that Congress didn't intend.
Mr. Green. How willing has the Court been to apply Chevron
in cases in the past? Is there any indication that the Court
would lean this way again or would a pending case offer a new
point of view?
Mr. Revesz. Well, legal scholars have debated this for
many, many years. My own view is that this case will get the
traditional Chevron deference, as EPA cases have been getting
since the Chevron case was decided in 1984.
Mr. Green. OK. Ms. Hammond, isn't there a major difference
between Burwell and a potential Clean Power Plan case, namely
that the Affordable Care Act had already taken hold across the
Nation and the CPP is newly finalized?
Ms. Hammond. Well, it is true that the CPP is newly
finalized, but I think the issue for how a court would
interpret the statutory provisions and decide about deference
to the agency doesn't hinge on that particular factual
scenario.
Here, I agree that Chevron deference would be appropriate
in this situation, but I think a court could also decide the
issue is too important to leave to the Agency, in other words,
promote regulatory certainty. If a court holds that a statute
has a particular meaning, then they Agency is not free to
change that meeting later, and the Supreme Court here should
interpret this section 112 exclusion issue to permit EPA's
regulations here. And taking that route would promote the
regulatory certainty and let everybody know, yes, it is time to
implement the Clean Power Plan.
Mr. Green. Mr. Chairman, I will yield back so somebody else
can have time before we go vote.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from West Virginia, Mr.
Griffith, for 5 minutes, and then recognize Mrs. Capps for 5
minutes. Then, we will go vote.
Mr. Griffith. OK. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I would note that while I love the people of West Virginia
and my district borders them, I come from the original
Commonwealth of Virginia and not our separated segment thereof.
That being said, we have heard arguments even today that in
interpreting section 111(d) of the Clean Air Act we should
treat a technical conforming amendment produced by the Senate
as equal to a substantive House amendment that prevailed in
conference on the 1990 Clean Air Act amendments. We know the
Senate receded to the House with respect to this language.
What people may not remember but provides important context
is that the language that the House judged to be appropriate
was initially proposed by the President of the United States.
He proposed the language that excludes dual regulation of
sources in his formal submission of proposed Clean Air Act
amendments to Congress in the summer of 1989. The language to
prevent dual regulation of sources under section 111(d) and
other sections was intentional and a substantive amendment to
the act.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to enter into the record the
cover page of the message from the President and the actual
revision to section 111(d) that President Bush, the first
President Bush, proposed and Congress ultimately adopted.
Mr. Olson. Without objection.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that.
Mr. Lin, you state in your testimony that in the context of
the Clean Air Act amendments of 1990, Congress was particularly
concerned about electric-generating units being subject to
double regulation. Can you elaborate?
Mr. Lin. Yes, Congressman. In the legislative history, as
recounted by EPA itself, there is tremendous concern about
power plants being subject to double regulation. One piece of
evidence of that is section 112(n)(1)(a), which is the
provision that carved out power plants for special treatment
with regard to hazardous air pollutants. And it said, as
opposed to other major stationary sources, it did not
automatically subject power plants to 112 regulation, but
instead it said that EPA was to do a study to assess the effect
of other parts of the Clean Air Act and to determine whether
regulation of power plants was appropriate and necessary.
Mr. Griffith. OK. I appreciate that. You know, it is kind
of interesting. Mr. Shimkus earlier said that when Acting
Assistant Administrator McCabe was in, she started dancing
around. I had a similar problem when we were talking. She
insisted that this was not a cap-and-trade scheme, and yet I
have heard most of you--I think the only one I haven't heard
say that it was a cap-and-trade process or program was Ms.
Hammond. So, you know, it was curious. I speculated they are
just so afraid that the negative connotations to cap-and-trade
the American public holds is why she wouldn't give me that, but
I asked her in several different ways isn't this going to be a
cap-and-trade scheme? She refused to use those words. Mr. Lin,
predominantly isn't this a cap-and-trade program?
Mr. Lin. Well, as I said in my opening statement, I think
it is clear that what EPA is doing is trying to drive States
toward cap-and-trade. And they say at several points in the
preamble that emissions trading is a critical part of their
analysis. The Federal----
Mr. Griffith. And in fact, Ms. Wood--and I am sorry. I am
just looking at the clock.
Mr. Lin. That is OK. Of course.
Mr. Griffith. Ms. Wood, I note that I think you said that
they had two different types of cap-and-trade plans within
their preamble that they mentioned that they promote. Isn't
that correct?
Ms. Wood. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Griffith. But they are still cap-and-trade plans, isn't
that right?
Ms. Wood. They are. One is mass-based and one is rate-
based, and the State can choose, but at the end of the day, you
have a cap on your emissions.
Mr. Griffith. Now, the question that I then followed up
with Ms. McCabe and we have heard some testimony on today is if
the State just says we are not doing anything, do you, Mr. Lin,
see this as the EPA coming in and then forcing a cap-and-trade
program on the State that doesn't do anything?
Mr. Lin. If the Federal plan stays the way that it has been
proposed, there will be a federally imposed cap-and-trade
system.
Mr. Griffith. I also thought it was interesting, Mr. Lin,
that you brought up the MATS rule. On that border between West
Virginia and Virginia was a little place called Glen Lyn plant
in Virginia that closed on, I believe, May 1 of this year. And
the ruling from the Supreme Court saying that, because of
MATS--it was aging and all that is true, but it was closed
because of the MATS rule. On May 1 it had to close down. I lost
another plant in Clinch River, which is close to West Virginia
and probably provides some power to your State as well as mine,
but the ruling came out on June 28 saying the EPA had
overstepped its authority. Isn't that accurate?
Mr. Lin. That is correct.
Mr. Griffith. And, Mr. Gifford, these power companies are
having to make these decisions well in advance, and as a result
of that, they are building all kinds of gas pipelines, isn't
that true, across the country?
Mr. Gifford. Absolutely. They have to.
Mr. Griffith. Can you put that on the record?
Mr. Gifford. Yes. Absolutely. They have to.
Mr. Griffith. All right. Because we have got a lot of gas
pipeline opponents in my district. They need to know where it
is coming from. It is coming from this Clean Power Plan of the
administration.
I yield back.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from California, Mrs.
Capps, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding the
hearing. I thank the witnesses for your testimonies.
I would like to think that we are making progress in this
discussion, but unfortunately, we have repeatedly heard the
same story. We keep going over the same questions. While I do
appreciate there are a wide range of opinions on this topic,
the science is clear. Human activities are producing vast
amounts of carbon dioxide, and these are contributing to global
climate change.
Furthermore, the energy sector is the leading source of
emission for carbon dioxide in the United States, and as a
country, we have an obligation in my opinion to contribute to
national and worldwide reductions of greenhouse gases. Given
our status as a global superpower, we have an obligation to
lead this charge. Unfortunately, we spend more time debating
the scientific consensus on climate than identifying and
implementing tangible solutions.
But here is the bottom line: Our dependence on fossil fuels
is driving climate change, and we need to take bold action to
curb carbon pollution and move toward a clean sustainable
energy future.
So, Professor Revesz, we have heard on multiple occasions
from the majority that the costs associated with the Clean
Power Plan will be exorbitant, yet you have stated that this
plan will have reasonable costs and in fact will return
significant benefits. Would you please expand on how you have
come to this conclusion?
Mr. Revesz. Well, EPA has estimated that the net benefits--
that is benefits minus costs--of the Clean Power Plan, range
between 26 and 45 billion a year in 2030, and that is because
the Clean Power Plan has two big categories of benefits. One is
the benefit that comes from greenhouse gas reductions, and the
other is health benefits to come to citizens of the United
States.
By 2030 and every year after that, the Clean Power Plan is
expected to avoid 3,600 premature deaths, 1,700 heart attacks,
90,000 asthma attacks, and 300,000 missed days of work and
school. Those are the benefits. There are costs, about $8.4
billion a year. And the benefits minus the costs yield a net
benefit of between 26 and $45 billion a year starting in 2030.
Mrs. Capps. That is pretty precise, too. And as a former
school nurse, I can relate to the increased asthma costs and
some other health-related matters in southern California where
I am from.
Professor Hammond, you referred to the negative
environmental externalities of power generation and the fact
that the Clean Power Plan and CO
2
regulation would
lead to a more diverse energy generation landscape in the
future. I have had some experience with this recently in my
district on the central coast of California with two leading
academic institutions that are spawning all kinds of new
industry. Can you please elaborate on how, given the
flexibility of the regulations, States will be able to meet the
regulatory requirements with existing technology?
Ms. Hammond. Yes. Not only can they ask for fuel switching,
but they can also innovate or encourage innovation related to
electricity storage, which of course your State is a leader in,
also demand-response and efficiency programs. So there are many
ways for States to flexibly meet the requirements.
I want to emphasize that the building blocks are not what
is required. States have the flexibility to meet their
standards in ways that make sense for those States. And
everything is on the table for the States.
Mrs. Capps. Right.
Ms. Hammond. It is very flexible.
Mrs. Capps. It is a very timely period of time right now,
isn't it, very critical to see with this flexibility what can
happen. Given the incentive for clean power development, do you
see these regulations encouraging the development of new energy
technology?
Ms. Hammond. Absolutely. That is something to be excited
about with the Clean Power Plan, and it is also consistent with
the Clean Air Act, which has always, since the '70s, been
designed to encourage newer, cleaner technology.
Mrs. Capps. I am going to try one more question. I hope we
can make it.
Professor Revesz, are there any reasons to expect the
States will not be able to achieve the targets outlined in the
Clean Power Plan?
Mr. Revesz. No. The targets are very reasonable, and in
fact, on average, the States are already about halfway there of
the 32 percent reductions from the 2005 baseline the Clean
Power Plan expects by 2030. We have already achieved about 15
percent of the 32 percent. And we are basically on a path to
achieve further reductions, even absent the Clean Power Plan.
Mrs. Capps. I think that is a very exciting prospect, and,
you know, I am impressed that we are on this track. We want to
continue this. We want to resume our position as global
leaders. In renewable energy we have a ways to go, but what you
have said today is very encouraging.
I yield back. And thank you, Mr. Chairman, for squeezing me
in.
Mr. Olson. The gentlelady got it done.
Mrs. Capps. We got it done. Thank you.
Mr. Olson. We will reserve. We will go in recess right now,
come back in about an hour. This committee is in recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Olson. We will come to order. Thank you all so much for
coming back. As you can see, no Members we expected to come
back, but I have one final question for you, Ms. Wood. Can you
explain this Good Neighbor provision that Professor Revesz
talked about? Does it really support the Clean Power Plan, the
CPP? Last question.
Ms. Wood. Thank you. The Good Neighbor provision is part of
the NAAQS program, the National Ambient Air Quality Standard
provision. It is part of section 110 of the Clean Air Act. It
is different. And what that provision covers is the attainment
of National Ambient Air Quality Standards. And the way that
States can do that is much more broad than under section 111,
which is the standards of performance for sources. So it can
encompass many more things than a standard of performance can.
It is not as limited to the source or limited to an emission
rate. It works differently. It is a completely different
program.
Mr. Olson. Thank you for that clarification.
OK. In conclusion, I would like to thank so much all the
witnesses, the Members for coming and for taking part in
today's hearing. I remind Members that they have 10 business
days to submit questions for the record and ask that witnesses
all agreed to respond promptly to those questions.
This subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 5:02 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

In 2010, during the second year of the Obama
administration, a Democratically controlled Congress failed to
pass sweeping cap-and-trade legislation. That flawed scheme was
rejected because it would have done far more economic harm than
environmental good and people realized that cap and trade was
nothing more than an economywide energy tax. But now, the EPA
is regulating where the administration failed to legislate,
issuing final rules for CO
2
emissions from new and
existing power plants that seek to fundamentally change the way
we generate, distribute, and consume electricity here in the
United States. For the sake of jobs and affordable energy,
these rules must be stopped as the case for cap-and-trade has
only gotten worse with time. Today, we continue our review of
this expansive regulatory agenda, and focus on the legal
concerns with these rules.
Beyond the constitutional issues of these sweeping
measures, these rules take the Clean Air Act in an
unprecedented new direction, in which it was never designed to
go. In the past, EPA emissions performance standards were
technologically achievable. With these rules we are seeing new
coal generated electricity effectively banned, costly
renewables favored over other sources, and even clean-burning
natural gas and nuclear power relegated to a constrained
future, this is just plain wrong.
These rules raise significant concerns for States and
consumers. Back in Michigan the temperatures are dropping, the
lakes are near freezing, and we face another winter. Affordable
electricity for heating is absolutely essential for my State,
and especially for low-income households and those on fixed
incomes. Manufacturers in Michigan and across the country need
affordable energy to remain globally competitive--American
manufacturers can compete against anybody, except the EPA. One
study from NERA estimates that the existing source rule as
proposed would boost electric rates in Michigan and 42 other
States by double digits, and that is on top of already rising
electricity rates due to other onerous EPA regulations. This
will deal a crushing blow just as things are looking brighter
for manufacturing.
Michigan winters are cold enough that if the electricity
goes out, people may be harmed. Despite some acknowledgement of
this future by EPA, their rules ensure that reliability
concerns remain. This is not surprising, since Congress did not
authorize EPA with the responsibility for electric reliability.
In contrast, NERC and others with such expertise have warned of
serious reliability concerns with the steps EPA insists on
taking.
The Ratepayer Protection Act fixes many of the problems
with the existing source rule. It restores the State authority
envisioned in the Clean Air Act by empowering every Governor to
waive the provisions of the rule if found to threaten the
affordability or reliability of their electricity systems.
Under this bill, any State that wishes to go along with EPA's
regulations remains completely free to do so.
These and other legal concerns are not mere technicalities.
Quite the contrary, if left unaddressed they could lead to
higher electric bills, an increased likelihood of blackouts,
and lost American jobs. The new EPA's regulations on their own
do significant damage--but cumulatively they will break the
camel's back--that is why our continued work is so important,

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
