- EXAMINING ICD-10 IMPLEMENTATION

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING ICD-10 IMPLEMENTATION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 11, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-9

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

95-175 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

_____

Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          KATHY CASTOR, Florida
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina         Massachusetts
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TONY CARDENAS, California
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
CHRIS COLLINS, New York                  officio)
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Gene Green, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     2
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................     3
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................   110

Witnesses

Edward Burke, M.D., Beyer Medical Group..........................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Answers to submitted questions...............................   146
Richard F. Averill, Director of Public Policy, 3M Health
Information Systems............................................    12
Prepared statement...........................................    14
Answers to submitted questions...............................   150
Sue Bowman, Senior Director, Coding Policy and Compliance,
American Health Information Management Association.............    19
Prepared statement...........................................    21
Additional material for the record...........................    34
Kristi A. Matus, Chief Financial and Administrative Officer,
Athena Health..................................................    43
Prepared statement...........................................    45
Answers to submitted questions...............................   158
Carmella Bocchino, Executive Vice President, Clinical Affairs and
Strategic Planning, America's Health Insurance Plans...........    52
Prepared statement...........................................    54
Answers to submitted questions...............................   162
William Jefferson Terry, Sr., M.D., Legislative Affairs Committee
Member, American Urological Association........................    63
Prepared statement...........................................    65
Additional material for the record \1\
John S. Hughes, M.D., Professor of Medicine, Yale School of
Medicine.......................................................    77
Prepared statement...........................................    79

Submitted Material

Report of the Government Accountability Office to the Senate
Committee on Finance, ``International Classification of
Diseases: CMS's Efforts to Prepare for the New Version of the
Disease and Procedure Codes,'' January 2015, \2\ submitted by
Mr. Guthrie....................................................    89
Statement of the American Hospital Association, February 11,
2015, submitted by Mr. Pitts...................................   111
Letter of February 11, 2015, from The Coalition for ICD-10 to Mr.
Pitts and Mr. Green, submitted by Mr. Pitts....................   116
Statement of the Premier Healthcare Alliance, February 11, 2015,
submitted by Mr. Pitts.........................................   119

----------
\1\ Additional material submitted by Dr. Terry has been retained in
committee files and also is available at  http://docs.house.gov/
meetings/IF/IF14/20150211/102940/HHRG-114-IF14-Wstate-TerryW-20150211-
SD001.pdf.
\2\ The report has been retained in committee files and also is
available at  http://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF14/20150211/102940/
HHRG-114-IF14-20150211-SD006.pdf.
Statement of the American Medical Association, February 11, 2015,
submitted by Mr. Pitts.........................................   122
Statement of the American Academy of Dermatology Association,
February 11, 2015, submitted by Mr. Pitts......................   129
Statement of Dr. Fred Azar, President, American Association of
Orthopaedic Surgeons, February 11, 2015, submitted by Mr. Pitts   131
Statement of Chris Powell, Chief Executive Officer, Precyse,
February 11, 2015, submitted by Mr. Pitts......................   136
Article of February 2015, ``Survey of ICD-10 Implementation Costs
in Small Physician Offices,'' by Karen Blanchette, et al.,
Journal of AHIMA, submitted by Mr. Green.......................   141
Letter, undated, from Daniel D. Chamber, Executive Director, Key-
Whitman Eye Center, to Hon. Pete Sessions, Chairman, House
Committee on Rules, submitted by Mr. Burgess...................   143
Letter of February 4, 2015, from C. Duane Dauner, President and
CEO, California Hospital Association, to Mr. Cardenas,
submitted by Mr. Cardenas......................................   145

EXAMINING ICD-10 IMPLEMENTATION

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 11, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:16 a.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joseph R.
Pitts (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Pitts, Guthrie, Barton,
Whitfield, Shimkus, Burgess, McMorris Rodgers, Lance, Griffith,
Bilirakis, Long, Ellmers, Bucshon, Brooks, Collins, Green,
Butterfield, Castor, Sarbanes, Schrader, Kennedy, Cardenas, and
Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Clay Alspach, Chief Counsel, Health; Gary
Andres, Staff Director; Leighton Brown, Press Assistant; Jerry
Couri, Senior Environmental Policy Advisor; Andy Duberstein,
Deputy Press Secretary; Robert Horne, Professional Staff
Member, Health; Chris Sarley, Policy Coordinator, Environment
and the Economy; Adrianna Simonelli, Legislative Clerk; Heidi
Stirrup, Policy Coordinator, Health; Traci Vitek, Detailee,
Health; Ziky Ababiya, Democratic Policy Analyst; Jeff Carroll,
Democratic Staff Director; Tiffany Guarascio, Democratic Staff
Director and Chief Health Advisor; Ashley Jones, Democratic
Director, Outreach and Member Services; and Arielle Woronoff,
Democratic Health Counsel.
Mr. Pitts. The subcommittee will come to order. The Chair
will recognize himself for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

The United States currently operates under the
International Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision (ICD-9)
code set, which has about 13,000 diagnostic codes. The
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) had set a
mandatory deadline of October 1, 2013, for providers to switch
from ICD-9 to the greatly expanded ICD, 10th Revision (ICD-10)
code set, which has 68,000 diagnostic codes and 87,000
procedural codes.
Section 212 of H.R. 4302, the Protecting Access to Medicare
Act, signed into law by President Barack Obama on April 1,
2014, delayed the transition to ICD-10 until October 1, 2015.
Many providers and payers, including the Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services, have already made considerable
investments in the ICD-10 transition, and any further delay
will entail additional costs to keep ICD-9 systems current, to
retrain employees, and to prepare, again, for the transition.
The United States currently lags behind most of the rest of
the world, which already uses the updated ICD-10. ICD-9 is more
than 30 years old and does not capture the data needed to track
changes in modern medical practice and healthcare delivery.
I would like to welcome all of our witnesses today. We look
forward to your testimony on this important subject.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Joseph R. Pitts

The subcommittee will come to order.
The Chair will recognize himself for an opening statement.
The United States currently operates under the
International Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision (ICD-9)
code set, which has about 13,000 diagnostic codes.
The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) had set a
mandatory deadline of October 1, 2013 for providers to switch
from ICD-9 to the greatly expanded ICD, 10th Revision (ICD-10)
code set, which has 68,000 diagnostic codes and 87,000
procedural codes.
Section 212 of H.R. 4302, the Protecting Access to Medicare
Act, signed into law by President Barack Obama on April 1,
2014, delayed the transition to ICD-10 until October 1, 2015.
Many providers and payers, including the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services, have already made considerable
investments in the ICD-10 transition, and any further delay
will entail additional costs to keep ICD-9 systems current, to
re-train employees, and to prepare, again, for the transition.
The United States currently lags behind most of the rest of
the world, which already uses the updated ICD-10.
ICD-9 is more than 30 years old and does not capture the
data needed to track changes in modern medical practice and
healthcare delivery.
I would like to welcome all of our witnesses today. We look
forward to your testimony on this important subject.

Mr. Pitts. With that, I will yield back and recognize the
ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr. Green, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GENE GREEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning and
thank you to all our witnesses for being here today.
As we know, ICD-9 was adopted in the United States nearly
40 years ago. Congress included a requirement that providers
transition to ICD-10 in the Health Insurance Portability Act of
1996. Since then, transition has been delayed twice to give
covered entities time to prepare. ICD-10 transition is
currently set to take place on October 1, 2015. It is time to
move forward without further delay.
ICD-9 was developed in 1979 and there has been significant
medical breakthroughs which ICD-9 doesn't have codes. ICD-10
will include the more accurate medical descriptions and account
for varying symptoms and levels of security. More precise and
appropriate codes have a number of benefits to our healthcare
system. Precise information will improve claims processing.
Insurers will reject fewer claims and not have to ask to
provide more information as often as they currently do. The
improved specificity of ICD-10 will help researchers. It will
allow public health officials to better track disease and
outbreaks.
The Affordable Care Act included provisions to move our
healthcare system from one that rewards value instead of just
volume. There is still a lot of work to do to improve our
system in this regard, and adopting ICD-10 without delay would
help move this forward.
Providers are increasingly evaluated and held accountable
based on patient outcomes so more accurate codes can help
providers improve their patient safety efforts.
RAND estimated that the cost of transitioning would be
between $475 million and $1.5 billion over 10 years but that
the benefits of the system would be between $700 million and
$7.7 billion in cost savings. According to their analysis, this
is due to more accurate payments, improved disease management,
less rejected claims and fewer fraudulent claims. The
transition to ICD-10 is supported by a majority of the
healthcare community, a broad-based coalition including
hospitals, health plans, medical device manufacturers, and the
health information community opposes any further delay. Each
has invested substantial time and resources, and further delay
will be costly and wasteful.
I understand the medical community has had mixed reactions
to the transition. Many have invested time and resources to be
ready for October 1st yet some tell us they are not ready. The
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services says it is ready for
the transition. CMS has a technical assistance Web site that
features resources to help providers and others with the
transition to ICD-10. It has engaged in targeted outreach to
facilitate the switch. Between CMS and the Coalition for ICD-
10, the resources available to help the transition are
significant. Many of these are available online for free.
Each delay has been costly to the healthcare system, and
ICD transition is an important part of bringing our healthcare
system into the 21st century, and I yield back my time. Wait a
second. Does anyone want my time on our side? I yield back my
time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman, and now
recognizes Dr. Burgess, 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
recognition. I appreciate our witnesses being here and spending
time with us this morning at this hearing. I am certainly glad
we are having the hearing. It is something that I have been
asking for for some time. I am very glad we are here today
talking about our readiness and preparedness and have not
delayed that until September.
While the transition has been delayed several times by
various mechanisms, the last-minute delays do nothing to
relieve the pressure for the small practice that struggles
under this administrative burden. It does put the health
systems and the insurers in a difficult position as well. In
fact, it punishes those who have done exactly what Congress has
requested.
So we do need to hear from our witnesses. Are we doing this
or not? If we are, then the big question for you and me
becomes, will we be ready?
Now, I understand that most of the claims processing will
be done by Medicare contractors and insurance companies. I
actually have a great deal of faith in their ability to move
data. That is what they do. But all roads eventually lead to
the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, and if you will
pardon me, that does appear to be a weak link in the chain,
because from healthcare.gov to the Sunshine Act reporting Web
site, when CMS flips a switch, something breaks, and it is
invariable, and it has happened time and again. Any time they
flip a switch and it involves the processing of data, their
systems fail.
So it begs the question: Is flipping a switch on October
1st the right move? If it is, then what is the contingency plan
for any problems that may develop? Now, contingency plan is a
phrase I use advisedly because it has been in this subcommittee
and in the Oversight Subcommittee time and again. With the
lead-up to healthcare.gov, I asked Gary Cohen, I asked
Secretary Sebelius, what are the contingency plans if all does
not go well when you turn this thing on, and I was told no
contingency plan necessary, we will be ready October 1st. That
was October 1st, 2013. We know what happened after that.
So forgive me if I keep repeating the point that I have
asked for contingency plans in the past, I have been told they
are not necessary, that everything is fine, until it isn't, and
then we all scramble. In this case, it could mean disruptions
in patient care and the ability of small practices to actually
meet their fiscal obligations that they are required to meet to
stay in business.
So today I am anxious to discuss not just the plan ahead
for the implementation but I would also like to talk about the
contingencies if everything doesn't go exactly as planned.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the recognition. I will yield
back the time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. That concludes
the opening statements. As usual, all members' written opening
statements will be made a part of the record.
I would like to ask unanimous consent to submit seven
documents for the record: a statement on ICD-10 from the
American Hospital Association; a letter of support from the
ICD-10 Coalition; a statement from the Premier Healthcare
Alliance on ICD-10; comments from the American Medical
Association; comments from the American Academy of Dermatology
Association; statement from the American Academy of Orthopedic
Surgeons; and a statement from Precyse, a leader in performance
management and technology focused on health information
management. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Pitts. We have one panel before us today. I will
introduce them at this time in the order that they speak: Dr.
Edward Burke from the Beyer Medical Group; Mr. Rich Averill,
Director of Public Policy at 3M Health Information Systems; Ms.
Sue Bowman, Senior Director for Coding Policy and Compliance at
American Health Information Management Association; Ms. Kristi
Matus, Chief Financial and Administrative Officer at Athena
Health; Ms. Carmella Bocchino, Executive Vice President,
Clinical Affairs and Strategic Planning at America's Health
Insurance Plans; Dr. William Jefferson Terry, a Member of the
American Urological Association, a Physician at Urology and
Oncology Specialists; and Dr. John Hughes, Professor of
Medicine at Yale University.
Thank you all for coming. Your written statements will be
made a part of the record. You will each be given 5 minutes to
summarize your testimony, and we will start with you, Dr.
Burke. You are recognized, 5 minutes for your summary.

STATEMENTS OF EDWARD BURKE, M.D., BEYER MEDICAL GROUP; RICHARD
F. AVERILL, DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC POLICY, 3M HEALTH INFORMATION
SYSTEMS; SUE BOWMAN, SENIOR DIRECTOR, CODING POLICY AND
COMPLIANCE, AMERICAN HEALTH INFORMATION MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION;
KRISTI A. MATUS, CHIEF FINANCIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER,
ATHENA HEALTH; CARMELLA BOCCHINO, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT,
CLINICAL AFFAIRS AND STRATEGIC PLANNING, AMERICA'S HEALTH
INSURANCE PLANS; WILLIAM JEFFERSON TERRY, SR., M.D.,
LEGISLATIVE AFFAIRS COMMITTEE MEMBER, AMERICAN UROLOGICAL
ASSOCIATION; AND JOHN S. HUGHES, M.D., PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE,
YALE SCHOOL OF MEDICINE

STATEMENT OF EDWARD BURKE

Mr. Burke. Good morning, and thank you for the opportunity
to share our journey into ICD-10. My name is Dr. Edward Burke.
I practice internal medicine in a small, rural community in
Missouri with a population of about 4,000 people. I work with a
family practice physician, three nurse practitioners, and a
mental health provider. We see patients of all ages.
Providers face unique challenges while serving in rural
areas due to accessibility and lack of resources. The
challenges to running a successful business in healthcare can
be just as difficult for the same reasons. The information
highway often overlooks the side roads. In an industry full of
rules and regulations, it is imperative to keep abreast of
anything new coming down the pipe. Being out of the loop often
means being left behind.
ICD-10 has been on the horizon for several years now. We
were ready for it, and our software vendor was ready for it.
When the date was postponed, we moved forward. We believed the
implementation of ICD-10 would eventually happen and that we
would be even more prepared. With all the changes coming in
healthcare, this was one we would tackle in full confidence.
What we were unprepared for was how seamless it was. On a busy
Monday morning, October 7, 2013, we took on ICD-10 and we
haven't looked back. We did not have special training. We did
not spend any money in preparation. We did not see less
patients and our practice did not suffer. As providers, it was
not frustrating or scary. It just was.
Why did this work so well for us? A combination of things
in our opinion, most of all teamwork and leadership. We have
providers who work well with each other and with the rest of
the staff. We are a close-knit medical office family,
understanding that we are only as strong as our weakest
employee.
It is important to have a leader on the staff that is
progressive and knowledgeable about what is coming, someone who
comes prepared with a plan of action. No office should be
without a professional practice manager, one who has
certification to back up what years of experience has given.
The relationship between professional practice managers and
physicians is critical and often means the difference in
success and failure.
Associations such as PAHCOM offer practice managers the
knowledge needed to navigate through the many changes in rules
and regulations. Our industry is riddled with what you can do
and what you cannot do. PAHCOM provides access to information
critical to running a successful medical office.
The other prominent factor was our software. We chose to
implement highly effective software when we made the decision
to transition to electronic medical records. Our practice
manager looked at some of the things coming in the near future
and chose software that would grow and expand to what we would
need and that would be ready when we needed it. The road to
ICD-10 was driven by our EHR vendor. They extended an offer to
us to be a part of a pilot program for implementing ICD-10. We
were very happy to be a part of it. Our thinking was, it gives
us time to play with it and learn it before it really counts.
We had no idea how easy it was going to be. We just wanted to
take advantage of every possible source of information before
each stroke counted financially. We did not feel we could be
too prepared. We were as apprehensive as everyone else.
Communication is the most important tool in eliminating errors,
providing quality care and improving outcomes. There are
several pieces that must come together, with the same
information, in order to complete one simple procedure.
Speaking the same language is crucial to patient care. ICD-
10 is that language. As all processes change and improve over
time, so should our diagnosing. ICD-10 provides clear, concise
descriptions of the problem a patient is having. The
specifications narrow margins of error since the picture is
clearer. The drill-down structure of the system provides an
accurate description of the problem.
As the world becomes ever smaller it is important to see
healthcare with a broader view. Even in our small community, it
is not uncommon for patients to be traveling outside of the
country. It is important to understand that we are affected by
the health of locations outside our homes. To speak the same
healthcare language is imperative. As a Nation, we are behind.
As an industry, we are behind. As healthcare providers, we can
do better. We must be open to change and to the possibility
that a different way can work. ICD-10 is truly better than what
we currently have. The benefits to ICD-10 have been well touted
as well as the drawbacks. We do not claim to have to have the
answers or formula that will work for every provider situation
but it worked for us.
We used ICD-9 on a Friday and ICD-10 on the following
Monday. We are very pleased with our decision to keep using
ICD-10 and encourage others to support this move. Accuracy and
positive outcomes are of course important goals in patient
care. Fine-tuning diagnoses help paint a clearer picture of
what is happening with a patient.
The important thing to understand is that ICD-10 helps, not
hinders, patient care. There are many issues that are debatable
in healthcare today. Anything that so clearly helps the patient
should not be one of them. ICD-10 should move forward.
Healthcare moves fast. You cannot blink. Putting off ICD-10 is
not blinking; it is closing your eyes.
We do not wish to discredit rational objections to
transitions to ICD-10. Each situation will present its own
pains and struggles. We just wish to share our story and maybe
ease some lingering fear. It wasn't hard, it wasn't expensive
and it wasn't time consuming. Clinical documentation did not
change. We spend the same amount of time documenting to support
ICD-10 as we did with ICD-9. We did nothing different. We use
it every day. It is a normal part of our encounter with a
patient. The most important issue was that it was not
disruptive to patients.
We strongly support full implementation of ICD-10. We
believe ICD-10 is a better communication tool and we believe it
will truly be a benefit in the care of patients.
Thank you again for the opportunity to share our
experiences.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Burke follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Dr. Burke.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Averill, 5 minutes for an
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD F. AVERILL

Mr. Averill. 3M appreciates the opportunity to testify this
morning.
ICD-10: We need it. We are ready. This is the message I
want to make sure that I convey to the committee today.
The current system used for reporting diagnosis and
procedures, ICD-9, was developed nearly 40 years ago. When ICD-
9 was developed, you could smoke in a patient's room. There was
no personal computer. There was no Internet. Minimally invasive
procedures were not even envisioned.
ICD-9 reflects medicine of a bygone era. With ICD-9, we
often don't know what is really wrong with the patient or what
procedures were performed. ICD-9 codes like a repair of an
unspecified artery by an unspecified technique are virtually
useless for establishing fair payment levels and evaluating
outcomes.
I was one of the original developers of the DRGs at Yale
University. Since the inception of the Medicaid Inpatient
Prospective Payment System by President Reagan and Speaker
O'Neill, I have worked with CMS to maintain and update the
DRGs. The biggest frustration with DRG updates is that proposed
DRG modifications from the healthcare industry often cannot
even be evaluated because there are no ICD-9 codes available.
Congress rightly wants to move to a healthcare system that
focuses more on value than volume. I am here to tell you, you
can't do that with ICD-9. You need ICD-10. It is time to have
our diagnosis and procedure coding system reflect modern
medicine.
The RAND report commissioned by the National Committee on
Vital and Health statistics concluded that the ICD-10 benefits
from more accurate payments, fewer rejected claims, fewer
fraudulent claims, better understanding of new procedures, and
improved disease management would far exceed the cost of
implementation. It is time to start realizing those benefits.
The industry is ready. The transition to ICD-10 is
supported by the vast majority of the healthcare community--
hospitals, health plans, coding experts, physician office
managers, vendors, medical device manufacturers, health
informatics specialists, and some in the physician community.
All support the adoption of ICD-10 in October of 2015.
Unfortunately, the uncertainty over the ICD-10
implementation date means the whole industry has to maintain
fully functional systems in both ICD-9 and ICD-10. Maintaining
redundant ICD-9 and ICD-10 systems is very costly. Any further
delay means more wasted cost. Last year's delay is estimated to
have cost the healthcare industry $6.5 billion.
Perhaps the biggest challenge to a smooth transition to
ICD-10 is the uncertainty of the implementation date. It is
simply time to end that uncertainty and allow the whole
healthcare industry to move forward with a smooth transition.
Questions have been raised concerning the ability of CMS to
move forward with ICD-10. For CMS and its fiscal
intermediaries, the implementation of ICD-10 is primarily an
update to its claims processing system. While admittedly CMS
has encountered some difficulties with newly constructed
consumer-facing Web sites, CMS has extensively experience
implementing significant updates to its claims processing
system. As the recent GAO report demonstrates, CMS has done
extensive ICD-10 planning, preparation, testing and outreach.
For example, in order to facilitate vendor and hospital ICD-10
preparation, CMS made available a fully operational version of
the ICD-10 MSDRG software more than a year ago. Providers,
clearinghouse, payers including CMS are all testing and will
continue to test. Testing results show that the system is ready
for those who have taken the time to prepare.
As I said in the beginning, ICD-10, we need it, we are
ready. As a member of the Coalition for ICD-10, we strongly
oppose any further delay to the adoption of ICD-10. The
Coalition stands ready to help in any way to ensure a
successful transition to ICD-10 in October of 2015. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Averill follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes Ms. Bowman, 5 minutes for her summary.

STATEMENT OF SUE BOWMAN

Ms. Bowman. Good morning. On behalf of the American Health
Information Management Association, or AHIMA, I would like to
thank you for the opportunity to testify today on the very
important topic of ICD-10 implementation.
Implementation of ICD-10 is long overdue. Never before in
U.S. history has the same version of ICD been used for more
than 30 years. ICD-9 is obsolete and no longer reflects current
clinical knowledge, contemporary medical terminology or the
modern practice of medicine.
U.S. healthcare data is being allowed to deteriorate while
the demand continues to increase for high-quality data, data
that can support healthcare initiatives such as the meaningful
use of electronic health record Incentive Program, new payment
models, and other initiatives aimed at improving quality and
patient safety and decreasing costs. ICD-10 also improves
tracking and surveillance of pandemic threats such as Ebola,
which does not have its own ICD-9 code.
The number of ICD-10 codes has been raised as a concern.
The expanded clinical detail in ICD-10 was requested by the
medical community because these clinical distinctions were felt
to be important to capture. A number of physician organizations
continues to actively participate in the ongoing maintenance of
ICD-10 by requesting additional clinical detail. Ninety-five
percent of the requests for new ICD-10 comes have come from the
medical community, especially the physician organizations.
Just as the size of a dictionary or phone book does not
make it more difficult to look up a word or a phone number, an
increased number of codes does not make it harder to find the
right code. Increased specificity, clinical accuracy, and a
logical structure actually facilitate rather than complicate
the use of a code set. Also, no individual provider will use
all of the ICD-10 codes but rather he will use a subset of
codes applicable to his clinical practice and patient
population. And nearly half of the increase in codes is due
solely to the capture of the side of the body affected by the
clinical condition.
The specificity of the external cause codes has also been
raised as a concern. External cause codes, or the reason why an
injury occurred, are not unique to ICD-10. They exist in ICD-9
as well. Many providers are not currently required to report
external cause codes unless a provider is subject to a State-
based external cause code reporting mandate or these codes are
required for a particular patient circumstance. Reporting of
external cause codes in either ICD-10 or ICD-9 is not required.
And even when external cause codes are required, many of them
are for use in very specific circumstances. Most providers have
probably had no occasion to assign the existing ICD-9 code for
an accident involving injury to the occupant of a spacecraft
but the fact that such a code exists has not made ICD-9 more
difficult to use.
Many small providers have been concerned about anticipated
high cost and complexity of the ICD-10 transition. However,
recent data such as the results of a survey of small physician
offices conducted by the Professional Association of Health
Care Office Management, or PAHCOM, that were just released
yesterday, have shown the cost and burden to be much less than
earlier predictions. And physician practices do not need to
implement the ICD-10 procedure code or ICD-10 PCS as CPT codes
will continue to be used to report physician and outpatient
services.
Training is one of the factors in the cost of
implementation but the extent of ICD-10 training needed depends
on the individual's role. Physicians will primarily require
education around the clinical documentation needed to support
ICD-10 codes. Additional documentation requirements have often
been cited as a major contributor to the cost of ICD-10
implementation. However, even without the ICD-10 transition,
there is a growing demand for more complete and accurate
documentation, and the impact of clinical documentation
improvement efforts can be mitigated through the use of
electronic documentation capture tools such as documentation
prompts in electronic health record systems. Also, many of the
clinical details found in ICD-10 are typically already
documented such as laterality.
Free and low-cost ICD-10 educational implementation
resources are widely available from multiple sources, giving
all stakeholders the ability to be fully ready by the
compliance date. Each delay in ICD-10 implementation has taken
an enormous toll on the healthcare industry including
significant additional costs, diversion of ICD-10 budgets and
personnel, lack of employment prospects for students trained in
a code set not yet in use, and many lost opportunities to use
better data to improve health care and reduce costs.
The healthcare industry has had more than 6 years to
prepare. It is time to stop delaying the transition to ICD-10.
We need ICD-10, and we are ready.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement and additional material submitted
by Ms. Bowman follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Ms. Bowman.
At this point the Chair recognizes Ms. Matus, 5 minutes for
her summary.

STATEMENT OF KRISTI A. MATUS

Ms. Matus. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Green, members of
the subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to share our
perspective on the important issue of ICD-10 implementation and
its implications for our broader, bipartisan health reform
efforts.
My name is Kristi Matus, and I am the Chief Financial and
Administrative Officer for Athena Health, a provider of cloud-
based health information technology services to more than
60,000 care providers nationwide in all 50 States, connecting
care for over 60 million patients.
Every one of our clients is on a single national Internet-
based network that we use to connect with them in real time on
a daily basis like Amazon, Facebook or Google. As you may know,
this is a paradigm that is all too rare in health care.
Based on our experience with partnering with medical
practices to improve efficiency and outcomes, our point of view
is simple: it is decision time. Maintain the current date for
ICD-10 implementation or cancel it once and for all. Do not
allow another delay.
Our Nation has an extraordinarily ambitious, largely
bipartisan healthcare agenda. From the effort to transition the
Nation's care providers to modern technology to the clear
imperative of shifting from a costly fee-for-service model to
value-based delivery payment structures, we have collectively
resolved to tackle a series of very difficult complex problems,
all with the idea of reducing costs and taking better care of
patients. To cite just one particularly timely example, the
21st Century Cures package of initiatives championed by many on
this committee has tremendous potential to improve health care,
but many of its components assume and depend upon continued
technological evolution.
I am not here to tell you that ICD-10 is a silver bullet,
but on the spectrum of the challenges we face in health care,
ICD-10 is a relatively easy one, the technological equivalent
of an upgrade from a simple dictionary to a more complex one.
It will be orders of magnitude less difficult than achieving
the changes in human behavior necessary for the Meaningful Use
program to succeed or implementing the fundamental evolution in
healthcare business models necessary for truly accountable
care. Repeatedly delaying the implementation of relatively
simple changes calls into question whether we as a country are
truly committed to improving health care and potentially
undermines the success of our national healthcare agenda.
Fortunately, we know that ICD-10 is absolutely possible.
Much of the developed world has made the switch years ago
including, for example, the Czech Republic, Korea and Thailand,
where, according to the World Bank, the average annual
healthcare spend per capita is $215 compared to nearly $9,000
in the United States.
At Athena Health, we have already completed the work
necessary to ensure that our clients were ready for last year's
deadline as they will be ready for this year's. In fact, we
financially guarantee ICD-10 readiness for each of our tens of
thousands of clients. We are not the only solution.
Many of our clients practice in exactly the kinds of small
medical groups that have expressed significant concerns about
the changes required to adapt to ICD-10. Each new delay only
multiplies the financial and emotional cost of such practices,
who struggle not only with the implications of a possible code
switch but with the persistent uncertainty created by repeated
delays. Fear creates stasis, inhibiting progress not only on
ICD-10 but also on the other more important systemic reforms
that I discussed a few moments ago.
Athenahealth clients have no reason to fear. Because we are
Internet based, we will throw a virtual switch at the moment
ICD-10 requirement goes into effect, and every one of our
clients will be upgraded at that same moment.
There is a solution to the perceived ICD-10 problem, and we
certainly are not the only ones that can provide it. Repeated
delays of supposedly firm deadlines both in ICD-10 and in other
health IT programs like Meaningful Use make it all too easy for
some in our industry to doubt future deadlines. Delays
unintentionally create incentives for some vendors to forego
the work necessary to prepare for ICD-10, confident that their
failure to prepare will not harm their clients because we will
continue to kick the can and not really move forward with
reforms necessary to improve efficiency and patient care. This
is a damaging cycle of nonperformance that will only be broken
when the Government resolves to stick to the deadlines it
communicates.
Either ICD-10 is worth doing or it is not. If it is, then
stick to the deadline this year. There will be some disruption
but our industry and the Nation's care providers will respond
and adapt. If you conclude that the benefits of ICD-10 do not
outweigh the potential risks, then cancel the program and focus
legislation more aggressively on the few fundamental changes in
health care that are necessary to cure our current
dysfunctional system.
On behalf of Athena Health's 60,000-plus care provider
clients and their many thousands of colleagues, I urge you in
the strongest possible terms, do not again kick this can down
the road. Pull the trigger or pull the plug.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Matus follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady and now
recognizes Ms. Bocchino, 5 minutes for your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF CARMELLA BOCCHINO

Ms. Bocchino. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Pitts and
Ranking Member Green and members of the subcommittee. I am
Carmella Bocchino, Executive Vice President of America's Health
Insurance Plans, the trade association for the health insurance
industry. I appreciate the opportunity to testify about the
importance of implementing the ICD-10 system on October 1st
without any further delay.
I think everyone here today agrees that we need more value
in our Nation's healthcare dollar and we need a 21st century
healthcare system. To support this goal, our members believe it
is critically important for the healthcare system to move
forward now with the ICD system to deliver greater value for
consumers and improvements in quality improvement, and
implementing ICD-10 under the current timetable will establish
a strong foundation for allowing health plans and providers to
identify and report conditions and medical treatments in more
specific ways, ultimately leading to more effective measures of
quality and health outcomes.
Delaying implementation will increase cost and impose
significant administrative challenges across the entire
healthcare system. Our industry processes millions of claims,
eligibility requests, payments and other administrative and
clinical transactions on a daily basis. Recognizing the
migration to the ICD-10 code set has a major impact on all
these activities. Our members have devoted a tremendous amount
of time and resources to be ready by October 1, 2015. This
includes extended outreach to healthcare providers as well as
their vendors, working with them to provide education and
implementation tools, crosswalks, practice management upgrades,
and instructions and appropriate coding based on the provider's
area of practice.
Our written testimony provides specific examples of steps
many of our members are taking to prepare for ICD-10
implementation. For example, completed internal systems testing
to assure successful use of ICD-10 on all claims and other
transactions and engage with providers, hospitals and physician
groups and their vendors to do this external testing, ensuring
end-to-end testing of submitted claims. We have conducted
readiness surveys to assess partners' familiarity with the
coding system and the expected process for submitting compliant
transactions and to see what support is continued to be needed,
developed informational articles and resource materials that
provide detailed information for healthcare providers on ICD-10
and how to incorporate the new coding system into their
practices. They have updated clinical policies to reflect the
new ICD-10 codes and provided this information to their
healthcare provider partners. And some members have actually
established a professional readiness portal for ICD-10 that
allows hospitals, medical group systems, clearinghouses and
individual providers to engage in testing and check their own
readiness by submitting claims based on specific episode-of-
care scenarios. These activities have been supplemented by
significant efforts undertaken by HHS Road to 10 Initiative and
private stakeholders as the American Health Information
Management Association, many professional societies and others.
From a quality improvement perspective, ICD code sets
provide substantial more specificity and precision in defining
a diagnosis or procedure. It will make it easier for healthcare
providers and researchers to identify the correct code for a
diagnosis or procedure and document medical applications. This
expanded detail compared to the ICD-9 system is a fundamental
building block for payment reform and will enable providers and
payers to track health outcomes more effectively.
Because the ICD-10 system offers more granularity to
identify disease, public health surveillance will be better
equipped to analyze and interpret data, thereby providing early
warning signals for impending public health emergencies,
monitoring the epidemiology of public health problems, and
informing public health policy.
In closing, I want to note that ICD-10 already has been
delayed three times, as has already been stated. Another delay
would bring significant cost and additional administrative
challenges for health plans and providers that have been and
are ready to implement, penalizing those who have invested the
time and resources necessary to implement on time. Further
delays also would prevent providers and payers from leveraging
ICD-10 to improve patient care and quality outcomes.
Without the more accurate, reliable data that will be
facilitated by ICD-10, ongoing efforts to a transition to a
payment system based on quality and outcomes would not achieve
their full potential. These outcomes both in terms of financial
cost and lost opportunities are unacceptable.
For that reason, we strongly urge the committee to support
the current schedule of implementing ICD-10 codes on October
1st.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Bocchino follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady and now
recognizes Dr. Terry, 5 minutes for your summary.

STATEMENT OF WILLIAM JEFFERSON TERRY, SR.

Dr. Terry. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Green, members of
the subcommittee, my name is Dr. Jeff Terry, and I am
testifying today as a member of the American Urological
Association and as a practicing urologist who puts in 13 hours
a day taking care of patients in Mobile, Alabama. We thank you
for this hearing very much.
The AUA has a membership of 18,000 physicians and is also a
member of the Alliance of Specialty Medicine. During the last
Congress, I had the privilege of moderating an Alliance
roundtable on ICD-10 where members of CMS were actually
present.
The AUA enters this debate on ICD-10 as an advocate for the
patients and the physicians. As you hear testimony today, keep
in mind the concerns of practicing physicians who want to
preserve the all-important patient-physician relationship and
don't put the computer and statistics in the middle of this
relationship.
I know that you will weigh any proven patient care
advantages of ICD-10 against the consequences of a flawed
implementation. Ultimately, the benefits should outweigh the
risks.
The ICD system was designed for the purposes of gathering
statistical and epidemiological data. The United States is the
only country that uses it as part of the billing system. ICD-10
is planned to replace ICD-9 all in one day. Our present system
has 13,000 codes where ICD-10 will have anywhere between 68,000
and 87,000 codes, and the United States is the only country
that uses all of these codes. The other countries use about a
fifth of that number. Experts estimate physicians should plan
on a 3 to 4 percent increase in time per patient encounter
merely to document the correct code. The coding guidelines for
ICD-10 are more complex, and those who do not fully understand
them will fail to document correctly and not be paid.
Proponents of ICD-10 say the increased specificity will
improve clinical data and improve quality. These potential
benefits are not documented. However, the cost of ICD-10 is
well documented for physicians who already face increased cost
in complying with EHR incentive programs, the PQRS Quality
program, the Value-Based Payment Modifier Program, not to
mention the annual threat of SGR cuts and the 2 percent
sequestration cut that we already have.
Now we are faced with the costly unfunded mandate of ICD-10
that will certainly put some physicians out of business.
Physicians are overwhelmed with the tsunami of regulations that
have significantly increased the work for our practices.
Physicians are retiring early, which could leave countless
number of patients without a doctor. Based on data in other
countries, all physicians will be forced to reduce the number
of patients that they see when ICD-10 is implemented, which can
last for more than a year, resulting in less efficient
practices and making it difficult for patients to get the care
they need.
An independent study last year found significant cost
associated with upgrading the hardware, the software, the
training of personnel and the conversion of ICD-10 ranging from
$50,000 to $250,000 for small practices and several million
dollars for large practices. CMS states that physician consider
getting a line of credit to cover cash-flow problems and
expenses. Others have suggested the need for a 3- to 6-month
cushion. This is not possible for most practices that have very
few assets to quality for these significant loans.
While CMS is in the midst of end-to-end testing, it is
primarily being conducted by volunteers who are prepared. We
worry that these results do not paint an accurate picture of
the current state of provider readiness.
Ladies and gentlemen, no matter what the coalition or the
coding industry says, the vast majority of America's physicians
in private practice are not prepared for this ICD
implementation all in one day. The continual threat of Medicare
payment reductions, the time-consuming CMS quality programs,
the new EHR systems, Medicare compliance programs occupy
physicians so much that they don't have the time or resources
to prepare for ICD-10. It is harder and harder to keep the
patient as the primary focus in our daily activities. ICD-10 is
viewed as another expensive distraction with little
demonstrated value to improving patient care. The huge costs
certainly outweigh the very few benefits as far as patient care
is concerned.
Our focus today is not centered solely on the financial
investment made by large health insurers, health systems and
other entities preparing for this transition. Our focus is
about our Government providing an environment where physicians
and healthcare professionals can devote all of their energies
to medical issues for the benefit of their patients. To that
end, I urge Congress to delay implementation of ICD-10 and
appoint a committee to better study the risks and the benefits
with the patient in mind. If a delay is not possible, then
consider a dual ICD-10 option permitting physicians to make the
transition so we can survive in our practices.
Thank you so much for your commitment and your leadership
on this issue. ICD-11 is probably 5 years away so we need a
policy for appropriate coding transitions in order to avoid
this problem again.
I am happy to answer any questions that you see fit.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Terry follows:] \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Additional material submitted by Dr. Terry has been retained in
committee files and also is available at  http://docs.house.gov/
meetings/IF/IF14/20150211/102940/HHRG-114-IF14-Wstate-TerryW-20150211-
SD001.pdf.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes Dr. Hughes, 5 minutes for your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JOHN S. HUGHES

Dr. Hughes. Thank you, sir. Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, first let me just interject that I very respectfully
appreciate Dr. Terry's comments about the stresses of the
regulatory burden placed on physicians, but I would offer that
ICD-10 is not the major problem and is probably a trivial
problem compared to the other issues that confront practices
today.
I am a general internist. I am Professor of Medicine. I
teach medical students and medical residents. I see patients on
my own and I conduct research in areas of quality assurance.
One of the research areas I have focused on is the study of
complications of care, with the view that if we can accurately
identify the factors and circumstances that account for
complications, then we will be able to reduce their occurrence.
In fact, several States, Maryland for one, are now adjusting
hospital payments based on some of this research.
The usefulness and reliability of this kind of research
depends very much on how precisely we can identify the
specifics of the complication and exactly how they are treated.
Although we have made considerable progress in addressing
complications, other quality issues in the past several years,
complication rates remain unacceptably high. The ICD-9 coding
system fails to provide the level of detail needed to expand
these efforts. I have been personally frustrated many times at
ICD-9's inability to specify the exact nature of a
complication, its extent, its location, and how it was treated.
Now, as an example, let me ask you to consider a 74-year-
old man who fell, sustaining a puncture wound that severed his
left femoral artery. He was rushed to surgery, where the
damaged portion of the artery was replaced with a synthetic
graft. These events are coded in ICD-9 as a diagnosis of
``injury to the common femoral artery'' and the procedure code
is ``resection of vessel with replacement.'' There is no
mention that the injury was a major laceration on the left
side, or that the type of replacement was a synthetic graft,
all of which is included in the ICD-1.
This lack of detail is even more obvious when it comes to
complications. Consider the same man developed bleeding at the
site of the graft on the day after surgery. He was returned to
the operating room, his incision was reopened and the graft
repaired at the site of the leak. ICD-9 codes this as
``mechanical complication of other vascular device or implant
or graft'' and the procedure code is ``revision of vascular
procedure.'' So all we know is that there has been some type of
complication that required some type of surgery, and that is
about it. The ICD-10 code provides a much more complete
picture, telling us that the complication was a hemorrhage,
exactly where it occurred, and that the revision was a re-
suture of the graft using an open approach. This is but one
example. There are numerous throughout the ICD-9 system, and
the benefits of the ICD-10 providing the extra detail.
Another major flaw in ICD-9 is that it does not have the
capacity to expand to provide new codes describing new
treatments and technologies. This means that new techniques
such as minimally invasive surgery, which have been
increasingly and successfully used in cardiac surgery, and are
rapidly expanding into other surgical fields, cannot be
adequately described using the simplistic four-digit and
sometimes five-digit structure of ICD-9. Minimally invasive
surgeries use smaller incisions, which results in fewer
complications, less discomfort, more rapid healing and shorter
hospital stays.
Now, we don't need ICD-10 in order to do minimally invasive
surgery but these new procedures will not be adequately
described if we continue to use ICD-9. They will have to be
described in general terms or they will have to be included in
codes that contain open surgical approaches, resulting in
insufficient detail to track their increasing use.
The structure of ICD-10 allows this important information
to be captured in a systematic manner, and can be readily
expanded to incorporate descriptions of new discoveries and
treatments when they become available. This capacity is
critical to track and assess the efficacy of these new
technologies.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Hughes follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. Thank you all
for that excellent testimony. I will begin the questioning and
recognize myself for 5 minutes for that purpose.
I would like to ask a series of questions to all of you, so
please respond yes or no to these, and we will just go down the
line. We will start with you, Dr. Burke.
In your opinion, do you believe we are ready for ICD-10
implementation, yes or no?
Dr. Burke. Yes.
Mr. Pitts. Mr. Averill?
Mr. Averill. Yes.
Mr. Pitts. Ms. Bowman?
Ms. Bowman. Yes.
Mr. Pitts. Ms. Matus?
Ms. Matus. Yes.
Mr. Pitts. Ms. Bocchino?
Ms. Bocchino. Yes.
Mr. Pitts. Dr. Terry?
Dr. Terry. No.
Mr. Pitts. Dr. Hughes?
Dr. Hughes. Yes, sir.
Mr. Pitts. All right. Thank you. Again, all of you, in your
opinion, should Congress oppose attempts to delay ICD-10
implementation? Dr. Burke?
Dr. Burke. No.
Mr. Averill. It was a double negative.
Mr. Pitts. Let me repeat the question. In your opinion,
should Congress oppose attempts to delay ICD-10 implementation?
Mr. Averill. They should oppose.
Mr. Pitts. Yes. OK.
Ms. Bowman?
Ms. Bowman. Yes.
Mr. Pitts. Ms. Matus?
Ms. Matus. Yes.
Mr. Pitts. Mrs. Bocchino?
Ms. Bocchino. Yes.
Mr. Pitts. Dr. Terry?
Dr. Terry. No, sir.
Mr. Pitts. Dr. Hughes?
Dr. Hughes. Yes.
Mr. Pitts. All right. Again, down the line, Dr. Burke, we
will start with you. In your opinion, what impact would delay
have on your industry and the patients you serve? You can
elaborate a little bit.
Dr. Burke. Well, I think, you know, the ICD-10 is a very
good communication tool. Either you can use the ICD-10 code or
you would have to use it in your plan. You would have to type
out everything in your plan, so actually it flows a lot more
smoothly.
Mr. Pitts. OK. What impact would delay have on your
industry or patients you serve, Mr. Averill?
Mr. Averill. Well, certainly it would dramatically increase
the cost of being prepared to ultimately move forward. It would
also continue to compromise our national data in terms of
having the necessary information to evaluate many of the things
that the panel talked about, and so what is most concerning to
me is the dramatic increase in cost of any delay.
Mr. Pitts. Mrs. Bowman?
Ms. Bowman. I would say certainly the cost. Our members are
health management professionals who have been trained and
retrained and have to keep their training updated to maintain
their skills for whenever ICD-10 is implemented so the cost and
also I would agree with Rich's comment about the delay and
being able to use the better delay.
Mr. Pitts. Mrs. Matus?
Ms. Matus. Countless care providers, hospitals and other
institutions have already put untold thousands of dollars into
preparing for ICD-10, so those are the hard costs. The soft
costs of, you know, the uncertainty which is magnified by each
delay is unquantifiable.
Mr. Pitts. Mrs. Bocchino?
Ms. Bocchino. So I will echo what others have said but I
will also add that a lot of times additional documentation is
required by providers under ICD-9 in order to process a claim.
Because of the specificity of the ICD-10 codes, much of that
documentation will go away and therefore we believe it will
actually reduce some of the burden on providers.
Mr. Pitts. Dr. Terry?
Dr. Terry. I know I am in the minority on this panel but I
want you to know, I represent thousands of doctors. Speaker
Boehner has four boxes of thousands of letters in his office on
this subject. I have some at the table.
You know where I stand. It has the potential to do
irreparable harm to the patients and the physicians who can't
implement this the way industry wants us to. You know, we don't
treat by statistics. I mean, this is just something that gets
in our way of taking care of our patients, and it has to be
done the right way.
Mr. Pitts. All right. Dr. Hughes, what impact would delay
have on your industry or patients you serve?
Dr. Hughes. I agree that this has to be done in the right
way. Delay means a couple things. One, if physicians are
interested in keeping up with what is happening and learning
the effectiveness of new treatments, we need to have better
data. So that will--if we don't implement this, we are not
going to be having the optimum amount of data.
Mr. Pitts. All right. We are going to have to keep going. I
have a couple more questions.
Dr. Burke, does ICD-10 bring any value to the patient
community? It is one thing to improve systems operations for
insurers and hospitals but how does this matter to patients?
Dr. Burke. I think, you know, for instance, if you use an
ICD-9 code and a patient calls a couple days later, like if
they come in with leg pain, you know which leg it is. You will
have to ask them again where their pain was, but if you use an
ICD-10 code, you can actually localize the pain to either
extremity. So it is a lot better communication tool.
Mr. Pitts. Now, we heard a little bit mentioned about ICD-
11. Ms. Matus, what are your thoughts on, you know, just wait
for it instead of forcing people to go through ICD-10?
Ms. Matus. So, you know, again, we think this is either
important to do or it is not. If we were convinced that the
United States that we as a group would take a leadership
position in moving forward with ICD-11, then maybe miss ICD-10.
But without a firm commitment to be the leaders in a new coding
methodology that is still 5 years away and frankly needed
today, that seems like a bridge too far.
Mr. Pitts. All right. My time is expired. Let me make it
clear as chairman of this subcommittee, I support ICD-10,
moving forward to ICD-10 rather than another delay. We need to
end the uncertainty, in my opinion, move forward to full
implementation of ICD-10.
At this time I will recognize the ranking member, Mr.
Green, 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to ask
unanimous consent to submit for the record the article showing
ICD-10 implementation cost in small physician practices are
dramatically lower than expected.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Terry, I know that you, coming from Texas, you probably
feel like you are the Alamo.
Dr. Terry. I have my Kevlar suit on.
Mr. Green. And I appreciate urologists. I work a lot like
all of our committee members on the committee work a lot with
our specialties because delivery of health care. The biggest
issue I hear from them is not ICD and obviously it is SGR, and
I have served with some really great members from Mobile. You
have a beautiful city. Sonny Callahan was a good friend and Joe
Bonner, and you have a history of sending good hardworking
Members to Congress from Mobile.
Mr. Averill, you mentioned that ICD-10 testing is still
ongoing. For those who are preparing the transition, do you
expect ICD-10 implementation to run smoothly come October 1st?
Mr. Averill. Yes, I do. I think there has been extensive
opportunity both on the commercial payer side and the CMS side
to do end-to-end testing. CMS has a whole series of end-to-end
opportunities for those who are prepared and are willing to
participate.
I want to emphasize that for CMS, this is a relatively
routine update to their claims processing system. This is their
core competency. I submitted in my testimony that they have had
some difficulties with consumer-facing Web sites but this is
their core competency, namely updating the claims processing
system.
Mr. Green. Well, I hope they are doing some run-throughs
before October 1st so we don't have what we had when some of us
wanted the Affordable Care Act to roll out much more easily.
What about those folks who haven't begun to prepare for
transition? Can they still be ready by October 1st? Here we are
in February.
Mr. Averill. I have been very impressed with how the market
has responded with educational material out there, much of it
for free. The market has really responded. Most vendors have
converted their systems to ICD-10 and are by and large making
that available to their clients for free, and so the whole
infrastructure is there on a much more sophisticated basis than
it was even 1 or 2 years ago, so I remain confident that those
who are lagging behind at this particular point in time if they
are willing to expend some effort to get prepared, those
resources are readily available.
Mr. Green. I have another question for you, and I only have
a couple minutes left. You testified the effect of the current
ICD-9 coding system with diagnostic related groups, or DRGs.
DRGs are used to classify hospital cases into groups for the
purpose of reimbursement. Does the fact that ICD-10 is almost
40 years old have an effect on DRGs?
Mr. Averill. Absolutely. As I said, it is not uncommon to
have reasonable requests from the industry suggesting an MS DRG
change. Very often if you look at the Federal Register, you
will see CMS saying we had this suggestion, unfortunately we
weren't able to evaluate it because there is no ICD-9 codes to
evaluate that particular aspect.
Mr. Green. Who is most affected if the DRGs aren't modified
property?
Mr. Averill. Well, I think the whole industry is--
hospitals' financial viability, reputations of individual
institutions because they are often used for evaluating--or a
component of evaluating quality of care. I think it is
pervasive throughout the industry. It is absolutely critical
that we keep MS DRGs up-to-date and reflective of today's
medicine.
Mr. Green. Ms. Bowman, what types of training and resources
go into preparing for ICD implementation and what is the cost
of delaying?
Ms. Bowman. The cost of the training that goes into
implementation has to do primarily with training coders on
using the code sets and other users in understanding what the
changes in the data are going to look like after the code sets
are implemented, and also changes to systems and those
personnel in understanding what changes need to be made.
Also, a big factor is clinical documentation improvement,
and so I would say the biggest factors are probably training
coders and then training physicians on improving their clinical
documentation, but we found that there is a growing marketplace
for tools in helping with the clinical documentation
improvement because ICD-10 actually lends itself better because
of its logic and specificity for those types of tools so that
is turning out to be not as burdensome as some had feared
initially.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the Chair Emeritus of the full committee, Mr. Barton
of Texas.
Mr. Barton. I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate you
holding this hearing. I think it is good to have transparency.
I would point out, in our memo for this hearing, we have a
coding error. The memo talks about that the International
Statistical Institute began in 1891 to begin the process of
creating an internationally recognized classification of
diseases. That is pretty cool. A hundred and 16 years ago they
started doing that, so we have our own coding problems on the
committee staff.
But in any event, I think it is pretty obvious when the
committee chair or the subcommittee chairman says that he
supports this, and he is the chairman, and the ranking member
seems to support it, that we are supportive. I haven't had a
chance to talk to either of those gentlemen, and I am not
opposed to going to ICD-10 but I do have some concerns, and
they are more at the CMS level than the panel, but I don't see
why it has to be an either/or. I don't see why CMS has to
arbitrarily say this is going to be the way it is come hell or
high water.
I don't know enough about the coding systems and the
computer programs and all that. I would have thought that ICD-
10 would build on ICD-9 and that they would be compatible so
that you didn't have to choose. Dr. Terry, is that not true? I
mean, are they so different that you couldn't use either one or
the other?
Dr. Terry. Well, the codes are very different. Yes, sir,
they don't--I mean, it is just not an exponential increase in
the codes but it is a mindset. It is different rules. It is
just totally different.
Mr. Barton. I don't have my Congressional phone with me.
This is my campaign phone. It is an iPhone. My Congressional
phone is still a BlackBerry, and nobody made me switch to this
phone for campaign purposes. As all the members up here know,
we have to separate our campaign communications from our
Congressional, and the iPhone seemed to be better, and so that
is what the campaign bought. But there is no FEC law that says
I have to. If I still wanted to use a BlackBerry on the
campaign, I could.
I will ask the doctor on the end here, I can't see your
nameplate, sir, but I listened to you. Why couldn't CMS provide
incentives to switch to--our Medicare, for that matter--to
switch to ICD-10 by payments, but if a family practitioner or a
doctor in a small practice didn't have the money or didn't want
to, you know, let them use ICD-9 and not--they might not be
reimbursed as much but they could still get something, and if
you were in a more specialized practice that needed more
complicated codes, do it that way so it is not an either/or.
Dr. Hughes. I am not a health economist or an
administrator. The idea of incentives is inherently appealing
to me, but I don't know, it seems to me like that would cause
lots of duplication of effort on the part of CMS, which might
be prohibitively expensive, but that is just a question I am
raising. I can't answer that question definitely. Some of the
other folks on the panel may be able to.
Mr. Barton. Well, my point is, you know, you can make
things happen by punitive measures or you can make things
happen by incentives, and in this case, it looks like we are
trying to be punitive by saying no matter what, you have to do
it, and I don't know for the life of me if I am in whatever
business I am in, if I want to conduct my business on way, I
know I may be penalized by not being reimbursed as much or not
getting as timely a payment or something, but you know, I don't
know why we have to force people into a system that for
whatever purpose they just don't feel like they are ready to go
to.
Dr. Burke, do you have any comments on that?
Dr. Burke. I would say just in general, I mean, ICD-10 is a
lot better program than ICD-9. I mean, it makes it easier to
find the diagnosis, so actually would probably spend less time
in the room with the patient with an ICD-9 code.
Mr. Barton. Well, from an insurance perspective and from a
data information perspective, I agree with you, it is more
specific and all that, but from a practitioner perspective, I
am not sure that I am following that. I would like to see CMS
work with the user community at the provider level and come up
with a way to incentive it without telling them they had to do
it.
With that, Mr. Chairman, my time is expired and I yield
back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the lady from Florida, Ms. Castor, 5 minutes for
questions.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you to our experts for your testimony here today.
So what I understand is the International Classification of
Diseases coding system number 9 has been in place in the United
States since 1979. In 1990, a new classification system, number
10, was adopted. In 1996, the Congress gave general direction
for the United States to move towards that coding system. While
the United States has delayed it for many, many years, 38 other
countries have transitioned to that modern ICD-10 coding
system.
The United States is typically a world leader but it
appears that unfortunately that is not the case when it comes
to the modern coding system, and the problem is that based on
all the evidence I have seen, that has been very costly for our
country and for practitioners. A number of studies have
concluded--HHS did an analysis in 2014, the RAND Corporation
did an analysis, and we are working about billions of dollars
in the American healthcare system, and many of you have
testified today about the cost. So I would like to join my
colleagues in urging no more delays in the transition to ICD-
10, and especially I urge the leadership not to include delays
in must-pass bills, especially something as important as how we
pay doctors that see Medicare patients. Let us stick with the
October 1st deadline.
Another reason is since 1979, think about the changes in
health care that has been mentioned today. New medical devices,
new treatments have been developed, and our coding system has
to reflect modern medicine. The consensus, as I understand it,
is more specific codes will help us make great strides in
healthcare quality, and all of you have mentioned how important
it is for America to transition from paying for quantity of
care to quality of care, and it appears to me that more
specific data will help payers implement incentives for better
patient outcomes. Better specificity will help the providers
who we are increasingly holding accountable for patient safety,
readmission rates, patient outcomes.
So I would like to focus on a couple of things. I also
heard Dr. Hughes testify that the change in the codes will be
important to improvements in research, the importance of
identifying factors and circumstances that account for
complications of care in order to reduce their occurrence. Can
you talk a bit more about how ICD-10 will help with research
initiatives?
Dr. Hughes. The kind of research that I do and many other
people do in attempts to improve quality all depends on data.
That is what is needed. It has to be accurately recorded. It
has to be precise enough that actually makes some difference,
that it is specific enough, and with specific-enough data, you
can track patterns, you can track the introduction of new
procedures, and all that makes the quality of the research much
better and makes the results more accurate.
Ms. Castor. How does it make the quality much better in the
long run?
Dr. Hughes. Well, because you are able to identify specific
actions, you are able to identify specific new procedures. When
you have a new type of minimally invasive procedure, for
example, you don't have to categorize that as another open
procedure or ICD-9 to categorize those new procedures as other
types of cardiac surgery.
Ms. Castor. What type of diseases are you talking about?
Dr. Hughes. Well, here I am talking about cardiac surgery
on the procedure side, but the new procedures are being
expanded into gastrointestinal surgery, to lung surgery, you
name it. There are illnesses on the diagnosis side. There are
illnesses that arise or illnesses that differentiate. We have
new categories of malignancies.
Now, you can always add an ICD-9 code but at this point we
are pretty full. ICD-9 really has not that many more codes that
you can cram new information into so you have to add a code
that is out of--you know, put it in a different chapter or you
have to lump it in with a whole lot of other things. So the
specificity can make a whole lot of difference in terms of
tracking illness and tracking new interventions.
Ms. Castor. Thank you very much.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady and now
recognize the vice chair of the committee, the gentleman from
Kentucky, Mr. Guthrie, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to start
with Dr. Burke.
I have talked to different people about ICD-10 conversion,
and we went to estimate to cost to implement this, as much as
$84,000 and as low as a few thousand dollars. Could you help
the committee understand what actual costs are faced by the
doctors' offices as we move forward?
Dr. Burke. That is a good question. I don't know, because
for us, it didn't cost anything. You know, it was just another
day in the office, you know. Day one we were using ICD-9, the
next day we were using ICD-10.
Mr. Guthrie. No cost to transfer over?
Dr. Burke. No, no. Our software vendor was the primary
factor in getting that done but, you know, there is no cost to
us.
Mr. Guthrie. Well, thanks.
And Dr. Terry, I will get to you in a second on that. I
have got a question.
There was a new GAO report out Friday, and it finds that
while some concerns persist--and a unanimous consent to enter
this into the record.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at  http://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF14/20150211/
102940/HHRG-114-IF14-20150211-SD006.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Guthrie. It said that CMS has done notable work to
address concerns, providing educational tools, opportunities
for testing, and Ms. Bocchino, is it your belief that resources
and testing are available to those who want to be ready by
October?
Ms. Bocchino. Absolutely. And if I can make one other
comment, they are providing all kinds of outreach and
educational testing as well as end-to-end testing with claims
and getting providers accustomed to the new.
I also want to comment that running dual systems is just
not feasible, even on the private-sector side. It is very
costly, and what the plans are going to be doing on October 1st
is they are going to be switching to new clinical policies and
new algorithms based on the new codes, and having two tracks
will just create more confusion for providers as well as for
payers. It is important to send a very strong message that we
are going to implement on October 1st.
Mr. Guthrie. I want to talk to all the panelists, but I
want Dr. Terry to go first, give you an opportunity. I married
an Alabamian, so I appreciate your accent very well. My dear
wife is from the Shoals.
My question, well, there has been delays going on--well,
first of all, I appreciate your concern because I know as
things change in administration and health care and the
Affordable Care Act, it seems to smaller individual or small
personal practice, this is a bigger practice and a hospital has
more administrative ability to cover their overhead, and we
understand that. And also you have--Mr. Barton talked about
it--I just switched to an iPhone. The reason I didn't for so
long is because of the cost, time costs more than anything, but
it was my decision because I was paying for it and my time just
sit down and really learn how. I know how to use the
BlackBerry. And so the difference was, it was really my
decision because I was--although people in Medicare pay through
payroll taxes, they pay through their taxes, they pay for their
health care, but it goes through a third party. And so as we
try to get information on what is being paid for, controlling
costs of what is being paid for, that information is important
to the people paying for it, which is really the taxpayer
overall, so I understand your issues moving forward. And so the
question is, with the GAO, the resources, I will start with Dr.
Terry and all the others, we have had two delays
administratively, one Congressionally. I mean, in the meantime,
you see it coming, and what have you all been doing, people
with practices that are smaller than hospitals or megapractices
been doing to move forward knowing it is coming?
Dr. Terry. Well, it has been entered into the record. We
sent an attachment, the study that was done by an independent
group a year ago that shows the costs that I quoted in my
testimony, and that is true for my practice. We paid enormous
costs to our computer people just to put the thing in. Some
people have contracts and they don't have to pay the cost. We
paid a lot of money, and if you send people off to--if you sent
me off to a course to learn how to do it, that is more than
$5,000 right there.
Mr. Guthrie. Plus your time.
Dr. Terry. So the cost--but we are not here to debate that,
and we are not here to debate--I think to continue to delay it
is not the right answer. Now, you are surprised I said that.
You can delay, delay, delay but whenever that time certain date
is, we are still not going to be ready, and it is because it is
a flawed implementation. It is a big buying approach all in one
day. The industry says it takes a year to get ready for this.
How can you spend the time and effort and resources to prepare
for something that is a year away when you don't know what it
is going to do and then you don't even know when they turn the
switch if it is going to work?
We need a transition. The problem here is the
implementation. Now, I can argue the product, why are using
80,000 codes, the rest of the world 20. How can we compare data
with the rest of the world when we have 80,000 codes and they
have 20? How do those compare? But the problem here is the
implementation, and it needs to be some kind of transition we
have to figure out.
Now, the dual system, I have heard CMS say they can't do
it. I heard the Blue Cross Blue Shield man yesterday at the ICD
coalition meeting say they are already doing it. So it can be
done, and I don't know if that is the best thing to do, but we
have to--physicians have to have a guarantee that we are going
to get paid if we don't code right.
Now, remember, why does coding have anything to do with how
we get paid? We provide a service, and you are not going to pay
me because I coded wrong? Everybody can't run a 4-minute mile.
Some doctors aren't going to be able to do it, and do they
deserve the death sentence and be put out of business?
Mr. Guthrie. I understand your concern with that, I do. I
appreciate it. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentleman from Oregon, Mr. Schrader, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
opportunity. I appreciate the opportunity for the hearing.
I guess, Dr. Burke, first question is, how many additional
codes did you feel you had to deal with in your practice
compared to ICD-9?
Dr. Burke. Not many more. I would say maybe 10 or 20
percent more.
Mr. Schrader. OK. Then for Ms. Bowman, I guess, are there
tables out there that would help private practitioners figure
out what additional costs they are going to have to use? In
other words, if you are a urologist, is there a set of codes
you can handily go to or is this all done alphabetically and
you have to figure out what code out of the list of 10,000 is
going to fit your particular situation?
Ms. Bowman. Well, the classification itself is organized by
body system chapter, so the different specialties are typically
organized together, and a lot of the medical specialty
societies have developed cheat-sheet resources for their
members on the codes typically used in that community.
Mr. Schrader. So Dr. Terry, would you agree on this one
point, anyway, that there is an ability to figure out what
codes are relevant to your particular style of practice?
Dr. Terry. Well, sure. One of the comments is that I am
only going to have 50 or 60 codes as a urologist, but there are
unintended consequences here, and Blue Cross Blue Shield of
Alabama makes me code 10 diagnoses for every patient encounter,
so I have a patient with a kidney stone, I can code that
easily, but I have to code their diabetes, their coronary
artery disease, their high blood pressure. Diabetes has 250
codes, and if I don't do that, then Blue Cross--we are talking
about Medicare and CMS, but guess what? We get paid by Blue
Cross and United Health Care and Aetna, and it is going to kill
me. I can't sit there and go through all those codes.
Mr. Schrader. Ms. Bowman again, what do you see the role of
ICD-10 versus ICD-9 in combating fraud and, you know, abuse of
coding, if you will, that occasionally goes on by the very few
practices?
Ms. Bowman. For a lot of the same reasons that Dr. Hughes
mentioned as the benefits of the specificity, it actually will
help prevent and detect fraud, because right now there are so
many services or diagnoses that are lumped into the same code,
sometimes those that are covered and noncovered services are
lumped into the same code. So as I often describe in some of my
presentations, you can kind of hide behind the gray areas of
ICD-9 whereas ICD-10, the specificity is such that it is black
and white. The documentation should support what the
specificity of that code is, and it should be much clearer,
both to the provider in trying to assign the right code and the
auditor or payer trying to determine that the correct code has
been assigned.
Mr. Schrader. OK. I guess, Ms. Bocchino, when they talk
about cost, there seems to be disagreement. It is a relative
level of costs that a practice or a hospital or provider would
incur. There are different styles of practice, and medicine is
changing. Even in my little veterinary medical world, our
practice has changed dramatically in the last 35 years. Could
you comment a little bit about the contrasting views we have
heard today about the cost to the practice?
Ms. Bocchino. I think a lot of it has to do with the
contracts they have with vendors as actually Dr. Terry did
mention, and if they are doing a lot of this internally and not
using vendors externally, a lot of it is, do they have their
own systems that they would have to go in and pay the cost of
upgrading their own systems versus working with a particular
vendor who is going to be responsible for all that upgrade, and
it is just embedded in the contract. Also, some of the studies
are more current now and so we have gotten more data on cost as
more and more practices, particularly small practices, have
begun the transition to ICD-10, and to comment on what Dr.
Terry said before, right now some of the plans are using dual
systems because some of the providers have converted over to
ICD-10, but that has to stop because they are losing money on
the additional costs that they have to put in to have both
systems. This can't go on forever.
Mr. Schrader. I guess, Dr. Terry, last question for me
anyway would be, you know, the system is changing. It used to
be--I was a veterinarian. I just provided a service and I knew
I was doing a good job. My patients got better. My clients were
satisfied at the end of the day. But medicine in general seems
to be moving to a more value-based outcome system. It is very
different than my fee-for-service system. And frankly, we are
asking the Government and the taxpayer to fund a lot of this
stuff.
So what is your thinking on, you know, the evolution of
medicine here? I mean, you and I are a little older than some
of the young bucks coming up these days, and they are going to
the computer to figure out what the diagnosis is and stuff as
much as relying on their own instincts. How does the movement
to value-based medicine affect our view of this coding system?
Dr. Terry. Well, you are right, I am a dinosaur but I know
how to turn on a computer.
Mr. Schrader. I do too.
Dr. Terry. You just opened up a whole other can of worms,
what I think bout value-based payment. We don't even know how
to define value, OK, so how can you pay for value when we can't
even define it? You know how as a patient if my treatment is
valuable but how is the Government going to define it? I am not
going to go there, but that is the problem with it.
You know, they talk about these statistics but, you know,
in medicine, we have something called the scientific method,
and it is not statistics. These codes are for statistics, not
for research. Now, you can do statistical research but you
can't do medical research. It is not the scientific method. So
I have concerns about some of the amendments and argue of the
benefits of all of this.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
Dr. Burgess, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and again, I thank
you for holding the hearing. A busy morning, several things
going on, so I apologize for my absence through part of this.
If there is a question I ask that has already been asked, I ask
that you be indulgent and not point that out to me.
On the issue of value-based services and pay-for-
performance, I mean, Dr. Terry, I just have to tell you, there
was never a morning when I drove to work in my OB/Gyn practice
in Louisville, Texas, where I thought to myself, boy, I really
hope I can be average today. You go to do your best work every
single day. That is why you show up. That is why you are there
for your patients, and I am a little troubled as is Dr. Terry
about the fact that we are talking about a system that
basically revolves around reimbursement and not so much the
deliverable to the patient which, after all, at the end of the
day is where we should be concerned.
But the concept has been discussed about having a dual
system. Dr. Terry, do I understand you correctly that you would
see perhaps value in running both systems simultaneously for a
while after October 1st?
Dr. Terry. I am not an expert on that but the value is that
it is a way to transition. It is a way to let doctors get that
year of experience and learn how to do the coding so that they
don't--when we turn the switch and they are not ready to do it
that their income doesn't go to zero, so that is the value.
Now, whether that is the way to do it or not, there may be
other ways to do it.
Mr. Burgess. Well, it is interesting that you bring that
up, because if you go to the CMS Web site, and I don't spend a
lot of time but when I do go, I do go to the Frequently Asked
Questions section and there is an item that says dual coding,
does my practice need to use both code sets during the
transition, and the answer is, practice management systems must
be able to accommodate both ICD-9 and ICD-10 codes until all
claims and other transactions for services prior to the
compliance date have been processed and completed. Well, that
is CMS jargon for ``we are not giving you a date.'' So, you
know, under their own information on the Web site, maybe the
problem is solved.
You know, you go to other areas on their Web site and you
try to click on the video for how you do this in your own
office, and you are taken to an outside Web site that you need
a username and a password, so you develop a username and a
password, you click on it again, and the site is broken. So I
mean, there are some real obstacles that you as a practicing
physician when you try to do your due diligence and make sure
everything is going to go smoothly, there are some obstacles
put in your way.
Ms. Matus, your provocative statement to us, and I would
love to go--but the chairman has already done it so I won't put
the committee through it again, but pull the plug or pull the
trigger. I mean, I would just love to go down the line and say
trigger or plug, but I think I know what your answers are.
But even at--and I do want to say, your CEO came to talk to
one of our roundtables and provided one of the most refreshing
views of ways to go forward with things that I have ever heard,
so a lot of respect and affection for your CEO at Athena
Health, but even on your own Web site, the Frequently Asked
Questions on the Athena Health Web site, number 7, ``How can
the transition to ICD-10 impact my cash flow.'' The answer here
is instructive. It says ``CMS estimates that in the early
stages of implementation, denial rates will rise by 100 to 200
percent and the days in accounts receivable will grow by 20 to
40 percent.'' Those are pretty significant figures, and I will
just tell you from having run a small practice that you extend
my days in AR by 20 to 40 percent and I am probably having to
go downtown and ask my friendly banker for a short-term loan at
a high percentage interest rate in order to keep my practice
afloat. Is that a fair concern of the practicing physician out
there?
Ms. Matus. I think I am going to add on what Ms. Bocchino
said. It depends on what software provider you use. As I
mentioned, we do guarantee ICD-10 performance, and part of the
reason that we can do that is, we have one completely Internet-
based system. So if we, for example, have a claim rejected for
one provider, we can go out overnight and make sure that any
other claims that are in queue that look similar to that are
changed so that they will go through appropriately the next
day. So I think, you know, again, it depends on what system you
are using and how you are formatted, but there are ways to make
this easy to do, and when you think about ultimately--when you
heard John, we are so focused on building the healthcare
Internet, and to be able to do something like that, you need
one language. If you think about how we live our lives today,
we have one system for financial information, we have one--you
know, all our information, all our music is on our phones yet
our health care--I have lived in six States, 10 years in the
great State of Texas, my healthcare information is scattered to
the winds. So this is really important I think long term for
foundationally building a healthcare system that is integrated.
Mr. Burgess. Right, but for those practices that did not
have the foresight and intuition to align themselves with your
organization----
Ms. Matus. There is still time.
Mr. Burgess [continuing]. They may be in difficulty.
Mr. Chairman, I do want to submit for the record a series
of questions by Daniel Chambers, who is the Executive Director
of Key Whitman Eye Center in Pete Sessions' district back in
Texas, and I just want to point out one of the things that he
says there is that physician offices may need to be prepared to
go out and cover this delay in accounts receivable for an
extended period of time, and under existing tax law, we are in
our practices are not allowed to carry over money in our
practices or it is taxed and then we are going to pay taxes on
it twice. So this is an untenable situation that a lot of
practices find themselves in.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you for the indulgence. I do want to
submit this for the record.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr. Cardenas, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to thank all the witnesses for apprising us of
the perspective that you bring and thank you for representing
all the constituency interests that are so important to the
health care of all of our constituents throughout the country.
Thank you very much.
My first question is to Mr. Averill. I understand that
there are concerns that increased number of codes may be a
burden for physicians, and I am glad you testified on some of
those reasons earlier regarding the switch to ICD-10 and how it
would in fact be an excessive burden for some practitioners.
You recommended specifically that no individual would need to
know all the codes obviously, just like was mentioned
smartphones. This thing seems to be smarter than me. There are
things that thing does that I don't even know where to start.
I would imagine that with today's technology looking up
codes by doing a word search, for example, would be very simple
and wouldn't hinge much on how many codes are available, again
not having to know everything but just being able to utilize it
accurately and effectively is what I think every practical
system is expected to do.
I have a question. Would it be--would I be right to assume
that modern technology makes more comprehensive coding systems
like ICD-10 manageable?
Mr. Averill. Yes, they do, and since the iPhone has gotten
quite a bit of visibility today, there is an app for I-10. It
is a free app, and you can look up an iden code. If you wanted
to really splurge, there is one for $1.99 that will give you a
few bells and whistles on your iPhone to look up a code, and if
you take that technology, in a few seconds you could look up
almost any I-10 code.
Mr. Cardenas. OK. So the technology of today makes it much
less burdensome than the implementation of years past, correct?
Mr. Averill. Correct.
Mr. Cardenas. Mr. Chairman, for the record, before I run
out of time, I would ask to submit, the California Hospital
Association asked me to submit a letter to the hearing record
that states they are ready for the announced October 1st, 2015,
ICD-10 compliance date and urges Congress to avoid any further
delays, and I would like to submit that letter for the record,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you so much.
Carmella Bocchino, did I say your name right? Thank you. I
have heard the argument that given that the World Health
Organization will be implementing ICD-11 in 2017, the United
States should just wait to implement that coding system. I also
understand that there is an argument that implementing ICD-10
makes it easier to eventually implement ICD-11 down the road.
My question is, would skipping straight to ICD-11 be
counterproductive, or what is your opinion on that?
Ms. Bocchino. Our opinion is no, it would be
counterproductive in that----
Mr. Cardenas. How so?
Ms. Bocchino. ICD-10 builds off of ICD-9, and there has
been a lot of resources and training and effort gone into many,
many people in the healthcare system, not just payers, to get
us to ICD-10, and you end up penalizing them for all the
resources that they put forward already if you are now going to
make the jump and continue to use what I think is an antiquated
system in ICD-9.
Mr. Cardenas. One of the arguments again, Ms. Bocchino, one
of the arguments in any change is come on, we are looking at
this with a broad brush. It doesn't necessarily help the
individual constituent or the individual patient in this case,
but one of the things that I believe that this system makes
sense and the fact that the whole world or at least most of the
world seems to want to comply and is doing what they can to do
so. I think the United States should follow suit.
Doesn't it, at the end of the day, come down to the
individual knowing more about what diseases are going on and
going around now that the world is getting smaller every day?
Ms. Bocchino. Absolutely.
Mr. Cardenas. At the end of the day, doesn't it directly
affect the individual patient?
Ms. Bocchino. It does. It affects the individual patient
both in the sense of us knowing a lot more about complication
rates, about a lot of the research that actually Dr. Hughes
raised up, which is going to drive better patient care and
engage patients to better take care of themselves.
Mr. Cardenas. Isn't it today more than ever doctors
communicate with each other telephonically, electronically? My
understanding, I just had somebody--I helped somebody put
somebody in touch with a doctor who lives in northern
California, the patient was in my district, and lo and behold,
within 24 hours that specialist was looking electronically at
some information so that he could give that second opinion
where that patient was in the hospital, couldn't physically go
see that doctor, but yet again, my point is that communication,
that is happening more and more today, and that is a good
thing, right?
Ms. Bocchino. It is, and it is happening a lot more in
rural areas where we don't have a lot of specialization and you
need exactly that kind of connectivity.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I exceeded
my time. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Griffith, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate
that very much. I appreciate the witnesses being here today.
Dr. Terry, if you could help me out on this, I know we
apparently got smartphones and all kinds of computer programs
that will help you with the ICD-10, but they also come out in
book form, do they not, the ICD-9 and the ICD-10? And my
understanding is, the ICD-9 is about one volume about yea
thick. Is that right? If you can answer for the record?
Dr. Terry. Yes, about 2 or 3 inches.
Mr. Griffith. And that the ICD-10 would be about four of
those same size books. Is that about right?
Dr. Terry. I have not seen it but it makes sense.
Mr. Griffith. All right. And you indicated earlier that the
rest of the world is using 20,000 codes but that we are about
to use 80,000 codes, but then I heard testimony that the World
Health Organization is coming out with an ICD-11. Is most of
the world using the ICD-10 already or is that just
aspirational?
Dr. Terry. Yes, the rest of the world is using ICD-10, but
it is like you are comparing apples and oranges. The rest of
the world is using less than 20,000 codes and they don't use it
for billing, they don't use it in the outpatient setting. But
you are saying oh, we have to keep up with the rest of the
world but we are doing it totally different.
Mr. Griffith. OK. So if we do it the rest of the world did
it, then you would be OK with it, or you could at least figure
it out. Is that a fair statement?
Dr. Terry. Yes, sir.
Mr. Griffith. And you said something about how many codes
there were for diabetes, and I failed to write that down. How
many different codes are there for diabetes?
Dr. Terry. Two hundred and fifty.
Mr. Griffith. Two hundred and fifty codes. I guess my
problem with the ICD-10 and this whole concept, and it comes
down to part of what you are saying. It would seem to me to
make sense that you could do a dual system. Now, ultimately,
you want to get everybody on ICD-10. I get that. But if you
submitted for a period of years ICD-9 and ICD-10 and if you got
either one of them right, you got paid, then that would
probably alleviate your fear and concern. Is that correct?
Dr. Terry. My fear is just being able to take care of the
patient and not being put of business because I code wrong.
That is my fear, and how you can fix that? Like I said, there
are several ways to do it.
Mr. Griffith. And do you know what the projections are on
the numbers of the shortage of doctors that we are anticipating
having in this country?
Dr. Terry. I don't know numbers but it is definite. I mean,
there are fewer people wanting to go into the practice of
medicine because of the financial aspects, and it is just----
Mr. Griffith. And lots of paperwork and dealing with lots
of computers instead of seeing patients. Is that right?
Dr. Terry. You are talking about computers and statistics,
but one thing hasn't changed, and that is the care of the
patient, the sitting down and listening and examining and
talking. Computers can't do that. And I don't have time to do
that anymore. I am sitting in my office with my back to the
patient typing on my computer trying to take care of my
patient, and if you have a 15-minute office visit, that is
getting whittled down by 50 percent now, and it is not all ICD-
10. It is Meaningful Use, electronic medical records. It is
trying to learn how to deal with this, but ICD-10 is going to
pile on it.
Mr. Griffith. And as a result of that, it wouldn't surprise
you that either last year or the year before that, I sat down
with a doctor in one of my rural communities that I represent
and his number one complaint was ICD-10, and he said look, I am
getting old, I am not a dinosaur but I am getting old, or
older, and I love serving this community but I don't know if I
am going to continue to practice.
So you would anticipate that pushing with a drop-dead date,
as Dr. Burgess pointed you earlier, the dual coding is only
going to happen up to a certain date, not allowing for things
to go forward after that. You think like him that there would
be a lot of other doctors that may decide that it is just time
to go ahead and retire and enjoy their house at the lake?
Dr. Terry. There is no question. I already have a doctor in
Mobile that has already quit because of the thread of ICD-10
plus he didn't want to have to take his boards a fifth time,
and there are a lot of people--you know, I am 60, 61, you know,
there are a lot of people between age 61 and 65, they are not
going to do it. Now, how do you measure that? I am just telling
you it is going to happen.
Mr. Griffith. So what we are going to see is that my
allergist, who served my family for five generations and who
didn't stop practicing until 1992, and even though his body was
getting weaker all the time, his eyes flashed and he always
knew what was going on, you are indicating to me that we are
not going to have those doctors continue into practice as long
and that that is going to create a problem in our rural
communities, notwithstanding the fact that some of the younger
doctors like Dr. Burke will figure it out, but it is going to
create a shortage of doctors, particularly in the rural areas.
Am I correct that that is part of what you are saying here
today?
Dr. Terry. Yes, sir, but it doesn't have to be that way if
we can change the ways being implemented. It doesn't have to be
that way.
Mr. Griffith. Well, I appreciate you being here very much.
I appreciate everybody else, and I understand for big practices
and big cities, all of this is easy, but it is not so in the
rural areas where we are already having healthcare shortages.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes Mr. Long from Missouri, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all for
being here today.
When I was elected in 2010, and we came up for orientation
that next week, there was 96 new Congressmen out of 435, and we
were all excited, and they gave us our little briefcase with
things in it, documents, everything we need, and they gave me a
BlackBerry, and I said, ``What is that?'' They said, ``Everyone
gets a BlackBerry.'' I said, ``I don't get a BlackBerry.'' They
said, ``Why not?'' I said, ``I have never had one, I don't know
how to use one.'' I get an iPhone. ``No, no, no, we don't get
iPhones, you get the Government issue, you get a BlackBerry.''
I said, ``I don't want it, I can't use a BlackBerry, I don't
want to relearn a BlackBerry.'' So I was the first Congressman
that changed the policy here, so I hold the record. I was a 55-
year-old freshman at that time. I was a 55-year-old
trendsetter. So I got my Government-issued iPhone, and now they
give them to everybody. I know it is a little off the subject,
but that is what all the discussion was on iPhones or
BlackBerrys here this morning.
And Dr. Terry, you do the best impersonation I have ever
seen of my doctor in Springfield, Missouri. I should say my
former doctor, because when Obamacare first passed, I went to
see him, and you remind me of him because I told him, I said if
you don't settle down, I am going to have to check your blood
pressure. He turned around to the computer and he was working
just like you imitated a minute ago, and he said I have got to
do all this paperwork now. He said I have got 10 hours a week
just on new things. He said it used to be I would send you out
of here and now you have to sit there and answer these
questions for me, and he quit about 6 months after that, and he
was in the same age bracket as you and I, and he had several
good years left in him. So I know that this is very
disconcerting for a lot of doctors.
And for my friend from my State of Missouri, and you are
from where in Missouri?
Dr. Burke. Fredericktown.
Mr. Long. Fredericktown. My mom's people originally came
from Fredericktown, so we have got a little in common there.
You said--I don't guess you said it, but there are supposed
to be significant public health benefits to the greater coding
and reporting under ICD-10. Will you kind of discuss some of
those benefits?
Dr. Burke. I mean, you know, for instance, if, you know,
someone comes in with COPD, or emphysema, you would put the
code in, and it can talk about an acute exacerbation or chronic
COPD, unspecified. So it gives us a clearer picture of what is
going on with the patient.
Mr. Long. OK. And I have heard of both of those, but the
ICD-10 diagnosis codes have been readily mocked for their more
obscure codes. For example, there is a code--I don't know if
you run into this--but in our neck of the words down in
Missouri, you might need this one: bitten by a pig, initial
encounter. And walked into lamppost, subsequent encounter.
Mr. Griffith. What about a subsequent encounter with the
pig?
Mr. Long. Maybe that is why he ran into the lamppost. A pig
bit him, and he ran into the lamppost. Isn't this overwhelming
for small solo practices in rural America like your represent,
not that you have a sole practice, but I mean, you are out
there in a town of 4,000 people.
Dr. Burke. Yes, true. I don't think it's overwhelming. I
think it is easier to find a diagnosis because you have a lot
more choices for the diagnosis.
Mr. Long. I would say you do if you have got ``bitten by a
pig.''
Dr. Burke. So, you know, I think it is--I just don't think
it is overwhelming, not at all, not in the slightest bit. You
know, for the scope of my practice, which is internal medicine,
and actually our software is the one that helps us out because,
for instance, if someone comes in with a complaint and there is
an ICD-9 code in the chart, we can click on the ICD-9 code and
then a bunch of different ICD-10 codes can show up, and we can
go through the list and pick one which is more specific.
Mr. Long. OK. You said in your opening remarks that it
was--I am paraphrasing but kind of like a light switch. You
switch one day from 9 to 10 seamless, no problem whatsoever.
Dr. Terry in his answer to a question earlier I believe said
that it would take $5,000 in training to get somebody up to
speed. Did you have to undergo any special training or spend
any money or go off somewhere to learn this, or----
Dr. Burke. No, I didn't, and neither did the nurse
practitioners, so no one in our office did.
Mr. Long. OK. And Ms. Bocchino, healthcare communities have
had years to plan for ICD-10, including several delays. Have
the insurers used this time to prepare?
Ms. Bocchino. Absolutely, and they have worked with the
providers in their network to do end-to-end testing in
providers of all size, so they have done a lot of outreach,
even to the smaller providers. I will be honest that it is
difficult sometimes to get the smaller providers engaged, but
in part that is because many providers believe that we are
going to keep moving the date, and until we are firm on a
particular date that they know this is coming, I don't think we
are going to get some of them engaged. I think it is very
important to send a strong message.
Mr. Long. OK. Thank you. I downloaded a couple of apps here
on my iPhone on ICD-10 after we were advised earlier, but you
said a dollar. Now, the first one that came up was $4.99 but I
did find some free ones, so I have got two apps. Now I can go
study and see what is in there besides first encounter bitten
by a pig, and I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Pallone, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I feel like old times
up here today. This is nice. And I apologize. I was at one of
the other subcommittees earlier, so this is why I missed your
testimony.
But I wanted to ask Ms. Bowman, or Mrs. Bowman, I guess,
you mentioned in your testimony that the demand for high-
quality data is increasing due to healthcare initiatives that
aim to improve quality and patient safety while decreasing
cost. Can you explain how ICD-10 will interact with the
electronic health records Meaningful Use incentive program, and
what about other delivery system reform efforts?
Ms. Bowman. Sure. The ICD-10 codes in addition to being
used directly for reimbursement like we have heard a lot about
today is also used for a lot of administrative data reporting
purposes where aggregation of data is important. So it helps to
provide data for all these other programs like value-based
purchasing, accountable care organizations to show the severity
levels of different conditions so that you can link that to
outcomes to best practices, to different treatment options and
see really what works, what doesn't work, what is the most
cost-effective form of treatment. If you have better
information about what is really going on with the patient and
the level of severity of a particular illness, not just a
generic description for that illness, you can fine-tune that
information a lot better and really drill down to what works
and what doesn't work.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Now, you also mentioned that the updated
ICD-10 codes would help with reimbursement. Would you want to
explain how it would ensure more accurate and fair
reimbursement or more accurate codes would reduce providers' or
payers' administrative burden, for example, in clarifying
diagnosis and procedures?
Ms. Bowman. Sure. Because of the increased specificity, you
can drill down to different forms for the same reason. They
kind of give you better information on the different costs
related to particular diagnoses and procedures. A great
procedure example that I think Rich might have used in his
testimony but I heard it before is, suture of artery. So we
have a single code that is a procedure example, and it doesn't
matter whether it is the aorta or an artery in your little
finger. It is the same code in ICD-9, and obviously there is
enormous differences in complications and the cost of repairing
the aorta versus other types of arteries and yet we are lumping
it all into the same code. So by having better specificity on
the procedure side, a lot of it has to do with approaches,
anatomic sites on both the diagnosis and the procedure side. We
can really be able to fine-tune information about the cost of
treatment, which then links to the appropriate reimbursement
for that treatment.
Mr. Pallone. And you mentioned about the cost and danger of
continuing to use the ICD-9 codes. Who are those costs
affecting?
Ms. Bowman. These costs are affecting everyone, our entire
healthcare system, providers, payers, the patients because
right now because we don't have that specific information and
ICD-9 is just deteriorating and failing more year after year
that we use it. We are getting less and less information for
each clinical encounter, and basically reimbursement, analyzing
quality of care based on that data are just wild guesses at
this point because there are so many disparate conditions or
procedures that are lumped into a single code, and in some
cases some of the testifiers had talked about differences in
ICD-10. Some of those differences have to do with just changes
in clinical knowledge since ICD-9 was developed. So some
conditions are actually categorized somewhat differently. I
believe there is even some medical conditions that are not
categorized as cancer in ICD-9 but are categorized as cancer in
ICD-10 because of changes in medical knowledge. So we are
losing a lot of that information by continuing to use ICD-9.
Mr. Pallone. OK. And then lastly, some providers argue that
ICD-10 is unfair because it was developed by bureaucrats that
have never practiced medicine, but you mentioned in your
testimony that 95 percent of the requests for new codes in the
past few years came from physician organizations. Can you just
talk a little bit about how i10 was developed and who was
involved?
Ms. Bowman. Sure, and that has been one of the biggest
myths, I think, of ICD-10 is that it was developed in a back
closet somewhere by bureaucrats. I have actually been involved
in the development of ICD-10 since the 1990s now, and it is
still being updated and maintained every year, and all of the
content of the original ICD-10 that WHO uses, the clinical
modification that the United States is trying to implement, all
of it was contributed to greatly by the house of medicine who
participated in the development, asked for that clinical data
and continue today to come to public meetings that are hosted
by the CMS and CDC to discuss proposals for new codes, and it
is a completely public process. Anyone can submit a request for
a new code. It is discussed in a public meeting. There are
opportunities for public comments at the meeting or in writing
afterwards, and CMS and CDC take all of those comments into
consideration in making a final decision about adding new
codes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentleman from Indiana, Dr. Bucshon, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I was a practicing cardiovascular surgeon for 15 years, so
at the end of the day this is about money. This is going to
cost physician practices initially, and I agree with Dr. Terry
on the implementation. It is pretty clear that we are going to
move forward on ICD-10, and we should, but I do have
substantial concerns about the implementation and the short-
term impact on physician practices because that will happen,
and I am disappointed that some of the experts in non-
healthcare fields that don't practice medicine are here today
denying that will happen. That is very disappointing.
Ms. Bowman, have you ever practiced medicine? Have you ever
had to bill a patient?
Ms. Bowman. No, I have not practiced medicine.
Mr. Bucshon. Let me tell you what is going to happen, and I
am going to--because you--and again, ICD-10 is going to happen.
It needs an implementation plan. I agree with that. I don't
think we have a disagreement there, but that said, here is what
happens when you are a surgeon. You will do surgery, and it
will be much more difficult for you or your people to find a
code that matches what you write on your operative report. You
know why? Because you are going to be in the operating room and
you are going to dictate what you actually did. You are not
going to look through an ICD code book and make sure it
matches. And so when the insurance company gets the code and
they get the operative report, they are not going to match, and
it is going to come back to your office and you are going to
have to try to figure out, and then what do you do? Do you
modify part of the official hospital record and say no, that is
not--I had to change it to match a code? You could do that. But
it will not make it more easy to get the correct code. From a
practicing physician, my opinion, that is just false. That
won't happen. So I am concerned about that.
Dr. Burke, is your practice independent or are you part of
a larger healthcare system?
Dr. Burke. There are two physicians and three nurse
practitioners, and I am----
Mr. Bucshon. So you are not part of a larger conglomerate
that owns your practice?
Dr. Burke. No, privately owned.
Mr. Bucshon. OK. That is good because it is a rarity that
that is happening today, and the reason is, is because the cost
to run an individual medical practice is very difficult. I was
in a 15-surgeon, 16 cardiology practice. We had to sell to the
hospital. We couldn't afford to stay independent anymore.
But I was interested in your cost statement, that it didn't
cost anything. What are your annual IT costs? What is your--how
much do you pay a month for your IT service?
Dr. Burke. I would have to talk to the office manager about
that.
Mr. Bucshon. My point is, you made a statement that said
the cost is zero, and that is just false because you are making
monthly or annual payments to your IT and this type of
implementation is included in that cost.
We put an EMR in in 2005 in my practice. It cost us $3
million up front, $60,000 to $80,000 a year just to maintain
the current software. This is extremely expensive for medical
practices. It may not be that, you know, oh, converting from
ICD one day to the next cost you anything, but it is costly,
and I think that that is something I want to clear up because I
think that is just not accurate.
Ms. Matus, do you know what percentage of the healthcare
costs are related to physician services?
Ms. Matus. I don't know specifically.
Mr. Bucshon. People estimate about 10 to 15 percent. Where
is the rest of the cost to the American people for health care?
Ms. Matus. I would imagine it is in administrative.
Mr. Bucshon. Yes, about 25 percent is in administrative and
then, you know, there is hospital expenses and others, right?
So, you know, the reality is, is that trying to continue to
save Medicare or save our system by cutting reimbursement to
providers is a failed strategy, and this is what this is about
because what is going to happen is, is you are going to have
physicians who are not going to be able to code this properly
at all age groups except if they work for you, which it is
great that you have a great system, but the individual
physician out there is not going to be able to do this
correctly, and their AR is going to go dramatically up and they
are going to get denied, and it is not just for Medicare. It is
going to be from every other private insurance company out
there.
So I would encourage all of us who are involved in health
care including on the administrative side to really look
closely at our implementation plan and make sure that we can
implement ICD-10, which we need to, in a way that does not
really cause dramatic problems with our healthcare system.
My practice, you know, we could afford to have a line of
credit of $1 million. With this kind of thing, we could front
it for a few months. Many practices can't.
And lastly, Dr. Hughes, the example that you gave of a 74-
year-old with a vascular injury, I did vascular surgery. Other
than for your research and for statistics, how does that impact
that patient's medical care? Because given your example, it has
no impact on the outcome of that patient, not a single--nothing
that----
Dr. Hughes. I am sorry if I gave you the impression that
that individual patient would be affected because you are
absolutely right, it is not going to have any impact.
Mr. Bucshon. It won't make any difference.
Dr. Hughes. It won't make any difference to that individual
patient. The point I was trying to make is that the
accumulation of data is useful, and I disagree with Dr. Terry.
I do believe that it is possible to look at data in a
scientifically sound method and to derive useful information
from it. We have got lots of information from the National
Surgical Quality Improvement Program, for example, but you are
absolutely right. It is not going to make any difference to----
Mr. Bucshon. I just wanted to clear that up that in the
short run, implementation of ICD-10--and thanks for your
indulgence for a second, Mr. Chairman--will not have a direct
impact on the individual patient care. It may in the long run
based on your research, which I agree.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now recognize
the gentleman from New York, Mr. Collins, 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Sorry I was somewhat
late. I was actually here on time, but I serve on Oversight. We
were just ending a hearing on mental health, which I wanted to
stay until it was over. So I missed most of the testimony
although I did review the information, and just to set the
stage, I am a supporter of ICD-10. I am a supporter of getting
it implemented sooner than later. It has been on the agenda a
long time. This isn't something that should be new to anyone.
Most countries in the world are doing it. I certainly have a
lot of physician friends, and I understand there is a cost of
implementing anything new. You know, we can, I suppose, debate
the benefits.
I am also a data guy. In my office I actually do have a
sign that says ``In God we trust. All others bring data.'' And
I know that with data, whether it is analysis or other things
we can do with it, while it may not be a positive for that
patient today, at some point in time being able to deep-dive
data, especially with healthcare costs going up in this country
as they are, someone of my son's young age will be able to
really use that data. He is very adept at that.
So I guess my question is--and feel free--I am sorry, I
don't know who would be best at answering some of these, but I
would see the data collection as a very major part of why we
are doing it and maybe perhaps the other piece--I don't know if
this came out--some identification of potential, I will use the
word ``fraud.'' You know, the more data we have, the more
specific someone has to be, and if someone could comment too, I
would assume a lot of the coding will be done by the office
staff. I mean, a dermatologist is going to be rocking and
rolling. Her staff knows that I would think a lot of the coding
would be coming from that. Is that a good assumption or bad,
and could anyone speak to where this data would be helpful in
the medical field going down the road?
Ms. Bowman. Yes, you are absolutely right. The data is very
useful and helpful, and the fraud arena is one example, and the
research that Dr. Hughes mentioned, yes, in most cases it is
not necessarily going to help that patient today but the
accumulation of data and knowledge about medical care will
ultimately lead to better care for patients in the future.
There are some scenarios where it could help the individual
patient today such as in the area of disease management. I know
of some facilities now that are using the better diagnosis
codes in their internal systems for disease management
programs, particularly in the area of diabetes and asthma,
because the clinical classification of asthma in ICD-10 is
totally different than ICD-9 and is much more aligned to the
way people are currently managing asthma, so I know of some
facilities that are using the data that way.
With respect to the coding, obviously in hospitals almost
all of the coding is done by professional coders who do the
coding. In large practices, it usually is designated staff, and
so there is a cost to the practice obviously, even in those
situations of having the staff trained, and then in some
smaller practices such as the Beyer Medical Group that is here
today, it might be physicians who are actually doing their own
coding but in a lot of scenarios it is usually a trained staff
person.
Mr. Collins. So this has been implemented, am I correct, in
other countries?
Ms. Bowman. Yes.
Mr. Collins. What have we learned--and we have only got a
minute or so--the benefits of this has been evidenced by other
countries having already implemented it?
Ms. Bowman. Well, Dr. Terry, I think it was, in his
comments is absolutely correct. Other countries are not using
it in the same way that we use it, and that is kind of a catch-
22. That also makes it more complicated for us to implement it
because of the fact that we do use it in our reimbursement
system. So they didn't have some of the challenges and the
costs and the issues that we are facing.
There was a comment earlier about not being comparable
globally. However, we have a treaty with the World Health
Organization for ICD. The modifications individual countries
can make to ICD have to be beyond a certain character level in
order to be able to maintain global comparability, and as I had
mentioned in my testimony, almost half, actually 46 percent, of
the additional codes in our modification are due to laterality,
which is not in the international system, primarily because
although they are actually oddly enough looking at that in the
area of ICD-11. They are actually looking at what we did in our
clinical modification as they work on ICD-11.
So there is comparability with the rest of the world
because a lot of the detail, it has to do with ways we use the
codes in our country that just aren't applicable to the rest of
the world, the laterality and also there was significant
request for--I know there was jokes about the subsequent
encounter and initial encounter but those kinds of things,
which are all in the seventh character, are where some of those
additional codes come, and it is actually intended to improve
our data from ICD-9, which right now if you have a follow-up
encounter, it goes into a very generic aftercare code, which
has been a big complaint for 30 years in the ICD-9 system that
I can't tell that the reason I am seeing the patient was
because they are being followed up for a fracture of the
humerus. All I know is, it is orthopedic aftercare or a follow-
up examination for who knows what.
So these encounter seventh characters were specifically
created to solve that problem in ICD-10 so that it is an added
digit to say you still use the original injury code but you
know from this particular character that it is a follow-up
visit and not the initial acute injury.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes the
gentlelady from North Carolina, Mrs. Ellmers, 5 minutes for
questions.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
panel for being here, and I too apologize for coming in late,
so if any of the questions that I ask have already been
answered, again, I just apologize. I am trying to get to the
bottom of this issue.
First, I would just like to say I am a nurse myself. I
practiced before coming to Congress as a nurse for over 21
years. My husband is a practicing general surgeon, and I will
just have to say that my husband's opinion of moving towards
ICD-10 is very much like Dr. Bucshon and Dr. Terry, although we
know that this needs to be implemented at some point. I believe
the frustration that exists within our medical community,
especially our private practitioners, is that there is so much
on top of them right now dealing with so much that now this is
just one more issue that they are going to be forced to deal
with. Many of our physicians and hospitals alike are still
trying to meet stage II of Meaningful Use, and here we have yet
another situation where we are going to have to deal with this.
So I want to get to the bottom of this. I want to see ICD-
10 move forward but obviously we have to address the issues as
they are in the realistic world rather than the theoretical
world where this would be a wonderful thing as implemented. We
just have to get there and apply it to the realistic world of
health care and medicine as it is today.
So one of the big issues that we here continuously is,
again, the cost, and the cost--you know, we know that our
hospitals have invested millions in preparing for ICD-10, and I
believe that that needs to be respected and we need to consider
that for our physician practices, especially--and I know, Dr.
Burke, you are practicing in a rural area--especially for our
rural physicians and some of our smaller practices.
Dr. Averill, what can be utilized? Is there a cost
incentive for physicians to embrace ICD-10 that you are aware
of?
Mr. Averill. Well, first of all, let me say on the cost--
there was just a recent study that was just released in which
PAHCOM, which is the office managers for small physicians,
surveyed their membership, and they asked the question, ``What
has been the expenditures getting ready for I-10 plus the
expenditures remaining to be expended?'' so the results of that
survey essentially said for a small physician practice where
that was defined as six or less direct caregivers, the average
expenditures to date plus anticipated expenditures was roughly
$8,000.
Mrs. Ellmers. OK.
Mr. Averill. And then there were two other studies that
were recently published that actually came in with lower
numbers. The market has really responded in terms of making the
transition much easier and much more cost-effective. As I
mentioned before, there is lots of free software out there.
There is lots of free training material and so on. So I think
in terms of what is available, the transition can be made. I
think the biggest problem is the uncertainty, the uncertainty
of should we invest the time, should we move forward when there
is an uncertain date. You know, it is a tough competition for
how you are going to spend your dollars. Do you want to spend
it on ICD-10 preparation when it may not ever occur? The most
important thing is to say will it occur and when, and for once
and for all, get that out there and let the industry move
forward.
Mrs. Ellmers. So again, just to clarify again from the cost
standpoint, there is software available that physician offices
can take part in. There are cost issues that can be addressed.
And again, that is your position as far as addressing the cost
issue for physicians and training?
Mr. Averill. Yes. The market has responded and those
services are readily available at a very low cost, and it is a
decision on the part of the individual physician office to take
advantage of that.
Mrs. Ellmers. Dr. Terry, would you concur with Mr. Averill
on that?
Dr. Terry. I thin, his comments represent the minority. I
know plenty of physician practices who have paid a lot of money
to--I mean, if you are stuck with an electronic medical records
and you don't have a contract that says they are going to
update it, you are stuck because you can't change it. They
control our practices now that we got that electronic medical
records. I have to do what the company tells me to do, and I
can't bargain. I mean, it costs. I mean, this is--and I respect
their study but their own people kind of did the study. I mean,
are there conflict of interest in it? Are there--how is it
done? Has it been repeated? But I respect what they did but I
just think it is crazy to say there is zero cost or $5,000
cost. It is more than that.
But, you know, cost is not what I am--it is not an issue to
me. I don't care about that. The thing is the implementation
and doctors not being able to stay in practice and taking care
of their patients. I don't really care about the cost.
Ms. Ellmers. No, and Dr. Terry, I agree. That has been one
of the issues that I think we all have heard, and those of us
who have been in the healthcare world, we want to give the best
care we possibly can to our patients, and when we have been
whittled down to a few moments in the exam room with them and
really understanding their issues, it really doesn't matter how
much information we can gather. We are not gathering it because
we are basically on a time constraint and there is much that
will be missed.
So with that, again, I just want to say thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and thank you to our panel. This is a very, very
important issue, and I just hope that we can all come together
to work on a solution moving forward so that we can continue to
provide great health care to every American. So thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady. That concludes
this round of questioning. We will go to one follow-up per
side, and I will recognize myself for that purpose.
Dr. Hughes, when a patient's health care requires multiple
providers, which coding system will allow the most
comprehensive detail information sharing to ensure each has the
best information to care for that patient, ICD-9 or ICD-10, and
please elaborate.
Dr. Hughes. ICD-10 provides more information. Let me
reiterate that for the patient in front of you or in front of
those several providers, it is not going to make a whole lot of
difference. Hopefully the several physicians that are caring
for this one patient are sharing information and they should
not need a computerized data system in order to learn what
their colleagues are doing or have done. So for the one
patient, I don't think it makes a whole lot of difference but
the difference comes when you are talking about patterns of
use, when you are talking about how many doctors in this area
use an assistant surgeon versus another area where you could be
talking about some pretty considerable differences in cost
because you get two surgeon bills instead of one, you know, the
involvement, if there is more than one procedure, then yes, you
want to have detail, but that is going to be billed anyway.
I think it is only when we look at the patterns and see how
the technologies are evolving that that is where it is going to
be really valuable.
Mr. Pitts. Does anyone else want to comment on that?
Dr. Terry. I will just say that I don't treat my patient
based on a code, and all of these electronic medical records,
you think my office talks to the doctors in California through
a computer? No. They don't talk to each other. That code only
goes to CMS and the insurance companies to do whatever they
want to do with it. One is to deny payment to us if we don't
get it right. I don't take care of patients based on a code.
That is just something else I have to do.
Mr. Pitts. Anyone else?
Mr. Averill. I will just make one observation in follow-up
to that, that much of this additional specificity has been
requested by the medical community. For example, the urologists
that have been coming to the coordination maintenance
committees over the last 3 years have asked for 200 new codes
to be added to ICD-10, arguing that there is not enough--as
much specificity as there is in I-10, the urologist community
is asking for 200 additional diagnosis codes. And so we are
kind of in a dilemma as an industry. There is continual
pressure coming from the medical community for more and more
precise information to be used for everything that we have
talked about today, and at the same time, there is great
reluctance to say that we are willing to collect it and submit
it. So I just find it very interesting that the urologists are
demanding more and more information and that I-10 becomes
further and further expanded.
Mr. Pitts. All right. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes
the ranking member, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just wanted to ask Dr. Burke, you testified that ICD-10
is a better communications tool. What are some of the critical
differences between ICD-9 and 10, and how have the more
specific codes helped you in your practice with patient care?
Mr. Burke. Well, as I said, it is a better communication
tool, but I would say, for instance, ICD-9 code would be
coronary artery disease, but an ICD-10 code could have which
vessels involved or which graft is involved if the patient has
had surgery. It was easier to communicate that with the patient
in describing their clinical condition when you see them.
Mr. Pallone. I mean, the concern is the large number of
codes but, I mean, your experience in navigating all these
codes with more than 100,000, I guess, now, it doesn't matter?
I mean, in other words, it is not that much more of a burden?
Dr. Burke. No, not at all.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Let me just ask, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Averill
because he was out here, you know, just testifying about the
cost of another delay. Can you help us understand the effect
each time implementation is delayed? What does the delay
affect? What types of, you know, training and resources go into
preparing for ICD-10 implementation? What is the cost of delay?
Mr. Averill. Well, I think it is twofold. One, vendors,
CMS, payers have to essentially maintain dual systems. We have
to be ready at any point once the final decision is made to go
fully forward with ICD-10 or continue to support I-9 and all
the various claims adjudication and all the evaluation of
quality metrics and so on. We have to have parallel systems.
That is a tremendous cost.
Further, the cost of the delay is the uncertainty of it
all. We have talked a lot about having people be prepared and
be ready, but in a time of tight expenditures and so on, if you
are not sure that the date is firm, that is causing many people
to postpone doing the final preparation to be ready, and so yet
another delay, frankly, if we go to a third delay, I don't
believe the industry is going to believe that we will ever move
forward, and the transition will become that much more
difficult if and when it ever occurs.
So after two delays--and I just want to point out, the
original proposed rule on I-10 was 2011. Then based on public
comments, it was moved to 2013, and then we have had our two
delays that have occurred subsequently.
And so it is the uncertainty of the date that is causing
the major problems out there in the industry to be absolutely
at the end of the day prepared for a smooth transition.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you to each of the witnesses. Excellent
testimony, very informative, very important.
We will have follow-up questions from members, those who
weren't able to attend. We will send those to you in writing.
We ask that you please respond promptly.
I remind members that they have 10 business days to submit
questions for the record. The members should submit their
questions by the close of business on Thursday, February 26th.
So with thanks to our panel, without objection, the
subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:31 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Today the subcommittee will examine the implementation of
ICD-10--the latest coding system for healthcare providers to
use for reimbursements and other purposes--set to happen on
October 1st of this year. Today's hearing is an opportunity to
learn more about what ICD-10 is, how it can help patients and
our healthcare system, and whether stakeholders are prepared
for its implementation later this year.
The United States is one of the few countries that has yet
to adopt this most modern coding system. Australia was the
first country to adopt ICD-10 in 1998. Since then, Canada,
China, France, Germany, Korea, South Africa, and Thailand--just
to name a few--have all also implemented ICD-10. In the United
States, Congress, through one vehicle or another, has prevented
the adoption of ICD-10 for nearly a decade.
Under law, ICD-10 is set to become the coding system of the
United States on October 1, 2015. Understanding that the
reasons for delay in the past have been credited to
preparedness, today we look forward to hearing from the
witnesses on their plans for implementing ICD-10 later this
year.
I thank the witnesses for their testimony and
recommendations.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
