- EXAMINING THE MEDICARE PART D MEDICATION THERAPY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE MEDICARE PART D MEDICATION THERAPY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 21, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-88

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

99-361                         WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                     Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          KATHY CASTOR, Florida
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina         Massachusetts
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TONY CARDENAS, California
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
CHRIS COLLINS, New York                  officio)
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Gene Green, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     2
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................   100

Witnesses

Tim Gronniger, Director of Delivery System Reform, Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services.................................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Answers to submitted questions...............................   151
Lawrence Kocot, Principal and National Leader, Center for
Healthcare Regulatory Insight, KPMG LLP........................    35
Prepared statement...........................................    38
Answers to submitted questions...............................   153
Mark Merritt, President and CEO, Pharmaceutical Care Management
Association....................................................    54
Prepared statement...........................................    56
Answers to submitted questions...............................   156
Jesse McCullough, Director, Field Clinical Services, Rite Aid
Corporation....................................................    68
Prepared statement...........................................    70
Richard Thomas Benson, Associate Director of Stroke, Medstar
Washington Hospital Center.....................................    84
Prepared statement...........................................    86

Submitted Material

Materials submitted by Mr. Pitts
Statement of the American College of Clinical Pharmacy and
the College of Psychiatric and Neurologic Pharmacists......   101
Statement of the American Association of Diabetes Educators..   111
Statement of the American Pharmacists Association............   113
Statement of Prescriptions for a Healthy America.............   117
Statement of the American Society of Health-System
Pharmacists................................................   123
Statement of Healthcare Leadership Council...................   130
Statement of National Community Pharmacists Association......   136
Statement of the National Association of Chain Drug Stores...   139
Statement of the Academy of Managed Care Pharmacy............   148

EXAMINING THE MEDICARE PART D MEDICATION THERAPY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM

----------

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 21, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:15 a.m., in
room 2322 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joe Pitts
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Pitts, Guthrie, Shimkus,
Murphy, McMorris Rodgers, Lance, Griffith, Bilirakis, Long,
Ellmers, Bucshon, Brooks, Collins, Green, Engel, Butterfield,
Castor, Sarbanes, Matsui, Schrader, Kennedy, and Pallone (ex
officio).
Staff present: Clay Alspach, Chief Counsel, Health; Graham
Pittman, Legislative Clerk; Chris Sarley, Policy Coordinator,
Environment and Economy; Adrianna Simonelli, Legislative
Associate, Health; Heidi Stirrup, Health Policy Coordinator;
Tiffany Guarascio, Deputy Staff Director and Chief Health
Advisor; Ashley Jones, Director of Communications, Member
Services and Outreach; Rachel Pryor, Health Policy Advisor; and
Samantha Satchell, Policy Analyst.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Pitts. Ladies and gentlemen, I ask all of our guests to
please take their seats.
It is 10:15 so the subcommittee will come to order. The
chairman will recognize himself for an opening statement.
Today's hearing will examine the Medication Therapy
Management program MTM, which is part of the Medicare Part D
prescription drug program.
The Part D program was established as part of the Medicare
Modernization Act, MMA, in 2003. MMA required Medicare Part D
prescription drug plans to include Medication Therapy
Management services delivered by a qualified healthcare
professional, including pharmacists, beginning in 2006.
Medications can save or improve lives, but taken
incorrectly or in excess they can make patients worse. With
thousands of prescription drugs on the market, frequently no
one prescriber, caregiver or manufacturer knows the total
picture for each patient.
MTM services target beneficiaries who have multiple chronic
conditions such as diabetes, asthma, hypertension, and
congestive heart failure. Such beneficiaries likely take
multiple medications and are likely to incur very expensive
annual medical costs.
The pharmacist can play an important part in MTM. We will
be hearing from pharmacists as they describe their role and
apply their extensive medication knowledge as medication
experts with the intent of improving patient health outcomes.
Medication management is vital to ensuring that covered
Part D, or prescription drugs, are appropriately used to
optimize therapeutic outcomes.
As we have heard from our senior constituents, they rely on
the Part D program and Congress has a responsibility to ensure
that the MTM program is working as intended.
Today we have two panels, including the administration's
witness from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services,
CMS, the director of delivery system reform.
Additionally, we will hear from a panel of experts and
stakeholders as to their ideas and recommendations for possible
improvement in this evolving program.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Joseph R. Pitts

The Subcommittee will come to order.
The Chairman will recognize himself for an opening
statement.
Today's hearing will examine the Medication Therapy
Management (MTM) program, which is part of the Medicare Part D
prescription drug program. The Part D program was established
as part of the Medicare Modernization Act (MMA) in 2003.
MMA required Medicare Part D prescription drug plans to
include medication therapy management services delivered by a
qualified healthcare professional, including pharmacists,
beginning in 2006.
Medications can save or improve lives, but taken
incorrectly or in excess, they can make patients worse. With
thousands of prescription drugs on the market, frequently no
one prescriber, caregiver or manufacturer knows the total
picture for each patient.
MTM services target beneficiaries who have multiple chronic
conditions, such as diabetes, asthma, hypertension, and
congestive heart failure. Such beneficiaries likely take
multiple medications and are likely to incur very expensive
annual medical costs. The pharmacists can play an important
part in MTM. We will be hearing from pharmacists as they
describe their role and apply their extensive medication
knowledge as medication experts with the intent of improving
patient health outcomes.
Medication management is vital to ensuring that covered
Part D or prescription drugs are appropriately used to optimize
therapeutic outcomes. As we have heard from our senior
constituents, they rely on the Part D program and Congress has
a responsibility to ensure that the MTM program is working as
intended.
Today we have two panels, including the Administration's
witness from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
(CMS), the Director of Delivery System Reform. Additionally, we
will hear from a panel of experts and stakeholders as to their
ideas and recommendations for possible improvement in this
evolving program.
I will now yield to the distinguished gentlelady from
Washington, Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers.

Mr. Pitts. Does anyone on my side of the aisle seek time?
If not, I will yield back and now recognize the distinguished
ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr. Green, 5 minutes for
his opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GENE GREEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning.
It is very real today, and thank our witness for being
here. The costs for medication adherence include increased
hospitalizations, doctor and emergency room visits and
preventable disease regression.
Studies have shown that these add up to costs to the health
care system of an estimated $290 billion each year. When
patients adhere to their medications, the data demonstrates
that they are much more likely to have improved health
outcomes, use fewer health care services such as ER visits and
rehospitalizations.
This is particularly true for patients with one or multiple
chronic conditions, as medications are involved in 80 percent
of all treatments for chronic disease interventions.
Proper medication adherence leads to improved health care
outcomes and better disease management. The avoidance of
dangerous and costly complications later on is advantageous to
the Medicare program at large through decreased medical
spending.
Recognizing the value of proper medication adherence,
Congress created Medication Therapy Management, MTM, program as
part of the Medicare Modernization Act of 2003. The MTM program
was intended to better integrate medication management services
to the Medicare Part D program.
Specifically, the goal of MTM is to ensure that covered
Part D--the drugs--are appropriately used to maximize their
therapeutic benefits for Medicare beneficiaries enrolled in
stand alone prescription drug plans and Medicare Advantage
prescription drug plans.
However, it is widely recognized that the Part D MTM
program is not meeting its full potential and reforms are
needed so that seniors can better access these important
services.
Current statute of regulatory requirements for MTM require
services offered based on fairly rigid criteria, which has led
to mismatched enrollment and beneficiaries who will likely
benefit from the MTM programs being missed.
MTM restrictions require that in order for a Medicare Part
D beneficiary to be eligible for MTM they must have multiple
chronic conditions, be prescribed multiple medications or meet
an annual cost threshold for prescription drug spending.
These prescriptive criteria seem like an oversimplification
of patients who may benefit from MTM services and have been
cited as a contributing factor to low MTM participation.
Another factor that may be contributing to low
participation is that the program requires cooperation among
several groups, some of which may have competing interests. It
is time to look for ways to effectively target seniors who
would greatly benefit from the medication management services
and realign incentives so that the benefits to patients in the
health care system can be fully realized.
Last month, the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services
announced a model test of strategies to improve medical
medication adherence among beneficiaries who are enrolled in
Part D plans by expanding and improving the use of MTM.
This model will run out of the CMS's Center for Medicare
and Medicaid Intervention which was created by the Affordable
Care Act. The enhanced MTM model will assess whether providing
stand alone Medicare prescription drug plans with additional
flexibility and alternative payment methods increase enrollment
and better achieve Congress' vision for the MTM programs.
I recognize and appreciate CMS for its agency's efforts to
improvement to the program throughout its history and for
piloting the enhanced MTM model.
However, demonstration projects are naturally limited in
scope and we won't have full results until 2022. Participation
remains very low and, according to CMS, more than 25 percent of
the enrollees would benefit from MTM services.
I look forward to working with my colleagues on appropriate
legislative solutions to reform the Part D MTM program to
provide the completion of the demonstration project.
I thank you and I yield the balance of my time to my
colleague from California, Congresswoman Matsui.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you so much and thank you, Mr. Chairman,
for holding this important hearing today on the topic of
medication therapy management, or MTM.
MTM helps seniors take their medications safely, correctly
and increases their adherence. It is an important tool that has
been shown to save the system money.
If people, especially seniors, had the proper training and
education about how, why, and when to take their medications,
their conditions don't end up untreated, saving unnecessary
hospital visits and other complications.
Not only does this save the system money but it truly
benefits the senior, especially those with multiple chronic
conditions who may be filling up to 50 different prescriptions
per year.
It is important that we ensure that seniors have access to
MTM within the Medicare program and I look forward to hearing
from our witnesses today about we are ensuring that that
happens.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady.
As usual, the written opening statements of the members
will be made a part of the record. We have another hearing in
Energy and Commerce going on downstairs so members will be
shuttling back and forth.
On the first panel we have Mr. Tim Gronniger, director of
Delivery System Reform Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services.
Your written testimony will be made a part of the record.
We would ask you to take 5 minutes to summarize your testimony
and then we will do questions.
So at this point, Mr. Gronniger, you are recognized 5
minutes for your summary.

STATEMENT OF TIM GRONNIGER, DIRECTOR OF DELIVERY SYSTEM REFORM,
CENTERS FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID SERVICES

Mr. Gronniger. Thank you.
Good morning, Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Green and
members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the invitation and
opportunity to discuss CMS's new Part D enhancement Medication
Therapy Management model, or enhanced MTM model.
We appreciate your continued interest in improving Medicare
beneficiaries' access to quality, affordable and well-
coordinated health care.
MTM, when implemented effectively, can improve health care
quality and outcomes for patients and has the potential to
lower health care costs by helping to address medication-
related issues such as risk of side effects, gaps in adherence
to therapy, duplicative therapies, and other issues that could
jeopardize patient health and lead to unnecessary risks.
MTM and Medicare is a plan-based set of services that tries
to improve health outcomes by ensuring that patients are taking
their medications safely and as prescribed, by addressing any
barriers to their doing so and by bringing any issues to the
attention of treating clinicians.
For a variety of reasons, CMS believes that the true
benefits of MTM programs have not been realized yet in
Medicare.
While CMS has made changes to MTM programs over the last
decade and in consultation with stakeholders, participation in
such programs remains very low with only about 11 percent of
beneficiaries enrolled in MTM programs today.
Performance data and our interviews with industry experts
suggest that misaligned incentives have led Part D plans to
focus on meeting minimum technical requirements rather than
trying to identify opportunities to improve the health of
Medicare beneficiaries.
Specific concerns include that plan sponsors are not
rewarded for improvements in the quality of care received
through MTM programs.
Plan sponsors cannot receive any benefit from reductions in
spending in Parts A and B of Medicare so their interests are
not entirely financially aligned with those of the Medicare
program or beneficiaries.
And compounding that, competitive pressure to keep premiums
low to attract enrollment means that investment in MTM services
comes at a competitive cost without any financial gain.
Despite these obstacles, we believe that Part D needs a
strong MTM program because there are a number of barriers that
can prevent beneficiaries from taking their medications safely
and as prescribed.
For example, some beneficiaries have difficulty with
forgetfulness and memory issues, the physical taking of pills
and opening pill bottles, the cost of cost sharing for
medications prescribed by multiple prescribers without a
coordinated process to reconcile those prescriptions.
Pharmacists, Part D sponsors, and other experts have
identified many ways that MTM programs can be improved if we
align incentives and provide flexibility in program design.
Opportunities include improved patient education, medication
reconciliation, reminder programs in packaging, refill
synchronization, and risk-based targeted interventions with
beneficiaries and prescribes.
Industry experts suggested that more targeted and
differentiated interventions to help patients understand their
medications on a more frequent basis are required--smaller
bytes of information at learning points such as care
transitions, starts of new medication and around annual
wellness visits, for example.
A few notes on the model itself--through this project, CMS
will test whether providing Part D plans with regulatory
flexibilities, aligned financial incentives and access to
Medicare claims data will better achieve Medicare's original
vision for MTM programs.
The enhanced MTM model will incentivize plans to right size
their investment in MTM services by expanding enrollment and
improving the coordination of care experienced by
beneficiaries.
Key elements of the model include the ability to offer
different MTM services to individuals based on their level of
medication-related risk with interventions tailored to those
enrollees' specific barriers to improvement, including cost
sharing assistance to beneficiaries who need it, prospective
payments to support more extensive MTM interventions that will
be outside of a planned annual Part D bid and premium.
The model also includes the opportunity for plans to
qualify for a performance-based payment in the form of an
increased premium subsidy for plans that successfully reduced
medical spending in Parts A and B of Medicare.
The ability to access Parts A and B claims data from CMS
will also support plan participants by helping to identify and
coordinate care for individuals enrolled in the MTM models.
A couple of notes on pharmacy and pharmacists' role in the
program. This model provides potential opportunity for plans to
invest in pharmacist-based MTM programs at the local level for
the opportunity for direct beneficiary engagement is greatest.
Pharmacists might be well positioned to identify candidate
beneficiaries starting new medications with risky side effect
profiles, to help patients receiving medication assistance
devices such as pill splitters or mobile phone reminder apps,
synchronized refills to provide home delivery and cost sharing
assistance and to provide counseling advice tailored to the
patient's needs and situation.
In conclusion, CMS believes that the enhanced MTM model
will give prescription drug plans stronger incentives and
flexibility to improve prescription drug safety and
effectiveness working with beneficiaries, pharmacists, and
prescribers.
CMS looks forward to working with these and other
stakeholders in the coming months and years to learn more about
ways to maximize the benefits of MTM to promote better care,
smarter spending, and better health for Medicare beneficiaries.
I thank the subcommittee for the opportunity to share our
plans for this important demonstration and would be happy to
answer any questions that you may have on the model.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gronniger follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. Again, thank you
for coming. Thank you for your testimony. I will begin the
questioning, recognize myself for 5 minutes for that purpose.
Mr. Gronniger, can you provide a range of how many plans
you expect to participate in the innovation model from the five
Part D regions selected for inclusion?
Mr. Gronniger. We haven't identified a cap or a limit on
participation in the model. That model is open to any plans
that would like to participate and can submit qualifying
applications.
In the five regions that are selected there are about 13 to
15 plans in each region. So that would be the maximum and we
will be identifying and evaluating applications and so we will
find out the number of applications as we go through that
process.
Mr. Pitts. It is my understanding that the regions chosen
for participation were evaluated on a number of criteria, such
as variation in market competition and range of Parts A and B
spending.
Can you provide any more insight into how these regions
were selected?
Mr. Gronniger. Yes, sir.
In designing all of the innovation center models including
this one, we look to make sure that we have sufficient number
of participants to power the evaluation design and in this case
we needed about that many regions to get an appropriate number
of beneficiaries and plans participating.
As I mentioned, we hope that all or most plans in those
regions will submit good applications. We wanted to make sure
that the participants were representative of the national
market as a whole as well as being able to identify areas with
higher and lower Medicare spending that had different types of
areas of the country whether rural or urban to make sure that
the evaluation could identify a nationally representative
result.
Mr. Pitts. Can you briefly summarize how the innovation
model will work to realign financial incentives and regulatory
constraints that PDPs currently face when trying to implement
meaningful MTM programs?
Mr. Gronniger. Yes, sir.
Today, Part D plans offering MTM programs are required to
offer a certain set of services and are required to define a
minimum number of patients who are eligible for these programs
based on criteria such as how many chronic conditions a patient
has, how many drugs the patient is taking and expected spending
for the course of a year.
We know that more than 11 percent of Medicare beneficiaries
can benefit from MTM programs. Previous work by CMS and other
experts suggest that 25 percent or even more could benefit from
these programs and we also know that there are certain
beneficiaries who fall under those criteria who could benefit
from interventions.
Patients who are taking drugs such as blood thinners that
are unusually risky even if it is the only drug that they are
taking can benefit from counseling and management of those
therapies.
So we are providing in this model the flexibility to use a
risk-based approach to identify beneficiaries who need the
project, who need the intervention the most, identify
interventions that will support that patient's care needs in
collaboration, potentially, with pharmacists, with the
patient's physicians and will provide a more comprehensive set
of interventions that can support care improvement.
For the alignment on incentives, never before has a Part D
model provided an incentive for Part D plans to manage or
contribute to managing the overall cost and quality of care for
patients.
So this will allow Part D plans to benefit if they are able
to lower overall medical spending directly by receiving a $2
premium reduction later on in the model. That will provide
competitive benefits if they are able to measure the effects of
this program.
Mr. Pitts. Cost sharing assistance for financially needy
enrollees is referenced as ``enhanced and individualized MTM
strategy'' in the announcement from CMS on the MTM innovation
model.
Will the individual PDPs or CMS be defining who is
financially needy?
Mr. Gronniger. So that is a good question. Thank you, sir.
We are asking for plans to provide us ideas on the right
types of interventions that are needed here and so we are
hoping to see a diversity of programs created and identified.
If they choose to take advantage of this option, then they
will need to submit a detailed plan around what types of
interventions and what types of medications and what situations
would give rise to offering cost sharing assistance.
If a patient tells a plan that cost sharing is an
impediment to accessing needed therapy, then that is the type
of situation that this model is intended to allow the MTM
program to identify. We are not intending that plans would get
deep into income determination.
Mr. Pitts. And you will be defining what cost sharing
assistance entails?
Mr. Gronniger. We will be evaluating proposals from plans
and working with them on the right parameters for that type of
assistance.
Mr. Pitts. And can we expect this will be elaborated on in
the request for applicants?
Mr. Gronniger. The request for applications will include
what the plans need to submit to us and we will then take those
applications and work with plans to make sure that it is the
intervention that makes sense.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you. My time has expired.
The chair recognizes the ranking member, Mr. Green, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Green. One of the great successes of the Affordable
Care Act is that it not only provided lifesaving health
insurance coverage to millions of Americans but it also changed
the way we pay for health care.
The ACA has indisputably put our healthcare system on the
path toward one that reimburses for value instead of volume.
Patients now have the option to be cared for in a more
integrated system such as accountable care organizations and
patient-centered medical homes.
Mr. Gronniger, in your testimony you wrote that the
enhanced MTM model will be complementary rather than
duplicative of the ACOs and other integrative care models.
Can you elaborate on that interaction?
Mr. Gronniger. Yes. Thank you, sir.
So for most ACOs, the number of prescription drug plans
that are providing drug benefits for their aligned populations
could be anywhere from 15 to 20 or 30 plans and those plans are
often in a better position to understand the scope of the
patient's medication-related issues and needs because they have
access to the full set of data or nearly the full set of data
on the drugs that that patient is using.
Today, though, as we have discussed, there isn't a strong
incentive for plans to engage with ACOs or other physicians who
are managing the care of their patients overall. And so that
physician may not be able to see the full picture that they
need to see of the medications that the patient is taking.
This model will create the opportunity for a pathway that
plans can invest in MTM services that could include linkages
with physician groups to provide better information to the
physician managing the patient's medications and overall care
and so enhance the work of an ACO or other alternative payment
model.
Mr. Green. Is it fair to say that an enhanced MTM model has
the potential to not only work alongside newer patient-centered
medical care models but actually have a multiplying effect on
the benefits that the patients may receive?
Mr. Gronniger. Yes, sir.
We think that there are numerous opportunities for these
programs to support the care management activities that ACOs
and other physician organizations are trying to promote to
improve the quality of care that their patients are
experiencing.
Mr. Green. I want to thank you for your work on the MTM
program. I believe the enhanced MTM model is an excellent step
and I am happy that CMS has dedicated the time and effort to
thoughtfully improve the important beneficiary services.
On the other hand, one of the drawbacks of any
demonstration project is it is by nature limited in scope and
will only have results until 2022.
Are these specific aspects of the Medication Therapy
Management program would benefit from change prior to the
completion of the enhanced medication therapy model?
Mr. Gronniger. We are in the process of standing up the
model right now so we are still working on the front end part
of getting plans to apply and to getting the process stood up
for 2017.
We allowed 5 years for the model to work and to provide
adequate time for evaluation because we heard that these types
of interventions there needs to be a lot of experimentation.
It is going to take a process of refinement. Plan
participants can also propose updates to their programs on an
annual basis that we will discuss with them.
I would also emphasize that even though the model is slated
to run for 5 years we will be evaluating it on an annual basis.
And so we will have the opportunities to engage with you as
well as to make any needed course corrections in the interim.
Mr. Green. But during that 5-year period if you have some
type of real success you could actually put those in place even
before the 2022?
Mr. Gronniger. If the data is strong enough and if we are
able to demonstrate improvements in quality then there would be
opportunity for extension earlier than 2022, yes.
Mr. Green. Procedures choosing Part D plans transparency
and ease of understanding are critical to ensure every
beneficiary selects the plan that is most appropriate for that
individual.
One component, I believe, that has been very helpful in
this regard is the use of star ratings in the Part D program.
Can you discuss why CMS decided to add a comprehensive
medication reviews to the star rating measurement beginning
next year?
Mr. Gronniger. Yes.
So we are constantly looking at improving our quality
rating systems and our quality performance systems. We have had
the star program in Part D for a number of years now.
We have also been aware of issues and we have worked over
the years to try to improve enrollment in and to scope of the
MTM program.
And one opportunity for that was to promote the use and
adoption of comprehensive medication reconciliation under the
existing MTM program and we thought that by including a star
rating on that that would provide some incentive for plans to
improve.
And that is work that we still feel is important. We think
that CMRs are something that is valuable for beneficiaries and
that will be happening across the country and supporting
improvement in plans that are not in this intervention.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
I now recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am glad I follow my friend from Texas because he had to
put in his little plug for the ACA.
[Laughter.]
Well, the plug I have is it look likes it is going to be 10
million under enrolled and that most people I talk to are
paying more and getting less coverage. So a little tit for tat
just to show that there is differing views on that piece of
legislation.
But that is not what we are here to talk about so we are
glad to have you here.
So I come from a very large district in southern Illinois--
33 counties. Many of my seniors, most in need, the pharmacist
might be the only health care provider that they have
consistent access to in this area that we are talking about
today.
As a result, they are visiting their pharmacist and the
pharmacist can start asking them because they look maybe
jaundiced a little bit when they come in or then they can start
asking these questions.
So in this process I am kind of excited about this but, of
course, we will make sure that the pharmacy community,
especially the independents and some of the chains, they are
involved in this process.
Do you track and have evidence showing how this
relationship translates when it comes to outcomes and emergency
room usage and hospital utilizations in rural and underserved
areas?
So the thing we have is this cost benefit analysis, right?
So if we are going to move to this new model, if they are able
to identify stuff through the management practices are you
trying to track the savings on the back end?
Mr. Gronniger. Yes.
Yes and yes. We are very attentive to the issues facing
rural communities and difficulties accessing providers and
traveling long distances.
We have also heard from many community pharmacists that the
current MTM program really doesn't touch them very often and we
think that that is largely a result of the misaligned
incentives and regulatory barriers that we have discussed.
We are hopeful that this will provide a pathway for
investment in some of those services that can be delivered
often by local community pharmacists, potentially by others.
Today, a lot of MTM programs are provided by national or
regional contractors and many of them are very competent and
capable and also able to engage with local pharmacists. But
because there is not a strong incentive to invest, we think
that they are mostly in the cost minimization approach rather
than recognizing the full potential here.
So yes, we think that this will create an opportunity for
support of that and we will also be tracking on a granular
level sort of the intervention by intervention where what is
happening in this program and where there are benefits being
provided.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, so we want to make sure you remember the
rural and the underserved areas. Sometimes they are the same
but sometimes underserved areas could be in some metropolitan
areas too where there is, we call those deserts for food and
nutrition but I think that is true in some of the health care
delivery issues, also.
You mentioned that current MTM statutory and regulatory
provision limitations may lead to some beneficiaries who don't
benefit from MTM being included in the programs while missing
some of the beneficiaries who would benefit from the MTM
programs.
Can you give us some more specifics on what changes you
think might be needed to include more people that could benefit
from the program and removing those who don't benefit from the
program?
Mr. Gronniger. Sure.
So, for example, we talked about the need for a cost
threshold and the minimum number of chronic conditions to
qualify for MTM programs today.
We know that diabetic patients often take drugs that are
risky and can result in hospitalizations and other adverse
events if they aren't managed well.
Today, being diagnosed as a diabetic alone doesn't qualify
you for an MTM program. Under this program, the plan sponsor
and participant would be able to suggest risk-based
intervention such as even just one condition such as diabetes
that could qualify a patient for counseling or other types of
MTM interventions.
Mr. Shimkus. And in my remaining time, you state that CMS
believes pharmacists serve a vital role in ensuring that
Medicare beneficiaries receive and properly use prescription
drugs upon which they rely.
Can you tell us how we have seen that role increase and
evolve over time with the implementation of Part D?
Mr. Gronniger. Yes.
We talked to a lot of pharmacy groups and pharmacists and I
think that it is fair to say that many of these organizations
view themselves, as you mentioned, as part of the health care
continuum and want to provide more support for their patients
than merely filling a script and we think that this model is an
opportunity to support that work.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman and now I will
recognize the gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Castor, 5 minutes
for questions.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for calling the
hearing today.
Mr. Gronniger, I am pleased to see that CMS is working to
improve the Medication Therapy Management program through the
enhanced MTM model.
The efficiencies that can be achieved haven't been
maximized over the past few years and this definitely is a step
in the right direction.
I have a question regarding what the model will look like
from the patient's perspective. At first glance, most of the
provisions of the medication therapy management model appear to
target the insurer rather than the patient.
I understand the rationale behind the restrictions on
direct marketing. But I am wondering if Medicare beneficiaries
understand what the MTM is when it is offered to them.
Personally, I wonder if beneficiaries are naturally
skeptical when an insurance company says here, we have
additional services for you. Given that, historically, there
has been a very low participation in the MTM program.
Has CMS considered undertaking any actions to improve
beneficiary awareness and engagement?
Mr. Gronniger. Yes.
So we have historically included language in the Medicare &
You Handbook that is mailed out every year as well as on
Medicare.gov to explain what MTM programs are in case patients
are contacted by their insurer.
We also encourage beneficiaries if they think they could
benefit from these types of services to contact their Part D
plan directly.
And this model, because the interventions are going to be
very tailored and sometimes may operate at first in the
background of the beneficiary and the beneficiary will not know
beforehand whether they will qualify under the plan's tailored
intervention, we are not going to be doing prospective outreach
from CMS on this other than providing, again, language
explaining what the project is and making sure that we are able
to direct people to the right source to answer questions.
We think, though, that part of the reason for low
enrollment in the past is that plans have the ability to engage
with beneficiaries as well as through trusted intermediaries
like pharmacists and physicians.
And so we think that there are multiple ways that further
engagement could--further engagement with those stakeholders
and those providers can support better enrollment in the
program.
Ms. Castor. Does it make sense to tackle some of the more
expensive chronic conditions, for example, diabetes? Do you
have something that is targeted to certain populations like
that?
Mr. Gronniger. We have seen diabetes as the most targeted
chronic condition in MTM services today and we expect that it
will probably continue to be one of the most targeted.
We have heard that chronic conditions that are very reliant
on medication therapy, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary
disorder--congestive heart failure--are likely to be candidates
for intervention.
But we are not prescribing that beforehand. We want to see
a diversity in innovation and the offerings from plans here and
then we will hopefully be able to learn what works.
Ms. Castor. OK. Thank you for your work on it and we will
look forward to a report back that you have achieved greater
efficiencies in the MTM.
Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentlelady and I recognize the
gentleman from Pennsylvania, Dr. Murphy, 5 minutes for
questions.
Dr. Murphy. Thank you for being here today. This is very
informative.
Can you just help me understand the difference between a
model test versus a demonstration?
Mr. Gronniger. So I think in this case there is not an
important difference. This is a model test. I think it is a
difference between statutory and common language.
So this is a demonstration project being tested under the
innovation center's authority.
Dr. Murphy. So there is not, for example, statutory
authority for a model test. Is that what you are saying?
Mr. Gronniger. We can get back to you on the exact wording
of how this works in the statute. But, yes, this is operated
under the innovation center's authority to test models.
Dr. Murphy. OK. Thank you.
So in the announcement for the MTM innovation model you say
that one of CMS's research questions--what is the impact on
patient outcomes and satisfaction--how are you measuring and
what are you using to measure patient satisfaction and outcome?
Mr. Gronniger. So we are going to be conducting beneficiary
surveys to understand how this program is experienced by
involved beneficiaries to CFA, both if they like the program,
if they have appreciated the services available, if they felt
that it has improved to a better understanding of their
medication.
We are going to be working with experts, with pharmacists
and plans and physician organizations to define the right
quality measures for the program.
There aren't a consensus set of quality measures right now
for MTM services. So we are going to have to work with others
to build them.
Dr. Murphy. So for example, we have been talking about
diabetes here as one example in chronic illness. Do you have
any kind of questions or areas at least you are thinking of in
a direction with that yet?
Mr. Gronniger. We don't have any quality measures for MTM
specific to diabetes that we are envisioning and these are
draft.
But we put it out in our announcement to plans, things like
medication-related problems identified and resolved would be
the type of quality measures.
Dr. Murphy. So side effects, et cetera?
Mr. Gronniger. Yes.
Dr. Murphy. So there has been a number of studies, for
example, that have identified people with chronic illness, such
as diabetes, heart disease, et cetera, have a much higher risk
of depression, like, double the rate.
When you have untreated depression and a chronic illness,
the cost doubled, for multiple reasons, some of them actually
primary neurological and how the body no longer fights--it
doesn't have the same immune levels, exacerbation of illness,
et cetera.
But crossing over from that, for example, with diabetes,
cardiovascular disease, et cetera, persons with severe mental
illness have a much higher risk of those not only primarily
because they perhaps are not caring for themselves as well,
they don't keep appointments, they may fear the doctors because
of hallucinations, delusions, et cetera, but also when they are
taking a second generation anti-psychotic, for example, higher
risk for diabetes, higher risk for cardiovascular disease--I
think type 2 diabetes is one and so it is extremely important.
When I have seen studies where, for example, Jewish
Healthcare Foundation in Pittsburgh, is monitoring folks. They
screen them at the same time for depression when they are
diabetic or heart disease.
They intervene quickly and they actually find that overall
costs go down and they can use less medications to treat.
So I hope you will use a broader, coordinated and
integrated care model to look at and not just do you have
symptoms of side effects or not. But are those being addressed
in a more global perspective and a multi disciplinary way to
try and address these issues.
It is one of those things that--and I know Medicare is
moving towards, in some way, with this integrative model can be
extremely important in addressing those. But if we don't ask
those, it is a problem.
The second issue I want to get into is pain management.
Some have said the elderly, actually, is underserved in terms
of managing pain.
But the other issue is oftentimes the way you can quiet
someone down is just give them some opiates for their pain, and
then we run higher risks of addiction issues.
Not from someone who has set out to be a drug addict but we
give them so much opiates that they end up having an addiction
to that.
Is that something you will also be monitoring in terms of
how pain is managed and other sensitivity to opiates?
Mr. Gronniger. Yes, and so first, I would say I appreciate
your comments and suggestions for managing mental health
medications and their interactions with other chronic diseases
and we will take that back. I think they were great
suggestions.
For opiates and other pain medications, we think that that
is one area that applicants might want to target for the
reasons you identify.
MTM programs also attempt to look at the over the counter
medications that patients are taking, and particularly for
acetaminophen, can be a really bad interaction problem----
Dr. Murphy. OK.
Mr. Gronniger [continuing]. For opiates. And so we think
that there are opportunities there to improve care and avoid
risks and we hope that plans will take advantage of that.
Dr. Murphy. Let me suggest something too, and pharmacists
can be helpful--with the Affordable Care Act, there is at least
3 questions that are asked as someone is discharged. Like, for
an emergency room, you have to fill out surveys, at least 3
questions that deal with pain.
And since hospitals are finding themselves scored on this,
I think there is almost an incentive for them to hand out more
pain medication because it affects how much they are going to
get paid.
And then without follow-up--this committee has done a lot
of work on looking at substance abuse and addictions issues and
I hope you look at that whole picture of things.
But thank you so much for your focus on this. This could be
innovative. Appreciate that.
I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman and now recognizes
the gentlelady from California, Ms. Matsui, 5 minutes for
questions.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Traditionally, patients have been eligible for MTM services
if they meet fairly rigid criteria regarding either the number
of prescriptions utilized, the number of chronic diseases or
the total amount of prescription drug spending. However, there
seems to be an oversimplification of patients that may benefit
from MTM services.
Mr. Gronniger, in the past, CMS has recommended that Part D
plans offer MTM services to additional patient groups beyond
the baseline requirements, and we have already talked about
patients at high risk for opiate abuse.
Are there other groups of patients that are under
represented in the MTM programs?
Mr. Gronniger. Yes.
I think it is probably fair to say because of the low
enrollment we think that the patients overall are under
represented in the programs and we think that there are a
multitude of condition-specific opportunities available here,
including in areas where there is already investment in
diabetes and congestive heart failure.
So we think that there are going to be a wide range of
opportunities. Congressman Murphy just mentioned a couple of
good ones as well.
So I think yes and I think we are going to probably have a
large amount of good ideas on the table as we go through the
applications.
Ms. Matsui. I would also consider too that there are
different populations involved here, which might cause some
concern amongst some patients as to communication, and I was
wondering whether that is a consideration also. I am looking at
California a large diversity, different ethnic populations.
Has there been consideration in that regard?
Mr. Gronniger. Yes.
So I think inherent to any successful project and
application and intervention here is going to be an ability to
engage with beneficiaries to help them understand the
medications that they are taking.
And so plans are going to have to look closely at their
enrollees to understand what they need to be successful, to
communicate with them.
Whether it is working with the pharmacists in their
neighborhood or whether it is something based out of a
physician office or some other organization that can reach
beneficiaries who need to--who can understand their medications
better. I think that that will have to be a part of these
models.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Thank you.
I noticed in the new model at CMMI that there is a
particular emphasis on risk-based interventions. Can you speak
to how a risk-based approach in MTM might improve outcomes?
Mr. Gronniger. Yes, and it gets to the flexibilities and
incentives that you mentioned earlier. We think that the intent
of the statute and the regulations to say the MTM services, we
know, aren't for everybody so we need to limit them to
individuals with multiple chronic conditions and with spending
expected to exceed a threshold would make sense on some levels
and that we know that it is not for everybody.
However, we know that there are individuals who don't reach
those thresholds who can benefit like individuals on blood
thinners, medications that can have fatal consequences if not
managed appropriately.
Even if it is the only drug that that patient is taking
they wouldn't qualify for MTM under the current programs. So we
think that that is an example of an area where we are providing
the ability to reach beyond the current thresholds.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Well, thank you very much, and I yield
back.
Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentlelady and now recognizes
the gentleman from New York, Mr. Collins, 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Gronniger, for your testimony.
Obviously, from the questions and the tone we are just all
trying to better understand what is going on and, clearly,
looking out for patient safety and costs at the same time are
admirable goals and I think all of us can agree that is a good
thing.
So just, really, a couple of questions as I have heard some
of the testimony. Am I correct that the MTM program--a
beneficiary has to agree with their provider to enter their
program?
Mr. Gronniger. So beneficiaries can opt out of the program
at any time and they will be contacted by the plan, generally,
speaking, and it will depend on the intervention and it will
require some work with the plans to identify exactly the type
of intervention for the right type of patient. Sometimes it
might be something as simple as an extra communication at the
pharmacist level.
So they might not feel like they are enrolled in anything
but plan patients will have the opportunity to opt out at any
time.
Mr. Collins. But why would a patient opt out? If we are
looking after their health to make sure they are not taking
drugs that could interfere, et cetera, and putting aside the
cost factor, why would a beneficiary opt out?
Mr. Gronniger. I would think that beneficiaries wouldn't
and shouldn't and I wouldn't recommend to any of my relatives
to opt out.
It is possible that some beneficiaries don't find the
current program where they do an interview, a comprehensive
medication review with, say, a pharmacist and they have to
spend 45 minutes talking to that person, some people find that
an imposition.
And so under the current program, some patients opt out. We
think that under a better designed program many fewer would
agree to participate.
Mr. Collins. Is there anything that would--clearly, I am
assuming the cost benefit which accrues to both the government
and the carriers but also information that would be available
to patients if they tried to opt out that they might get
something that would say, you should rethink this. Does that
type of thing happen or if somebody opts out they just opt out?
Mr. Gronniger. We are going to have to figure that one out
as we get the specific projects proposed by plan sponsors. And
that will include discussion of how the communications work
with beneficiaries.
We think that a well designed program should be sort of
self-evidentially beneficial to beneficiaries.
Mr. Collins. Right, I agree. So----
Mr. Gronniger. And so we hope that that is what we will see
and that we will see much lower rates of opt out. Only about 1
percent of beneficiaries in all of Part D receive comprehensive
medication reviews. Right now, we would expect that use of the
interventions in this program would exceed that in these
regions.
Mr. Collins. So now, as you bring this forward, I represent
the very rural area of eight counties and 105 towns in western
New York.
We have an extraordinarily high enrollment in Medicare
Advantage. It has just been adopted in our area probably, like,
no other. Now, am I correct that the MTM program does not apply
to Medicare Advantage plans?
Mr. Gronniger. Yes, that is right, sir.
Mr. Collins. And why would that be?
Mr. Gronniger. So one of the reasons that we are pursuing
this project is that we recognize that the incentives for Part
D plans are different from Medicare Advantage plans.
Medicare Advantage plans have responsibility for the total
Medicare benefit Parts A, B and D. Part D plans only have
responsibility for the drug part of the benefit. So they have a
different financial perspective on this than anybody.
Mr. Collins. So the assumption would be someone in Medicare
Advantage, those providers are already looking at the
interaction of A, B and D and should already be doing this? Is
that the idea?
Mr. Gronniger. We aren't assuming that and, in fact, we
have data suggesting that there are issues in Medicare
Advantage as well. So we aren't saying that this isn't
something that could benefit Medicare Advantage patients.
But as a first step and a first evaluation, we think this
is where we have the greatest needs. We would look at whether
we should expand it to Medicare Advantage in the future.
Mr. Collins. So that also begs the next question on
Medicaid. You would certainly have individuals in Medicaid that
have the comorbidities as well as cost and so forth.
Is there any thought that this MTM program should also move
into the Medicaid world?
Mr. Gronniger. It is a good question.
I think that some of the evidence that we have seen
supporting the use of Medication Therapy Measurement programs
has come from the Medicaid world.
States have the ability to offer this service under
Medicaid today and I would be happy to talk further about
whether it makes sense to try to expand that.
Mr. Collins. And is this a 7-year program, as I understand
it, this pilot?
Mr. Gronniger. It is a 5-year intervention with an extra 2
years run out to provide the premium subsidy for plans that
perform well in the fifth year.
Mr. Collins. OK. Well, again, my time has expired. Thank
you for that testimony.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman.
I now recognize the gentleman from Oregon, Dr. Schrader, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate you being here, Mr. Gronniger.
I would like to follow up a little bit on the Medicare
Advantage piece and it is a big part of prescription drug
delivery in my part of the world and patently very successful
by all accounts.
Wondered if you could elaborate what time frame might there
be an opportunity for Medicare Advantage to also have the same
incentives.
It seems smart to line all prescription drug plans
incentives along the same lines. Everyone is playing from the
same deck of cards and wondered when that might happen.
Mr. Gronniger. Sure. So Medicare Advantage prescription
drugs plans today are required to offer the same set of MTM
services and interventions that stand alone Part D plans are.
So Medicare Advantage plans do offer the currently existing set
of services that we have been trying to improve over the last
10 years.
This model has focused on Part D stand alone plans because
of the misalignment of financial incentives is greatest there
and we think that the greatest opportunity to demonstrate the
benefit of the program are the largest in the shortest amount
of time there.
We don't have plans to expand it to Medicare Advantage
right now but it is something I would be happy to talk with you
and others about over the coming months and year.
Mr. Schrader. I appreciate that, because I think there is
an opportunity and we want to make sure that as we hopefully
get better healthcare outcomes from whatever healthcare
delivery system continues to go forward that we align them
somewhat similarly so, again, we don't get this duplication--
some of the things you are trying to avoid, actually, with the
new rules.
And I guess I would ask the chair if it would be possible
to include a piece of information and some concerns put forward
by the National Association of Chain Drug Stores dated October
16th as part of the record for further consideration.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Schrader. And I yield back the rest of my time.
Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman and now recognize the
gentleman from Indiana, Dr. Bucshon, 5 minutes for questions.
Dr. Bucshon. Mr. Chairman, I don't have any specific
questions, just a few comments.
I was a practicing cardiovascular surgeon before and there
are many barriers to patients properly taking their medications
and being in compliance and this is some of those.
Other areas, I think, of interest to me are prepackaging
patients with certain amount of medicines they have to take on
a daily basis.
As many people know, patients already go home and take the
little pill counters and put them in there themselves. But I am
very intrigued about prepackaging at pharmacies, which some are
doing now, where patients will just get a packet and all their
medicines will be in there and it helps with the compliance
issue and it also helps, I think, the pharmacist also and the
pharmacy because less wasteful product, so to speak, where
patients have pill bottles renewed and still have three or four
pills in the other one and switch to the new bottle and those
medicines are lost.
So in the long run, there is a cost savings there probably
for the health care system overall. So I appreciate your
efforts at CMS to improve the quality of care for patients and
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman.
I now recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr. Engel, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Engel. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I am always pleased when our subcommittee comes together in
support of a particular cause and I just want to say that
Medicare Part D Medication Therapy Management program is a very
great example, and I thank our witness and look forward to the
second panel as well.
Mr. Gronniger, you note in your testimony CMS's belief, and
I am going to quote it, ``that the Part D MTM model will give
prescription drug plans stronger incentives and flexibility to
improve prescription drug safety and efficacy.''
Can you talk a little bit about why plans don't feel such
incentives currently or, perhaps put differently, why isn't
there already an incentive to improve prescription drug safety?
Is there any reason that this wouldn't already be a goal?
Mr. Gronniger. Yes.
So it is not that Part D plans aren't trying to deliver the
best care for patients and that clinicians managing care aren't
trying to deliver the best care and that many cases do have the
desire as well as the financial incentives.
I think that the example that Dr. Bucshon just gave is a
great one of prepackaging medications, is something that can
help patients remember to take the right drugs. It can help
them with the difficulty of opening bottles.
But right now, there is just not an incentive for plans or
pharmacists to invest if it costs less than the current
standards then that they can justify. But there is no incentive
in place that can support that.
There is no true up at the end that says you have done
better on the medical side of the benefit so we are going to
provide some support for your work. And so because it cuts
against the competitive pressures in Part D to keep the premium
low, to keep enrollment high, we just don't see the investment
that we think is probably beneficial here.
Mr. Engel. And you don't see it down the road either,
because, obviously, cost is the most relevant thing?
Mr. Gronniger. Yes.
So Part D plans are incentivized to manage and minimize the
spending on prescription drugs and unless they are Medicare
Advantage plans, are not responsible for the total cost of care
of the benefit.
And that makes sense in certain contexts but it also makes
sense to test approaches to making them more attentive and more
focused on how the drugs that the patients are taking are
supporting the overall patient care.
And that is why we have created an incentive to provide to
plans so that if they do demonstrate that they can reduce costs
on areas where we know that pharmacists and MTM type
interventions can drive cost savings then plans should have the
opportunity to share in that as long as beneficiaries from
lower premiums.
Mr. Engel. Thank you.
I can see from your testimony that CMS put a significant
amount of thought into defining the test area with the new MTM
model and I can also see from your testimony that CMS has
already carefully considered evaluation methods for this model.
I have a clarification I would like. Why did CMMI choose to
make only plans with the basic benefit eligible to participate
in the new model?
Mr. Gronniger. Sure.
So like we have talked about for some of the evaluation
parts of this, we want to make sure that we get the best test
of this model and the best defined set of patients and plans
possible.
The basic plans are a clearly defined set of patients and
populations where we believe there is significant need for
these services. Over time, just as with Medicare Advantage, we
would want to look at whether it makes sense to expand to
enhance coverage as well.
Mr. Engel. So what percentage of plans overall will be
participating in this model nationwide?
Mr. Gronniger. Nationwide, I am not sure of the percent
overall. It is in 5 regions and I think there are 34 PDP
regions. So it will be a minority of the population nationwide
but a nontrivial minority.
Mr. Engel. OK. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Gronniger. The chair thanks the gentleman. I now
recognize the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Griffith, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Appreciate
it. Appreciate you being here with us today. I am glad that
Virginia is in the program area that is going to be tested.
The CMS and Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation
recently announced plans to conduct a pilot allowing Part D
plans the opportunity to utilize new and innovative approaches
to Medication Therapy Management.
I have been a supporter of this and expanding the MTM
program and cosponsor of Cathy McMorris Rodgers' bill to do so
because I think better adherence to medication will keep our
seniors healthy and lower our cost for chronic care.
Does CMS plan on rolling out successful approaches, those
that prove to be successful, to the entire Part D MTM program
before the end of the 5 years that the pilot is scheduled to
take place or to last?
Mr. Gronniger. So for all innovation center projects our
goal is to identify pilots and demonstrations that both improve
the quality of care experience by patients and reduce program
costs and if they meet those tests in the evaluation then there
is the opportunity to expand them on the larger scale or even
nationwide.
So that would be our hope for this model as well that we
get really strong results and that we are able to expand it and
to provide these types of improvements on a nationwide basis if
we can get the research base behind it.
Mr. Griffith. And if you discover that before the end of
the 5-year period, do you feel like you will roll it out before
the end of that 5 years?
Mr. Gronniger. We will always be contingent on the data and
making sure that we have a clear understanding of how the
program is working for patients and for the Medicare program.
But we went with 5 years not because we wanted to wait 5
years but because we heard from plans and other stakeholders
that there was a lot of experimentation that is going to be
required here and it is going to take some time to get it
right.
And so we wanted to make sure we allowed for that and not
find ourselves feeling like we really got up and running year 3
and the project is over. So we wanted to make sure that there
is the opportunity to identify successful projects.
If we are able to find that things work great in year 1
and year 2, then we would be happy to talk with you and others
about the right way to expand that and scale it up sooner than
5 years.
Mr. Griffith. OK. I appreciate that.
I am glad you are here and given your role at CMS I wanted
to go off subject a little bit and mention another Part D
reform that I think is important. I know others disagree with
me. But I know that last year CMS released a broad rule which
was ultimately not finalized.
That rule contained a provision to allow for any willing
pharmacy to participate in Part D preferred network programs.
This is an issue of great importance for rural seniors and
pharmacies that I represent.
Seniors ought to be able to go to their local community
pharmacy and get the lowest price possible instead of being
told by an insurance plan they need to travel upwards of 20
miles to go to a different drug store.
Now, in my district, that doesn't sound like a lot, I
guess, if you come from a flat land area. But I represent the
mountainous parts of Virginia and in my district that 20 miles
could result in up to an hour in travel time.
In fact, from Haysi to Clintwood is only 18.1 miles. Those
are two towns in Dickenson County in my district but the mayor
of Haysi tells me that if he is going to a meeting in the
county seat in Clintwood, he plans on an hour because any
weather condition, a coal truck, a timber truck or any traffic
problem of any sort or nature on a mountain road means you are
not going to get there on time.
So he makes plans to travel an hour and it is just not
right to have our seniors having to make plans to travel an
hour to get to the pharmacy that may be designated by computers
being close by but is not in reality.
So that is my Congressman Welch and I, along with 59
bipartisan cosponsors, have a bill in, H.R. 793, to ensure
senior access to local pharmacies and we are hopeful that that
will go forward and encourage CMS to take a look at this and
would love to know if you had any comments.
Mr. Gronniger. Yes, sir.
Thank you, and I do come from flat lands in Kansas where we
go by about a mile per minute. If you have to take longer than
that then we are unhappy about it.
The specific provisions you reference in the rule from last
year we don't intend on in pursuing those at this time. We do
think that improving and making sure that the pharmacy networks
in Part D are robust is an important project and it is
something that we are continually looking at.
Mr. Griffith. Appreciate it very much and yield back.
Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman. I now recognize the
gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Sarbanes, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Sarbanes. Mr. Chairman, I don't have any questions. I
just want to associate myself with the comments of Mr. Griffith
on the annual pharmacy provision. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman. All right. We will
go to Mr. Long from Missouri, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gronniger, what is the need for this innovation model?
Mr. Gronniger. So we think that the Medication Therapy
Management program to date hasn't delivered the benefits that
we and others and Congress were intending when it was created
in 2006.
We think that there is a lot of need for better management
of prescription drugs for the Medicare population and we think
that the current program hasn't delivered largely as a result
of misaligned financial incentives and regulatory barriers that
we are trying to address in this project.
Mr. Long. OK. And then back in 2012 November, I think, the
CBO identified the cost savings potential of medication
adherence in the Medicare program.
And does CMS believe the program is designed to encourage
medication adherence, can improve the quality for
beneficiaries, and decrease costs?
Mr. Gronniger. Yes, absolutely.
We think that increasing adherence is likely to be one of
the major tools in the toolkit successful applications here.
We think that applicants will also look at projects to
address side effects, to address duplicative therapies if any
are identified and look at managing potential risks of drugs.
So we think that improving adherence is likely to be one aspect
of many of these programs.
Mr. Long. OK. Thank you.
You have covered a couple of my questions I had a little
earlier. So with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman. I now recognize the
ranking member of the full committee, Mr. Pallone, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gronniger, I am very pleased that just over 5 years ago
the Affordable Care Act was signed into law and the legislation
expanded insurance to those who needed it the most and provided
important protections for our most vulnerable citizens.
So I would just like to ask you about one aspect of the law
that pertains to Medication Therapy Management and that is the
medical loss ratio, or MLR.
Has CMS issued specific criteria as to what MTM services
must contain in order to be considered quality improvements?
Mr. Gronniger. Yes.
So this is one of the regulatory and financial issues that
we haven't discussed today. But the medical loss ratio rules
stipulate that MTM programs today are counted as administrative
costs and so it is a further reason that plans feel the
financial need to minimize the investment in these programs.
Under the model we will treat them as quality improvement
activities and so they will not be counted against the plan, so
to speak, in the calculation of MLR.
Mr. Pallone. So you just want to elaborate a little more on
CMS's decision to adjust the treatment of MTM services for
purposes of the calculation of MLR? You want to just talk about
that a little more? Is it just because as a means of
encouraging it?
Mr. Gronniger. Yes.
So plans today need to meet the minimum MLR to participate
in the program and so everything that counts against them on
the administrative side is something that they feel acutely.
By providing the ability to take something that is a
quality-enhancing activity like MTM services out of the
numerator, so to speak, out of the calculation it will allow
plans to look at the investments that they need to make here
and to right size them on the benefits of the program itself
rather than on a compliance checklist.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Let me ask you about the low income
subsidy patients. On average, Part D patients who receive the
low income subsidy tend to be in a poor state of health and
subsequently need to take more prescriptions.
And given that this is a more vulnerable population I am
interested in how well the MTA program is being applied to our
LIS patients. To date in Part D what proportion of MTM-eligible
Part D beneficiaries are LIS enrollees?
Mr. Gronniger. I will get back to you on the specific
numbers, sir.
Today, enrollment in MTM programs is slightly higher for
LIS beneficiaries than for other beneficiaries and we think
that under this model it is likely low income beneficiaries
including LIS beneficiaries are likely to be people who
successful plans study and try to target for specific tailored
interventions to help them access their medications.
We think we know that LIS enrollees are also in basic plans
which are the plans that are eligible to apply here. So we
think that it is likely to support improvements in care for LIS
beneficiaries through that channel as well.
Mr. Pallone. So is there anything else you could say about
how the rates of MTM participation compare between LIS
enrollees and other beneficiaries other than what you
mentioned?
Mr. Gronniger. Let me get back to you on the specific
numbers on that one, sir.
Mr. Pallone. All right.
Mr. Gronniger. We think that this will improve the ability
of plans to engage with LIS beneficiaries.
Mr. Pallone. Are there elements in this CMMI-enhanced MTM
model to specifically target the low income subsidy patients?
Mr. Gronniger. The particulars of the interventions
including beneficiary communications and the conditions
targeted are something that plans are going to propose and we
are going to work out what plans around the right way for that
intervention to happen.
So it is something where we hope to see diversity of
approaches and innovation from the participants and
applications.
Mr. Pallone. All right.
And my last question is will CMS be tracking MTM
participation and rates of comprehensive medication review
amongst these low income subsidy beneficiaries?
Mr. Gronniger. Yes, definitely.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Thank you so much. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman and now recognize the
gentlelady from North Carolina, Ms. Ellmers, 5 minutes for
questions.
Ms. Ellmers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Gronniger, for being with us today.
And I apologize for coming in late and you may have already
addressed the question that I have for you. But in relation to
the Medication Therapy Management program, you know, CMS
already acknowledging that the Medicare Part D program itself
has been utilized lower than had been expected.
I was just wondering, and there again, I know, there have
been many discussions, especially the pilot program that is
going to move forward--that was another one of my questions.
But if you can just identify for me what you think the
reasons are that this program has not been as successful as
anticipated.
Mr. Gronniger. Sure, and it gets back a little bit to the
question that Ranking Member Pallone asked.
We think that under the construct today Part D plans
operate in a very competitive market. They need to keep
premiums low to--both to attract enrollees as well as to
qualify as low income subsidy benchmark plans which qualifies
them for some automatic enrollment.
So in that circumstance, plans have to look very hard at
where they invest and where they try to do quality improvement
activities, and because MTM services cost money, not
necessarily a lot of money, but plans really are discouraged in
some ways by the current structure from investing inactivities
that are known to improve quality.
So this is a required service for plans in Part D so they
do it and we have defined how to do it and we have tried over
the years to expand the number of people involved as well as
the flexibility of what can be offered.
But, you know, we have some statutory constraints as well
as regulatory history. So this is an attempt to step outside of
that box and say we know that there are potential interventions
here that can benefit patients.
Let us create a model that is sustainable for a plan to
invest in those services, provide the technical investment that
can work with--work with local pharmacists, that can work with
the patient's physicians, that can provide better counseling to
patients and better understanding of their medications, provide
a framework for that and hopefully we will see this program
take off.
Ms. Ellmers. Great. Thank you so much for your time, and
with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentlelady.
That concludes the questions of the members present. I am
sure we will have follow-up questions and other members who may
be in another hearing will want to ask questions.
We will send them to you in writing. We ask that you please
respond promptly. Thank you very much for your testimony, your
time and very informative.
While the committee sets up for the second panel, the
committee will stand in recess for 3 minutes.
[Whereupon, the above-entitled matter recessed at 11:23
a.m. and resumed at 11:29 a.m.]
Mr. Pitts. Ladies and gentlemen, if you will take your
seats. The subcommittee will reconvene. I would like to submit
the following documents for the record: statements from the
American College of Clinical Pharmacy and the College of
Psychiatric and Neurologic Pharmacists, from the American
Association of Diabetes Educators, from the American
Pharmacists Association, from Prescriptions for a Healthy
America, from the American Society of Health System
Pharmacists, from the Healthcare Leadership Council, from the
National Community Pharmacists Association and from the
National Association of Chain Drug Stores and from the Academy
of Managed Care Pharmacies.
Without objection, those will be entered into the record.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Pitts. I am pleased to welcome the second panel at this
time and I will introduce them in the order of their
presentation.
First we have Mr. Lawrence Kocot, principal and national
leader, Center for Healthcare Regulatory Insight, KPMG.
Secondly, we have Mr. Mark Merritt, president and chief
executive officer of the Pharmaceutical Care Management
Association. Thirdly, Mr. Jesse McCullough, director, Field
Clinical Services, Rite Aid Corporation, and finally, Dr.
Richard Thomas Benson, associate director of stroke, MedStar
Washington Hospital Center.
First of all, your written testimony will be made a part of
the record. You will each be given 5 minutes to summarize your
testimony and we welcome you. Thank you for coming, and Mr.
Kocot, you are recognized 5 minutes for your summary.

STATEMENTS OF LAWRENCE KOCOT, PRINCIPAL AND NATIONAL LEADER,
CENTER FOR HEALTHCARE REGULATORY INSIGHT, KPMG LLP; MARK
MERRITT, PRESIDENT AND CEO, PHARMACEUTICAL CARE MANAGEMENT
ASSOCIATION; JESSE MCCULLOUGH, DIRECTOR, FIELD CLINICAL
SERVICES, RITE AID CORPORATION; RICHARD THOMAS BENSON,
ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR OF STROKE, MEDSTAR WASHINGTON HOSPITAL
CENTER

STATEMENT OF LAWRENCE KOCOT

Mr. Kocot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Green and distinguished
members of the subcommittee, thank you all for this opportunity
to testify on the Medicare Part D Medication Therapy Management
program.
My name is Larry Kocot and I am currently principal and
national leader of the Center for Healthcare Regulatory Insight
at KPMG.
As a former senior official with CMS during the
implementation of the MMA I was an active participant in the
implementation of Medicare Part D. Specifically, I was involved
in the development of the original MTM program requirements and
regulations.
More recently, I was the project leader for the technical
expert panel convened by the Brookings Institution and the
MITRE Corporation to inform the development of the Medicare
Part D enhanced MTM model recently announced by CMMI.
The MMA amended the Social Security Act to provide
subsidized prescription drug coverage to Medicare beneficiaries
through Medicare Advantage and through a stand alone PDP.
Today, nearly 40 million Medicare beneficiaries are
enrolled in a Medicare-sponsored plan that provide prescription
drug coverage with approximately 24 million Medicare
beneficiaries accessing their prescription drugs for a stand
alone PDP.
Effective medication use can prevent or address acute
chronic illnesses and improve beneficiary health outcomes and
reduce overall healthcare costs.
However, prescription drugs are often inappropriately used
or suboptimally used, leading to adverse drug events,
unnecessary hospitalizations, and other unintended health
outcomes.
Noting the great benefits as well as the potential risks of
providing prescription drug benefit coverage to Medicare
beneficiaries, Congress required that all Part D plans provide
an MTM program to optimize therapeutic outcomes through
improved medication use and to reduce the risk of adverse
events.
While the MTM program has had a positive impact on the
health outcomes of some Medicare beneficiaries, the program has
not lived up to expectations. Some plan sponsors view MTM as a
necessary cost of participating in the Part D program and they
do the minimum necessary to engage patients to satisfy CMS
requirements.
Experts across the spectrum of plans, pharmacists,
academics, and advocates have noted that the success of the MTM
program is severely limited by the misalignment of incentives.
Furthermore, better evidence is needed to understand how
MTM can more effectively be used and what factors are most
important to broader adoption and use.
Recognizing the limitations of the current program CMMI
convened a technical expert panel to explore some of the major
barriers to MTM program development and advancement.
As a result of the tech discussions and consultations with
a broad array of stakeholders, CMMI recently announced the
enhanced MTM model demonstration.
This demonstration has three important elements. First, it
will provide additional regulatory flexibilities to allow plan
sponsors to design more individualized and risk stratified
interventions.
Second, it will realign the incentives to provide a
prospective payment for more extensive MTM intervention
investment that will be outside of the plan's bid, and third,
it will provide a performance payment in the form of an
increased direct premium subsidy for plans that successfully
achieve a certain level of reduction in fee-for-service
expenditures and fulfill quality and other data reporting
requirements under the model.
Greater regulatory flexibility and a fundamental
realignment of incentives for providing more robust and
meaningful MTM through the enhanced model will encourage plan
sponsors to deliver a more patient-centric and comprehensive
approach to improve medication use in Part D.
Likewise, the program could create new competitive
opportunities for Part D plan partnerships that leverage data
sharing and provider communications to bring greater value to
the Medicare program and Medicare Part D beneficiaries.
This could encourage plan engagement with more providers
including pharmacists and physicians to more systemically
collaborate, coordinate patient care and optimize drug therapy.
Additionally, the model could better align Part D and the
goals of MTM with other CMS programs incentivize to deliver
higher value care to Medicare beneficiaries such as the
Medicare Shared Savings Program.
There are a number of factors that Part D sponsors will
consider before participating in the model, some of which are
outlined in my testimony.
Nonetheless, I believe the enhanced MTM model is a critical
first step to aligning the PDP sponsors and government
financial interests.
The model promises to create incentives for more robust MTM
investment. It will provide flexibility to better target the
interventions to the right patients at the right time and it
will help generate better evidence on how MTM can be more
effectively deployed across the health care system.
The enhanced MTM model demonstration has the potential to
unleash greater private sector innovation in the MTM program to
provide higher quality prescription drug benefit for Medicare
Part D beneficiaries.
If the objectives of the demonstration are achieved, the
MTM program could add even greater value to Medicare by
improving the health outcomes of beneficiaries in Medicare Part
D.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this opportunity to appear
before the subcommittee. I am happy to take any questions.
[The statement of Mr. Kocot follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now I recognize Mr. Merritt 5 minutes for his summary.

STATEMENT OF MARK MERRITT

Mr. Merritt. Good morning, Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member
Green and the other members of the panel. Thank you for having
me today.
I am president and CEO of the Pharmaceutical Care
Management Association. My name is Mark Merritt and I
appreciate the opportunity to be here today and talk about an
issue which actually has a lot of synergies among different
stakeholders in health care and that is improving MTM and
Medicare Part D.
PCMA, my trade association, represents America's pharmacy
benefit managers which administer prescription drug plans for
over 250 million Americans with coverage through employers,
unions, FEHBP, Medicare, and other programs.
We are probably best known for what we do in Part D because
it is such a popular successful program. But it is a program
that can be improved.
We do offer high quality affordable benefits. We do this by
offering an array of choices to consumers by negotiating
discounts with manufacturers, with retailers, establishing
affordable pharmacy networks and offering innovative
convenience tools like home delivery for prescription refills.
We also use sophisticated analytics to prevent harmful drug
interactions and improved patient safety. On this note, the
Part D statute includes the Medication Therapy Management
provisions that are designed or the goal of them anyway is to
improve adherence, reduce adverse drug effects, and make sure
there is not under use or overuse of prescription medications.
And I think we all agree the promise of MTM has not been
fully realized and that there is an opportunity here with the
CMMI model to get it right.
The reason there have been problems have been stated from
some others but let me just kind of go through our list here.
First, the one size fits all MTM requirements that are
currently there prevent Part D drug plans from focusing on the
beneficiaries who could really benefit most from the services.
However, we are required to provide the same uniform
services to every eligible patient regardless of their level of
need, their level of compliance, their condition, or their
willingness to participate in the program in the first place.
It would be much more productive to let plans develop
innovative programs that treat patients like individuals
according to their particular needs, circumstances, and
receptivity to MTM services.
Second, even when MTM services appear to be working in Part
D, the stand alone plans have had little visibility into the
patient outcomes or economic savings they may generate in
Medicare Parts A and B.
Third, the existing MTM program offers no economic
incentives to innovate or improve MTM services. In fact, they
are somewhat of a disincentive to do so, since it is unclear
whether investments that go beyond the bare minimum are treated
as administrative rather than quality improvement expenditures
in the medical loss ratio calculations.
In this light, we would encourage CMS to explore new
approaches that would improve the program in six ways. First,
let plans target high-risk beneficiaries most likely to benefit
from such interventions.
Our plans have broad knowledge not just in Medicare but all
across America in all these different programs to target people
in different ways. The more flexibility we have the better.
Second, if we have greater flexibility and a better range
of services, we will do better for patients, do better for the
program.
Third, we need financial incentives for plans to innovate
and expand MTM services. As Mr. Gronniger said, right now our
top goal is to provide the best benefits at the lowest
premiums, lowest cost sharing we can find, and if MTM has been
kind of a low return project so far because of the way it is
structured, there is not going to be a huge amount of
investment in there if it comes to the expense of premiums or
other things that patients really value.
Fourth, we like to count expenditures for expanded or
innovative MTM services as quality-improving activities for
purposes of MLR.
Then five, we want to focus on clinical outcomes instead of
just procedural or process measures like medication counts or
completed CMRs.
It is not that those are not important, but outcomes that
people are looking for, both clinical outcomes, economic
outcomes and that is what we need to focus on.
And six, stand alone PBMs should have access to Part A and
B beneficiary outcomes data including alignment with ACOs.
To its credit, CMS is working collaboratively with
stakeholders and understands that the current requirements are
preventing the MTM program from realizing its potential. We
have had very productive discussions with them, as have other
stakeholders here today.
CMMI's new Part D enhanced MTM model program largely
addresses our concerns and offers new hope that the original
goals of MTM can be realized starting in 2017.
So, in conclusion, our hope is that Congress and CMS
regulators will allow this program to get off the ground and
resist the temptation to add new MTM requirements in the
meantime.
The model needs time to build momentum, produce results,
and fulfill the original goals of the MTM program.
Thank you for your time and I look forward to answering
questions you might have.
[The statement of Mr. Merritt follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman and now recognizes
Mr. McCullough 5 minutes for your summary.

STATEMENT OF JESSE MCCULLOUGH

Mr. McCullough. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Green and
members of the House Energy and Commerce Health subcommittee.
My name is Jesse McCullough and I am the director of Field
Clinical Services for Rite Aid Corporation. I oversee Rite
Aid's clinical programs in Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania, New
Jersey and the District of Columbia.
My primary objectives are improving performance of
Medication Therapy Management, immunization, and quality
measure-based programs by identifying ways to reduce or
eliminate barriers to providing these health care services to
patients in the communities that we serve.
We greatly appreciate this opportunity to testify because
we feel strongly about the ability of MTM to improve the
quality and affordability of health care services.
My written testimony goes into greater detail but I would
add this statement is consistent with the policy positions of
the National Association of Chain Drug Stores of which Rite Aid
is a member.
For my oral testimony, I would like to summarize the
importance of MTM, some progress in advancing it and challenges
and opportunities for its improved utilization.
First, the importance of MTM. Medications are the primary
intervention to treat chronic disease and are involved in 80
percent of all treatment regimens. Medicare beneficiaries with
multiple chronic illnesses call on 13 different physicians on
average, have 50 different prescriptions filled per year,
account for 76 percent of all hospital admissions and are one
hundred times more likely to have a preventable
hospitalization.
Yet, medication management services are poorly integrated
into existing health care systems. Poor medication adherence
alone cost the nation approximately $290 billion annually, 13
percent of total health care expenditures and results in
avoidable and costly health complications.
My written testimony details numerous studies that
demonstrate MTM's ability to help fix this. The Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services and the Congressional Budget
Office have reached positive conclusions about MTM improper
medication use.
Several states have implemented MTM programs and have seen
notable savings for the state and beneficiaries. An MTM program
in Ohio returned $1.35 for every $1 invested in the first year
and $2.17 for every dollar invested in the second year. This is
one example among many.
Now about progress in leveraging MTM. Despite the proven
value of MTM, the Medicare Part D MTM program has seen low
enrollment and utilization rates. Current restrictions limit
the eligible population too dramatically. That said, plans are
required to offer a minimum level of MTM services and CMS has
taken steps to improve the quality and measuring of the Part D
MTM program.
CMS and the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation
recently announced an initiative that would provide Part D
plans the opportunity to utilize enhanced MTM models and
strategies. Rite Aid applauds that.
Although the testing phase for the program is 5 years,
meaning that it will take a long time to incorporate useful
strategies across the Part D program.
So where are the challenges and opportunities that can be
addressed now? Rite Aid has participated in MTM programs since
their inception. We have helped thousands of patients get more
out of MTM to optimize their medication therapy.
The fact of the matter is we can do more.
There are numerous challenges that exist which impede the
uptake of Part D MTM services such as lack of incentives for
plans, providers and beneficiaries, poor targeting of
beneficiaries, a lack of beneficiary awareness and provider
participation and prohibitive documentation requirements.
Rite Aid believes reforming the Part D MTM program can be
accomplished by better identifying beneficiaries who most need
the services. Changes should be made to revise the eligibility
requirements to include beneficiaries with single chronic
conditions that have been shown to respond well to improved
medication adherence.
One of the committee's members, Congresswoman McMorris
Rodgers, introduced legislation last Congress that would have
made such changes. Under her outstanding leadership, the bill
garnered 170 bipartisan cosponsors including 29 current Energy
and Commerce Committee members.
This Congress there is similar legislation that has been
introduced in the Senate, S. 776, the MTM Empowerment Act. This
bill would provide access to MTM for beneficiaries with
diabetes, cardiovascular disease, COPD, and high cholesterol.
We encourage Congress to advance this vital legislation to
allow more Medicare patients to have access to MTM services.
In addition to more effectively targeting and to more
effectively target and reach beneficiaries most in need of MTM,
we believe policy makers should explore ways to realign
incentives in the program for plans, providers, and
beneficiaries alike.
I would welcome the opportunity to elaborate more on these
topics further during the Q and A portion.
In closing, Rite Aide would like to thank Congresswoman
McMorris Rodgers, the committee for their leadership on this
important issue.
Our company and industry look forward to serving as a
resource as Congress explores ways to strengthen the Medicare
Part D MTM benefit for our nation's seniors.
Thank you for the opportunity to be part of this vital
discussion.
[The statement of Mr. McCullough follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman and now recognizes
Dr. Benson 5 minutes for your summary.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD THOMAS BENSON

Dr. Benson. Thank you, Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Green
and members of the subcommittee for holding this important
hearing and inviting me to testify.
Today, I speak not only as associate medical director of
stroke at MedStar Washington Hospital Center but as a volunteer
for the American Heart Association and its more than 30 million
supporters dedicated to building healthier lives free of
cardiovascular disease and stroke.
The statistics are alarming. Over 93 million Americans
don't take their medications as prescribed. Poor medication
adherence results in 125,000 deaths in the United States
annually and costs our health care system nearly $300 billion a
year in additional doctor and emergency department visits and
hospitalizations.
Poor medication adherence is particularly common among
patients with cardiovascular diseases, which is the number-one
cause of death in this country and stroke is the number-one
cause of disability among adults.
And with patients with CVD, when they don't take their
medications as directed, the repercussions are very severe. As
I mentioned, they die or have loss with major disability.
So why don't patients take their medications? There are
many reasons. They may forget. They may think the medication is
not working. They may fear the side effects or are having
difficulty taking the medication, or it may be a combination of
all of these.
However, there is hope. Medication Therapy Management
programs can improve adherence. Research indicates that these
programs can lead to better health outcomes, reduce the risk of
adverse events and help control health care cost.
For example, the American Pharmacists Association
Foundation created a community-based MTM program focussed on
CVD risk factors such as hypertension and
hyperhypercholesterolemia.
The results were impressive and across the board. The
proportion of program participants achieving targeted blood
pressure level increased while heart attacks and other cardiac
events fell by more than half as did patients' use of emergency
room and other hospital services.
In addition, health care costs paid by employers declined
by more than 45 percent and the percentage of health plan costs
related to CVD decreased from approximately 30 percent to 19
percent.
A 2013 CMS report showed that patients suffering from
congestive heart failure and diabetes enrolled in MTM programs
had improved medication adherence with considerable hospital
cost savings.
This was particularly true for those who received
comprehensive medication review. The American Heart Association
supports policies that would ensure access to these vulnerable
services, especially for patients most in need.
Passage of the Medication Therapy Management Empowerment
Act of 2015 is critical to ensuring that a greater number of
Medicare beneficiaries have access to MTM services.
It would amend current MTM criteria to allow beneficiaries
with a single chronic condition such as hypertension, high
blood pressure, to be eligible for these services.
While the MTM Empowerment Act of 2015 has not yet been
introduced in the House this Congress, we salute Representative
McMorris Rodgers' past work on this issue and for introducing
legislation similar to this act.
The American Heart Association was also encouraged when the
Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation announced its new
enhanced model to test strategies to improve and strengthen
medication use among Medicare beneficiaries enrolled in Part D.
MTM services currently offered by Part D plans falls short
of their potential to improve quality and reduce unnecessary
medical costs.
This is an important step to provide these programs with
regulatory flexibility and to identify new ways and strategies
to improve Medicare patients' health outcomes.
The American Heart Association strongly supports the MTM
enhanced model as both seniors and health plans that cover them
could benefit from stronger adherence to prescription
medication. We look forward to its launch in 2017.
In conclusion, the American Heart Association believes that
Medication Therapy Management services play a critical role in
ensuring patients meet their health care needs. We support
greater access to these services and better patient education
about medication adherence.
We further advocate for improved care coordination between
providers and utilizing existing relationships between
pharmacists and prescribers to identify and help reduce
barriers to improve drug adherence for those most at risk.
It could allow a patient to attend his grandchild's
baseball game or walk his daughter down the aisle. These are
the outcomes we can all support and work towards.
I thank you for giving me the opportunity to testify on
this important issue and I would be happy to answer any
questions.
[The statement of Dr. Benson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the witnesses for their testimony
and we will now begin questioning. In the interests of my
colleagues' request, I will now recognize Ms. McMorris Rodgers
for her 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. McMorris Rodgers. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you for holding this hearing on MTM and appreciate all
the witnesses being here and providing your insights.
I think we recognize that there is a lot to be gained if we
could focus more on getting the program to function more
efficiently but also the impact that it has on medication
adherence, which is a goal that we can all share.
Certainly, community pharmacists have been at the forefront
of providing services such as medication therapy management.
Pharmacist-provided services such as MTM are important tools in
our effort to improve medication adherence, patient health as
well as to improve health care affordability.
I wanted to applaud Rite Aid for their active management
and leadership on this issue, engagement with nearly 12,000
pharmacists across the country that are on the forefront every
day interfacing and treating patients.
And Mr. McCullough, I wanted to start by just asking if you
would review--I know you highlighted some but as you think
about the current program, the Medicare Part D MTM program,
just review some of the benefits, the challenges that you are
seeing day in and day out at Rite Aid.
Mr. McCullough. Well, let me start with the benefit. We
have the opportunity with nearly 12,000 pharmacists trained to
provide MTM services to be able to contract with a number of
different plans to provide these services and we do that
anywhere we can. It has been tremendous.
That being said, the identification of patients who are
eligible is probably one of the bigger challenges that we have.
Being able to expand that eligibility would be vital to help in
a number of ways.
As it is right now, the patients that come to us they are
oftentimes very, very complicated. They have a number of issues
going on and what we try to do is we try to engage them to help
make sure that any disease state that they have is being
appropriately treated and any treatment that they have has a
corresponding disease state for which it matches up, and
through that process they identify a number of drug-related
problems and work toward the resolution and the documentation
to be able to communicate with other providers to make sure
that we are all on the same page.
Some of the biggest things that we have is just being able
to get people in the door for these services. So while people
may be eligible, getting them to accept that service is
sometimes challenging. You have a number of patients that are
somewhat skeptical.
They may be a little naive of what the benefit of that
program is and I would suggest those are a couple of bigger
things that we see is we say well, my doctor takes care of
that.
There is some perception that there is a health care system
that exists that is different in their mind than what actually
exists.
Ms. McMorris Rodgers. So address what you think a
successful MTM program would look like and then also highlight
the populations that you think will benefit most.
Mr. McCullough. I think what would be most successful is
where we can intervene the earliest. The old expression goes an
ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. So the earlier we
can intervene in any chronic disease state, and diabetes, COPD,
cardiovascular disease are ones that come to mind very, very
quickly.
But anything that we can do earlier in the process will
prevent disease progression and ultimately that will do is that
will eliminate health care costs downstream.
So if we can intervene with a diabetic to prevent morbidity
such as blindness, amputation, so on and so forth, those are
benefits that are direct cost related to the health care system
and then there is also quality of life things that come in as
well.
Also, earlier intervention can prevent kidney disease
progression like that. Diabetes is probably one of the low-
hanging fruits, cardiovascular disease.
But, essentially, I am probably of the mind set that any
chronic disease state is fair game to start early on to prevent
that progression.
Ms. McMorris Rodgers. Great. OK. Thank you, and thank you,
Chairman, for yielding me this time.
Mr. Pitts. You are welcome. Thank you.
Chair now recognizes the ranking member, Mr. Green, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The CBO estimates that last year Medicare Part D spent $65
billion on prescription drugs. Despite the impressive magnitude
of the spending we haven't developed a successful system that
ensures we are doing all we can to help beneficiaries overcome
any obstacles to taking that medication as prescribed.
This issue is not new and, in fact, 25 years ago the Office
of Inspector General issued a report entitled ``Medication
Regimens: Causes of Noncompliance.''
Yet, a quarter of a century later, we have made little
progress and I want to add 25 years ago we didn't have some of
the great pharmaceuticals that we can take for our illnesses.
That being said, we do have several examples, many noted in
the testimony of our witnesses of outstanding success in the
area. I would like to take advantage of the four different
perspectives we have on our second panel.
Can our witnesses comment on what characteristics are the
most important to incorporate in any MTM intervention in Part
D, moving forward to achieve the outcomes of what we have seen
in Medicaid and in private sector?
In response, I would be interested in understanding what
you see as a top barrier right now to achieving the success in
Medicare Part D MTM and how the characteristics you identified
would overcome that barrier.
Mr. Kocot. I guess I will start. Well, first, I think what
CMMI has done in constructing this model does address some of
these questions.
First, a prospective payment to allow plans to invest up
front into MTM interventions and target patients that have the
most need is a real good start.
Secondly, having a reward on the back end for outcomes as
opposed to processes is a very good result. There are some
challenges with that, obviously, but we will work through those
challenges.
Those are two very good starting points for CMS to start
with because the way that the program was structured before, as
was said earlier, the goal of prescription drug plans is to
compete in the marketplace based on premium, and if you are
focusing on lowering the premium then you are not going to be
investing a lot of cost or a lot of money into prevention and
some of the other things that are necessary.
CMS, under the current program, allows people to allocate
or allows plans to allocate money but it has to be included in
their administrative costs within their bid.
Taking this outside of the bid and putting this as a
prospective payment is going to make a huge difference in the
ability in plans to invest more freely, more creatively, and
more innovatively.
Mr. Green. OK. Mr. Merritt?
Mr. Merritt. I would agree with what Larry has said. I
think the key is we need to let innovation start working
because there are ways to reach these people.
But right now, you have a lot of people who maybe are the
wrong people to be targeting because they are full compliant on
their medications.
Maybe they are people who aren't interested in
participating and a whole host of other reasons. You have
prescriber abrasion where prescribers are getting asked by
patients.
What is this called, this MTM thing, and the prescriber
will say, ``I don't know--I don't take the call--it's not for
me--don't talk to them.'' So we need more coordination. I think
these incentives will help there be more coordination between
the plan and the prescriber, the pharmacist, the patient.
Right now, people are subject to so much noise in their
life in general and noise just on your phone, getting calls for
refills and so forth.
The thought of, for a lot of people, getting on a phone
call and talking for 15 or 20 minutes about something to
somebody on the other end of the line or waiting in line at the
pharmacy and talking for 15, 20 minutes, a half hour.
They don't have the time to do it, they are not interested
in doing it and I think there are ways to change that. But we
need to let innovations start working so we can see the stuff
the works and do more of it.
Mr. Green. Mr. McCullough.
Mr. McCullough. I would just add in addition I think the
top barrier, as you asked for, Mr. Green, is that the
identification of the appropriate patients to impact.
We have an awful lot of patients that come in our stores
every day that would benefit from earlier intervention. So by
being able to get earlier access to care I think you can have a
lot of cost effective interventions that will save us money in
the long run.
Mr. Green. Dr. Benson.
Dr. Benson. My idea of a excellent MTM intervention would
be to truly embrace healthcare wellness and not illness.
When we create a medical home for each individual, as we
have talked about, in a medical neighborhood where a patient
would go to his or her physician, be evaluated, medications are
prescribed, that patient would then go to a pharmacist, have
the prescription filled.
The pharmacist would be an intermediary who can explain the
side effects of the medication and also help with possibly
checking blood pressure or blood sugars periodically.
If there is an abnormal value that information would be
relayed back to the physician and then that patient could go
back to physician and we are truly creating a neighborhood of
health and Wellness where we are catching abnormalities early.
We are catching people who are not being compliant.
We are truly developing a medical home and a medical
neighborhood to deal with these diseases.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I know I am out of my
time but, Mr. Kocot, you recently wrote an article for
Medication Therapy Management health fair's blog and you
described the status of an MTM program as well as upcoming CMMI
Part D.
I am interested in your thoughts and we might contact you
as we go further. So thank you.
Mr. Kocot. Be happy to. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman. I will now recognize
myself 5 minutes for questions. Mr. Kocot, we will start with
you.
Can you elaborate on your experience at CMS in developing
the original MTM program, please?
Mr. Kocot. Sure. Congress actually established the MTM
program through the MMA, as you know, and Congress left it to
CMS to fill in some of the blanks and that is the number of
drugs that would qualify the number of chronic conditions and
the dollar amount.
As you will recall, Mr. Chairman, when we were implementing
the MMA and, specifically, Part D we didn't know whether anyone
was even going to provide a prescription drug benefit at the
time.
We were hoping people would come if we set up the party.
The other thing we didn't know was whether it would be
affordable. And then finally, with regard to the MTM program,
we didn't have a lot of evidence on what would work.
So the idea behind setting up the MTM program the way that
we did was to get it set up, get it running, make it affordable
and then learn through the process, learn through time and then
add and develop the program.
As you may know, the CMS, when we rolled out the Part D
final rule, we called the Part D or the Medication Therapy
Management program, we said it had the potential to be the
cornerstone of the Part D benefit. And I truly believe that
that is true still and it will become the cornerstone of the
Medicare Part D benefit.
But it is going to take some innovation and that is what
this model is intended to bring to it. It is probably overdue
but it is about time.
Mr. Pitts. Looking to the future, if you will just continue
a moment, what can Congress do to make sure MTM is reaching its
fullest potential?
Mr. Kocot. Well, I think one of the things that Mark said
is important and that is, you know, let this model work. Don't
allow administrative barriers to get in the way.
There is other things that we may want to experiment with.
CMS has been very adamant about marketing this new benefit or
this new model to beneficiaries.
We have got to do more to engage beneficiaries in their
care. We are just not doing enough of that and that may be a
barrier to engaging people in the care.
There is a fine line between marketing and overdoing it
with beneficiaries and using this in ways that you shouldn't
but we also need to engage them and we should explore new ways
to develop programs to do that.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you. Mr. Merritt, what flexibility to do
plans need to enhance the MTM program for their beneficiaries
and does the CMS model provide you with that flexibility?
Mr. Merritt. We are very encouraged by the CMMI model. It
addresses virtually all the concerns that we have mentioned
from economic incentives to flexibility.
In terms of flexibility, right now there is the assumption
that OK, you have to have several classes of problems and
several different conditions, and it may just be one condition:
a blood thinner.
It could be opioid. It could be diabetes. It could be a
whole host of things and there are different ways to identify
individuals. Right now, we need to find individuals who need
the help, who want the help and that we can really talk to
about it.
There is almost no awareness right now among people about
this particular program and a cold call from us or a question
from a pharmacist at the counter is not going to kind of move
them right now.
So we need to really find ways to target individual groups
of people and really go after them, educate them, find other
providers that they want to talk to.
Maybe they want to talk to the plan. Maybe they want to
talk to the doctor, maybe the pharmacist. But we need to get to
know those people better. This will help us do that.
The problem we have with existing law is we have to treat
everybody the same, give them all the same uniform treatment.
They don't all need the same treatment. You don't market any
other program like that. We need that flexibility.
Mr. Pitts. What are the implications for plans that
activities associated with MTM will be counted as quality
improving activities in the medical loss ratio? What does that
mean for plans?
Mr. Merritt. Well, the medical loss ratio really, in a
sense, punishes additional administrative expenses. If more
spending on MTM is viewed as an Administrative expense, the
plan is going to get punished. You are going to have given
rebates back and it is just a huge disincentive to move in that
direction.
The intriguing thing about the CMMI model is you will have
separate payments that are outside of the whole MLR, outside of
the bid where plans can have flexibility to invest in these
things to get a return on that investment to see what works.
Right now, the challenge is if we are going to spend more
money than the bare minimum that is required, that money will
be largely counted as administrative costs. It will undermine
premiums.
It will make products less competitive and there is just no
incentive to do it, considering what people really want is
lower premiums and real access to drugs. That is the most----
Mr. Pitts. Thank you. Thank you.
Mr. McCullough, please discuss how MTM works in practice
and give me a real life example of a success story.
Mr. McCullough. Yes, sir.
In practice, what we do is when we have the opportunity to
sit down with the patient to provide MTM service and, more
specifically, the comprehensive medication review, is we sit
down and we assess the patient to make sure that every medical
condition they have has an appropriate treatment and every
treatment that they have on board has a corresponding medical
condition.
Through that process, we also do some physical assessment
to make sure that the therapies that they are on are actually
achieving clinical goals to the benefit of the patient.
And through that whole process we identify different drug-
related problems that we then collaborate with the prescribers
to look to resolve, be that increasing a dose, decreasing a
dose, adding a medication, removing a medication. Those are
some very common things.
Additionally, what we do is we then provide documentation
to the patient around different actions that they can take to
improve their health as well as documentation for them to be
able to share with other providers, which would be a
comprehensive list of a personal medication record.
That is, arguably, one of the most important things that
prescribers look for is to have a current list of medications
so they know what to work from.
As far as an individual example, we had an opportunity
where we provided care to a patient--I believe the patient was
in the State of Tennessee--where it was discovered that the
patient was receiving continuous treatment for a urinary tract
infection that was not necessary.
And what was happening is that was creating respiratory
complications and this patient was then put on a number of
inhalers and steroids and what not to treat that.
Through the comprehensive medication review process, we
identified that root cause. We were able to get the patient's
symptoms resolved.
They were able to discontinue the respiratory medications
and the word we got back is that that saved tens of thousands
of dollars in health care costs.
Mr. Pitts. All right. Thank you.
The chair now recognizes the vice chair of the
subcommittee, Mr. Guthrie, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you very much, and my question is for
Mr. McCullough.
As a pharmacist, you are aware of the important role that
pharmacists can play in delivering care to patients we have
talked about this morning.
Actually, I have another bill--it is H.R. 592--that would
allow Medicare reimbursement for some of the basic services
that pharmacists provide they are allowed to perform under
their own state law.
Can you address some of the things that pharmacists can do
but aren't reimbursed for in Medicare?
Mr. McCullough. Yes, sir. I would be happy to do that.
Thank you.
I will just start off by just saying from my perspective I
believe that the pharmacist has a specific goal in the health
care community and that is to monitor health care safety and
efficacy.
We do an excellent job with safety as we look for drug
interactions and drug allergies with every prescription that we
fill in the community setting.
Where we have a tremendous opportunity is in how do we make
sure that the patient's therapy is as efficacious for them as
possible and to that simple monitoring tests would be some of
those very simple tests that we could be looking at.
There are some medical conditions that monitor blood
pressure with a cuff and a stethoscope. But there are other
ones where you have to do some simple blood tests, which are
allowed by state laws, and that does vary from one state to the
next.
But those are tests that we could do where we would be able
to intervene and collaborate with prescribers to adjust
therapies more appropriately.
However, as it is right now, we do not have the capacity to
be able to be able to bill for services like that, which would
be very simple and very timely interventions to help increase
the patient getting to a location where the therapy is adjusted
in a more timely manner.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. Thank you.
And some of the questions I also have you touched on in
your opening statement--your 5 minutes. But I think you said at
the end you wanted, hopefully, a chance to elaborate.
So I am going to ask some questions, because you kind of
addressed that you would maybe get a chance to elaborate. You
have already talked about the role that pharmacists play under
the current MTM program.
Could you talk about how the role could potentially change
under the MTM model test out of CMS?
Mr. McCullough. I think that through that you are going to
see some different changes just by the new models that come
forth and what I expect to see is just a number of different
strategies used to identify different groups of patients,
groups that will be more responsive.
I think that that is one of the biggest things that we can
get out of this is to be able to demonstrate that earlier
action through more appropriate patient identification would be
one of those things to look for.
Whenever we are able to intervene earlier in the disease
process I fully believe that we can change the trajectory of
that disease progression to the benefit of the patient.
Through that I can see pharmacists getting involved and
doing a number of different additional things. Some of the low-
hanging fruit will be assessments to make sure immunizations
are up to date with more regularity.
I think there are a number of things like that that you
will see come to light.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. Thanks.
I know that pharmacists and pharmacies particularly played
an instrumental role implementing the Part D program.
Has the role of the pharmacy changed since the introduction
of Medicare Part D?
Mr. McCullough. It is interesting. When I was talking with
Mr. Kocot here before we started and I was dispensing when
Medicare Part D was implemented and that was an interesting
time, it was great because we were able to get more people
accessed to medications that in December of 2005 there were
different conversations than there were in January of 2006.
Since that time, what we have seen is we have seen
pharmacists become more instrumental in educating beneficiaries
around their benefit design.
But additionally you have seen the role of the pharmacist
expand through the advent of MTM services that was brought
through with Medicare Part D.
But also we have seen a rapid expansion in the last 10
years with immunization services that are provided in the
community setting.
Ten years ago there were a limited number of states and
now, I believe, every state in the union offers some level of
significance with pharmacy-based immunizations.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. I just have a few--about 30
seconds.
You said--30 seconds for an answer--when Mr. Pitts talked
to you, you talked about the benefits of the MTM program. What
are some of the challenges you have seen in trying to implement
or--at Rite Aid?
Mr. McCullough. We contract with whoever we can because we
want to provide service to whoever we can, and I believe Mr.
Merritt made the comment that some of the challenges is when
you are reaching out the patients to get them to enroll there
is some resistance, there is some hesitancy, one, because they
are not aware of the benefit.
They don't know what all is entailed with that. They
consult with the physician who says, I am not sure about what
is going on.
I would even suggest that there is some community-based
resources such as senior centers that I have heard specific
examples of that would say hey, if somebody calls you with
something that sounds too good to be true it might be too good
to be true.
So, I think there is a huge opportunity to drive awareness
with that population as to this is something that you may have
as a benefit and if you have a benefit you should very much
take advantage of that and then, additionally, working with
other members of the health care team to make sure that you
have their buy-in and endorsements and support.
Mr. Guthrie. Well, thank you. Thank you for those answers.
My time has expired. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman.
I now recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr. Collins, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Maybe to follow up a little bit on what Mr. Guthrie was
getting at, and maybe what you said a little bit, Mr.
McCullough.
Motherhood and apple pie--I mean, this, on the one hand,
sounds like that. You have got Democrats and Republicans here
universally agreeing anything we can do to help patients treat
their diseases better, save money at the same time both for the
federal government and plans. If that is not motherhood and
apple pie I don't know what is.
So it comes back to, the question of how do we get more
plans involved, how do we get more beneficiaries involved and
maybe at some point confirming the cost benefit is real and it
is not so nebulous that it is manipulated.
But one particular question for Mr. Kocot, I think your
written testimony anyway said basically there is not a lot of
financial incentive--for plans to enter the MTM.
But, on the star bonus payments, as I understand it anyway,
one of the quality measures is drug related.
So if have at least understood from some in the industry
that the MTM plans have helped them in that particular criteria
within their--to get their star ratings up, would you comment
on that, Mr. Kocot, whether you agree or not that----
Mr. Kocot. Sure. As you know, the financial rewards of the
star ratings go to the MAPDs and the prescription drug plans do
get a star rating. But it is not as powerful because of the
financial rewards that are associated with the star program for
Part D.
So there is a different incentive. Certainly, they get a
star ranking and they get that moniker next to their name as a
plan. But that is certainly not as powerful as the financial
incentives that the new model does establish for MTM.
Mr. Collins. So a question I asked earlier, the gentleman
from CMS, was why not Medicare Advantage and why not Medicaid.
Now, the answer on Medicare Advantage was those companies
offering those plans they are already coordinating and
integrating A, B and D and that there is really not the need
for the incentive because they are already covering the costs.
Would you agree with CMS's position that an MTM pilot or an
MTM program would not really be cost advantageous to the
taxpayers in the Medicare Advantage world because it is already
being done?
I mean, is that--and anyone who might want to jump in on
that?
Mr. Kocot. I will start. I think what Mr. Gronniger was
trying to say was that the incentives are aligned more fully in
the Medicare Advantage program than they are in Part D and I
thought I heard him say that we want to experiment with Part D
and if things look like they are effective we could try to
adopt more for the Medicare Advantage program.
I don't think he ruled it out. But I think this is a good
place to start because the contrast is very stark. The
incentives are totally misaligned in Part D for a plan to
invest in better care because there is no financial reward.
Mr. Collins. Would the others agree with that?
Mr. Merritt. Yes, I would agree with that.
The reality is because the MTM current setup is so
inflexible there just hasn't been a lot of information. There
is not a lot of data.
There are not a lot of outcomes reports on it and the
assumption is the Medicare Advantage plans they have better
access and reasons to be able to get there.
The stand alones, clearly, can't get there. They don't have
the incentives. They need this kind of support and I do think
it is a good place to start.
Mr. Collins. One last question, as my time expires here.
Is there a geographic area in the country that seems to
have adopted MTM more than others and, if so, why and what have
they found?
Or is this kind of a difficult issue across the whole
country? Or is there any early adapters that you can think of?
Not really?
Mr. Kocot. We have some anecdotal evidence that MTM has
taken hold in certain communities. But I don't have any real
evidence to offer you that MTM is more prevalent in one plan
versus another or in one geographic area versus another.
I think it comes back to that issue of incentives and all
Part D plans have to live within the same rules.
Mr. Collins. So, really, where we might wish upon a star
even that this was being better adapted by patients and plans,
what you are referring to, the incentive piece and maybe the
hard evidence of cost benefit analysis and it also sounds like
really almost an educational piece wouldn't hurt and into even
the community where, you stress, patient safety--somebody is
taking 19 drugs, you got to figure there could be an issue
there somewhere and if the patient is going back, it is push
pull.
So anyway, thank you for your testimony and with that, Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman. I now recognize the
gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Griffith, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Merritt, it is evident that the utilization of the Part
D MTM program has been low since its inception. There may be a
number of reasons for that.
But one might be that Part D plan set an unreasonably high
eligibility criteria for covered beneficiaries. Why is it that
most plans require three or more chronic conditions and eight
or more prescription drugs?
Mr. Merritt. Well, I mean, we comply with what is in the
MTM statute right now. So there is certainly, I would say,
within our industry the certainty and intention to make this
work.
It is just very difficult to make it work when you have to
have uniform services for every single person regardless of
their needs, their interest in the program, their receptivity,
what drugs they are taking and so forth.
So it is in our interest to see this thing work. It has
just been structured in a way where it is just difficult to
work and not just from our perspective.
I think everybody here, all the different stakeholders
would say for different reasons it is very hard to get this off
the ground the way it has been.
We are hopeful, though, with the CMMI model that those
barriers will be removed and I think all the stakeholders here
think there is a really good chance of success if we let this
program work.
Mr. Griffith. So you don't think that the high barriers are
causing a problem at this point or they are not designed to
reduce the number of folks who take advantage of it?
Mr. Merritt. No. I don't concede that there are high
barriers. I just concede we are complying with what the
standards are right now. And one of the good things about the
standards with the CMMI program is it is reducing the number of
conditions that make somebody eligible for this program.
So there may be somebody with one condition that makes them
eligible. There may be somebody with two. So it is in our
interest to make sure that the utilization is done right and I
think the challenge for all of us just hasn't been the
incentive or the structure to make it work yet.
Mr. Griffith. All right. Dr. Benson, you wanted to get in
on this.
Dr. Benson. Yes. No, I agree that the issue is multi-
factorial but I definitely support allowing single chronic
conditions to be an eligibility criteria.
As a representative of the American Heart Association,
hypertension is one of the most common as well as treatable
conditions that can decrease a lot of deaths in this country
and that is a single condition, as well as diabetes.
We have talked about that today is also a single chronic
condition. So I definitely advocate that as a representative of
the American Heart Association, allowing individuals with a
single chronic condition to also be eligible for the program.
Mr. Griffith. OK, and I appreciate that.
Also, Mr. Merritt, the Pharmaceutical Care Management
Association has stated that expansion of MTM eligibility would
result in increased costs to the plans and therefore could lead
to increased beneficiary premiums and costs to the Federal
Government without adding any clear value to the program.
Do you disagree with that? And then if you do what would
you say to those who argue that well run MTM programs can
result in reduced prescription drug prices as found by CMS when
they studied the Part D MTM program?
Mr. Merritt. Sure. That statement is true if there aren't
the economic incentives to get the job done right.
Right now, with the way the medical loss ratio calculations
are calculated, any additional innovative things that we do on
MTM are counted as administrative costs, not medical costs,
which punish the plans and force some to give rebates.
And so with economic incentives, not only do we have a
reason to pursue this without having to sacrifice premiums or
access to drugs and so forth but if it is set up this way where
it is outside of the whole MLR calculation we have every
incentive to really go for it and use all the innovative tools
we have to make it work.
Mr. Griffith. I appreciate that. Appreciate all of you
being here today, and with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. That concludes
the questions of the members present. As always, we will have
follow-up questions and members who couldn't be here will have
questions.
We will submit those to you in writing. We ask that you
please respond promptly. I remind members that they have 10
business days to submit questions for the record. Members
should submit their questions by the close of business on
Wednesday, November the 4th.
Excellent hearing. Excellent testimony. Good program with
bipartisan support and we look forward to progress that we will
be making on this issue.
So without objection, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:24 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Today we are examining the Medicare Part D Medication
Therapy Management program (MTM). This program has been in
existence since the Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit began in
2006 after the enactment of the Medicare Modernization Act of
2003. The goal of MTM is simple--to ensure that Part D drugs
are appropriately used by beneficiaries. Through more optimal
utilization of prescription drugs in Part D, patients' health
will be improved and medical costs can be lowered. This is
important for seniors in Michigan and all across the country.
But over the past nearly ten years, the program has been
somewhat of a missed opportunity to cut costs for seniors and
the Medicare program. Under the current construct of the
program, it has been difficult to engage seniors and coordinate
care due to burdensome statutory and regulatory requirements.
Today, only 8%, a rate lower than one out of every ten seniors
enrolled in Part D even participate in MTM.
Last month, CMS announced a new innovation model titled,
``The Part D Enhanced Medication Therapy Management Model.'' I
am eager to hear from them today on the improvements this model
will bring to MTM in the Part D space. We appreciate our
witnesses for taking the time to talk with us about ways to
advance this program so we can improve beneficiary care. I also
want to thank Conference Chair McMorris Rodgers for her
leadership on this issue.
I yield the remainder of my time to ----------------------
------------.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
