- H.R. 3797, THE SATISFYING ENERGY NEEDS AND SAVING THE ENVIRONMENT (SENSE) ACT; AND H.R., THE BLOCKING REGULATORY INTERFERENCE FROM CLOSING KILNS (BRICK) ACT

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. 3797, THE SATISFYING ENERGY NEEDS AND SAVING THE ENVIRONMENT
(SENSE) ACT; AND H.R. ___, THE BLOCKING REGULATORY INTERFERENCE FROM
CLOSING KILNS (BRICK) ACT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 3, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-113

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

___________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
99-969                        WASHINGTON : 2016

_________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan

Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                     Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman

PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               JERRY McNERNEY, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        PAUL TONKO, New York
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREGG HARPER, Vice Chairman          GENE GREEN, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     LOIS CAPPS, California
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             KATHY CASTOR, Florida
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   PETER WELCH, Vermont
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILL FLORES, Texas                   FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma               officio)
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................    16
Hon. Jerry McNerney, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................    17
Hon. Bill Johnson, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Ohio, opening statement........................................    18
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................    20
Prepared statement...........................................    21
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................    96

Witnesses

Keith J. Rothfus, A Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania...................................    22
Prepared statement...........................................    25
Vincent Brisini, Director, Environmental Affairs for Olympus
Power..........................................................    29
Prepared statement \1\.......................................    32
Dennis Beck, Chairman, Western Pennsylvania Coalition for
Abandoned Mine Reclamation.....................................    38
Prepared statement...........................................    40
John Walke, Senior Attorney and Clean Air Director, Natural
Resources Defense Council......................................    46
Prepared statement...........................................    48
Davis Henry, President and CEO, Henry Brick......................    61
Prepared statement \2\.......................................    64
Creighton ``Butch'' McAvoy, President, McAvoy Brick Company......    68
Prepared statement...........................................    71

Submitted Material

H.R. 3797........................................................     3
Blocking Regulatory Interference from Closing Kilns (BRICK) Act..    13
Statement of the United States Environmental Protection Agency...    98

----------
\1\ The addendum to Mr. Brisini's testimony is available at:
http://docs.house.gov/meetings/if/if03/20160203/104366/hhrg-
114-if03-wstate-brisiniv-20160203.pdf.
\2\ The addendum to Mr. Henry's testimony is available at: http:/
/docs.house.gov/meetings/if/if03/20160203/104366/hhrg-114-if03-
wstate-henryd-20160203-u2.pdf.]

H.R. 3797, THE SATISFYING ENERGY NEEDS AND SAVING THE ENVIRONMENT
(SENSE) ACT; AND H.R. ------, THE BLOCKING REGULATORY INTERFERENCE FROM
CLOSING KILNS (BRICK) ACT

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 3, 2016

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:04 a.m., in
room 2123 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed Whitfield
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Whitfield, Shimkus, Latta,
Harper, McKinley, Johnson, Long, Ellmers, Flores, Mullin,
McNerney, Engel, Green, Doyle, Welch, Loebsack, and Pallone (ex
officio).
Staff present: Will Batson, Legislative Clerk, E&P, E&E;
Allison Busbee, Policy Coordinator, Energy and Power; Rebecca
Card, Assistant Press Secretary; A.T. Johnston, Senior Policy
Advisor; Ben Lieberman, Counsel, Energy & Power; Mary Neumayr,
Senior Energy Counsel; Annelise Rickert; Legislative Associate;
Dan Schneider, Press Secretary; Christine Brennan, Minority
Press Secretary; Jeff Carroll, Minority Staff Director; Jean
Fruci, Minority Energy and Environment Policy Advisor; Caitlin
Haberman, Minority Professional Staff Member; Rick Kessler,
Minority Senior Advisor and Staff Director, Energy and
Environment; Josh Lewis, Minority EPA Detailee; and Alexander
Ratner, Minority Policy Analyst.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Mr. Whitfield. I would like to call the hearing to order
this morning and I would like to recognize myself for 5 minutes
for an opening statement.
The Obama EPA has been particularly aggressive in issuing
regulations and, of course, many of those regulations are
beneficial. But at the same time, many of those regulations
create job loss and obstacles to economic growth. And today we
are going to be discussing two bills making targeted changes to
EPA rules in order to avoid what we consider are adverse
consequences: H.R. 3797, the Satisfying Energy Needs and Saving
the Environment Act, referred to as the SENSE Act, and H.R.,
which I guess we don't have a number for this yet, the Blocking
Regulatory Interference from Closing Kilns, or BRICK Act.
Now, the SENSE Act was introduced by Rep. Keith Rothfus of
Pennsylvania, who is with us today, and his bill addresses an
issue of great concern in western Pennsylvania and other coal-
mining regions around the country and that is the recycling of
massive piles of coal refuse that were generated many years ago
and continue to be located in many of these communities. Coal
refuse is the above-ground waste product of coal mining found
near many abandoned mine sites. Left unaddressed, coal refuse
contributes to a number of environmental challenges such as
acid mine drainage that may impact rivers and streams. Coal
refuse from these abandoned mines can also spontaneously
combust, creating fires that are difficult sometimes to put
out.
Fortunately, there is an economically viable solution that
benefits the environment while reclaiming acres of land and
disposing of the coal refuse. Specialized power plants have
been developed that can use coal refuse to produce electricity,
and they are doing that today. These coal refuse-to-energy
facilities not only reduce the volumes of coal refuse, but the
resultant ash is environmentally beneficial and can then be
used for site remediation.
However, the continued operation of these plants is in
jeopardy by the EPA's Cross-State Air Pollution Rule and the
agency's Mercury and Air Toxics Standard, also commonly
referred to as Utility MACT. As written, these two EPA rules
may cause the shutdown of coal refuse-to-energy plants and put
a stop to the only economically proven means of addressing this
issue. Members of this subcommittee have raised concerns with
EPA regulators about the potential impact of the rules. I know
that Congressman Rothfus has spent a great deal of time on it.
And so we have been talking to EPA, asking for their assistance
and, unfortunately, to this point they have simply ignored
everything that we said.
Now, the BRICK Act, as the name implies, addresses a BRICK
industry regulation and I would like to thank Bill Johnson for
his work on this draft bill. Last September, EPA finalized its
national emission standards for hazardous air pollutants for
brick and structural clay products manufacturing, commonly
called Brick MACT. This rule contains ultra stringent new
emission targets, and in fact it used as a baseline EPA's 2003
Brick MACT rule which already reduced industry emissions by 95
percent, according to a recent report. It should be noted that
those 2003 Brick MACT standards were vacated by a federal court
in 2007. But as in so many EPA regulations where suits are
filed and the complainants win, the money is already spent.
The effort to comply has already been taken and so it is
too late for a practical relief for these people, and that's
precisely where the brick industry is finding itself today.
So I look forward to additional discussion. We have two
panels of witnesses today about these practical common sense
bills and hopefully we can provide some relief to these
industries as they try to protect jobs, help economic growth
and to expand their industries.
[H.R. 3797 follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Blocking Regulatory Interference from Closing Kilns
(BRICK) Act follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Ed Whitfield

The Obama EPA has issued numerous regulations impacting
manufacturers and energy producers, and many of us are
concerned about their impact on the economy and jobs. In
particular, a few of these rules are extremely troubling, such
as the ones that may cause more environmental harm than good
and those that may force small businesses to shut down. Today,
we will discuss two bills making targeted changes to EPA rules
in order to avoid these adverse consequences, H.R. 3797, the
Satisfying Energy Needs and Saving the Environment (SENSE) Act,
and H.R. ------, the Blocking Regulatory Interference from
Closing Kilns (BRICK) Act.
The SENSE Act was introduced by Rep. Keith Rothfus of
Pennsylvania who we welcome to this subcommittee. His bill
addresses an issue of great concern in Western Pennsylvania and
other coal-mining regions, and that is the recycling of massive
piles of coal refuse that were generated many years ago and
continue to be located in many of these communities. Coal
refuse is the aboveground waste products of coal mining found
near many abandoned mines. Left unaddressed, coal refuse
contributes to a number of environmental challenges such as
acid mine drainage that may impact rivers and streams. Coal
refuse from these abandoned mines can also spontaneously
combust, creating massive fires that are difficult to put out.
Fortunately, there is an economically viable solution that
benefits the environment while reclaiming acres of land and
disposing of the coal refuse. Specialized power plants have
been developed that can use coal refuse to produce electricity.
These coal refuse-to-energy facilities not only reduce the
volumes of coal refuse, but the resultant ash is
environmentally beneficial and can then be used for site
remediation.
However, the continued operation of these plants is
jeopardized by the EPA's Cross State Air Pollution Rule (CSAPR)
and the agency's Mercury and Air Toxics Standards (MATS), also
commonly referred to as Utility MACT. As written, these two EPA
rules may cause the shutdown of coal refuse-to-energy plants
and put a stop to the only economically proven means of
addressing coal refuse. Members of this subcommittee have
raised their concerns with EPA regulators about the potential
impact of these rules and on the need to treat coal refuse-to-
energy facilities as a separate sub-category, but these
concerns were ignored.
The SENSE Act contains limited modifications to these rules
as they apply to coal refuse-to-energy plants. Specifically,
the bill provides less restrictive sulfur dioxide emissions
allocations under the Cross State Air Pollution Rule, and
creates an alternative means of compliance under the Mercury
and Air Toxics Standards. In neither case would the bill repeal
the provisions in these rules nor jeopardize the continued
declines in the emissions regulated under them. But they would
enable these coal refuse-to-energy facilities to continue
operating and providing both electricity and environmental
benefits to the communities they serve.
The BRICK Act, as the name implies, addresses a brick
industry regulation, and I would like to thank Bill Johnson for
his work on this draft bill. Last September, EPA finalized its
National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants for
Brick and Structural Clay Products Manufacturing, commonly
called Brick MACT. This rule contains ultra-stringent new
emissions targets, and in fact it used as a baseline EPA's 2003
Brick MACT rule which already reduced industry emissions by 95
percent, according to a recent Chamber of Commerce report. It
should be noted that those 2003 Brick MACT standards were
vacated by a federal court in 2007, but by the time the
decision was handed down the industry had already undertaken
expensive compliance measures.
We want to make sure that this vulnerable industry does not
face the same unfair situation for a second time. Compliance is
especially challenging given that the brickmaking industry is
dominated by small companies that lack the resources to install
the costly new controls that are required. Many operators fear
shutdowns and layoffs, and all to ratchet down already-low
emissions by a very small amount. That is why the BRICK Act
extends the compliance dates for these rules until after all
judicial review is completed. This reasonable provision will
prevent EPA from again imposing costly requirements that may
later be found to be outside the agency's authority.
Both the SENSE Act and the BRICK Act provide specific
solutions to specific problems created by EPA rules that
directly threaten the continued operation of businesses in
these important sectors of our economy. These targeted
provisions will be a net plus for the environment as well as
the economy and jobs in many small communities. I urge all my
colleagues to support these commonsense measures and I look
forward to hearing the testimony from our witnesses today.

Mr. Whitfield. With that, at this time I would like to
recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. McNerney, for his
5-minute opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JERRY MCNERNEY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. McNerney. Well, I thank the chairman and I thank the
witness colleague. Today's hearing focuses on a couple of
bills, the BRICK Act and the SENSE Act, that are a familiar
effort to weaken the Clean Air Act.
Mr. Chairman, well thought out regulations make businesses
more competitive and protect American people. These bills echo
what we saw, for example, with the Ratepayer Protection Act, a
partisan effort to weaken the Clean Air Act.
Addressing air quality is a health and economic issue. Poor
air quality can disrupt businesses, individuals, and families
who have to live with its consequences. It is irresponsible and
morally bankrupt to needlessly delay a rule from taking effect
that will improve air quality, especially if the intent is to
delay it indefinitely. The bills under consideration simply
seek to maintain the status quo. Well, the status quo isn't
good enough. Our country can do better than that.
I represent part of the San Joaquin Valley, which is also
called the famed Central Valley of California. But,
unfortunately, it has some of the worst air quality in the
nation. Employees miss work, children miss school days and the
elderly are often encouraged to stay inside on certain days. We
have seen the air quality improve over the last decade, which I
am happy to say I have experienced. But we are still living in
poor air. I have seen firsthand the effect of pollution on our
communities. Valley air quality is affected from a variety of
sources--from China, from in-state and out-of-state vehicles,
from drought, as well as from pollutions drifting in from other
parts of the state and from other states. That is not to
mention unforeseen incidents like the methane leak that has
been releasing millions of pounds of methane per day in
southern California.
Our region has worked hard and taken steps to help address
one of the biggest issues facing the valley. Recent
improvements have produced significant economic and health
benefits. But there is still an enormous amount of work to be
done. Having worked in the private sector and an emerging
field, I understand the difficulties that come with raising
capital and business targets that are always moving around.
But these advancements take time and investments. Sticking
with the status quo is not and will never be a solution. Fossil
fuels will remain an important bridge of energy source as our
country moves forward to cleaner energy sources. But as we move
forward, we should maintain focus on making carbon energy
production as clean as possible through technology and
effective use of regulation.
The EPA has used the Clean Air Act to improve the lives of
millions of Americans and reduce harmful emissions. The Clean
Air Act has worked and we should continue building on this
landmark legislation, not slowly dismantle it. And by the way,
I suggest that my colleagues embrace carbon sequestration. With
that, I would like to recognize my colleague from Pennsylvania,
Mr. Doyle.
Mr. Doyle. I want to thank my friend for yielding time. I
also want to thank Congressman Rothfus from my home state for
appearing before our committee today and for his work on this
important issue. I have seen these coal refuse piles first hand
and I have witnessed significant benefit processing waste coal
can provide to these sites.
Our State, Pennsylvania, is home to nearly three-quarters
of the active coal refuse power plants in the country. There
are more than 5,000 coal refuse sites that cover approximately
184,000 acres throughout our state and pose a significant
threat to local habitats and communities.
As many of you on this committee know, I'm an all-of-the-
above guy when it comes to our energy portfolio and coal refuse
power plants provide an additional benefit in that they improve
the local environment. I think they are an important part of
Pennsylvania's power system and help ensure we are good
stewards of our land and water. This bill would certainly help
ensure their continued use in years to come. I would note to my
colleagues that this bill is also significantly improved from
previous versions.
Cleaning up these waste coal piles is a major priority for
our state and we need to figure this difficult problem out.
However, I also want to ensure that we are protecting our air,
not playing favorites when it comes to picking power sources
and preserving important regulations in the regulatory process.
I still have some remaining concerns on aspects of these
bills. But I want to thank Congressman Rothfus for highlighting
the importance of this pressing issue for Pennsylvania that is
before our committee today, and I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
At this time, Mr. Upton is not here so I would like to
recognize the gentleman from Ohio, the author of the BRICK Act,
Mr. Johnson, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BILL JOHNSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OHIO

Mr. Johnson. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this very important hearing today to examine both the
legislation that my colleague, Mr. Rothfus, has introduced and
the BRICK Act, a discussion draft that addresses the EPA's
national emissions standards for the brick and structural clay
products manufacturing industry, which was finalized last
September 24th of 2015. Simply put, the BRICK Act would allow
for the consideration and completion of any judicial review
regarding the EPA's emission standards for the brick industry
before requiring compliance.
Mr. Chairman, I want to take just a moment to illustrate
how the EPA's new regulation will affect the industry and why
the BRICK Act is so desperately needed. The majority of U.S.
brick plants are small family-owned operations. They are often
located in small communities that depend on the plant for good-
paying jobs. Whitacre Greer Brick, located in Alliance, Ohio,
is just such a company that fits that description. Whitacre
Greer employs 75 people, offers education and training benefits
and health insurance to its employees. To comply with the EPA's
requirements, Whitacre Greer will be forced to borrow millions
of dollars to pay for the required control equipment.
Many brick companies are already struggling to find the
capital for plant modernization projects. I can't imagine how
difficult it will be for these companies like Whitacre Greer to
secure the needed investments to pay for new control
equipment--equipment that provides zero return on investment.
Additionally, and this is an important point, the EPA, as
you mentioned, Mr. Chairman, finalized a similar rule in 2003
that already required brick companies to spend millions of
dollars on control equipment and the industry did that when
that rule was implemented. A few years later, a federal court
vacated that rule, making that investment useless.
Unfortunately, the brick industry couldn't roll back the clock
and recover the investment they had made and, worse yet, the
EPA's new emission rules used reductions achieved by the
vacated rule as the baseline for further emission reduction
requirements.
Now, I don't think anybody here would disagree. I see the
need to protect public health and the environment. But it is
unfair that the agency's new rule does not give the industry
credit for the emission reductions that it has already
achieved. This lack of consideration in addition to other EPA
rule requirements places the industry's very survival in
jeopardy.
The brick industry is a part of the American fabric. It is
a part of American culture. It has built some of the most
iconic buildings and towns in existence today. We must make
certain our regulations and laws preserve this industry, not
end it. The BRICK Act will help keep this important industry
alive.
Unless we want to start constructing buildings out of
sticks and straw, we better wise up. We, collectively, all
across this country, here in the House, in the Senate, in the
federal agencies like the EPA, need to act responsibly on this
issue.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I will look forward to
discussing the issue.
Mr. Shimkus. Would the gentleman yield? Would the gentleman
yield?
Mr. Johnson. Yes, I certainly will yield.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. I just want to take this time to
welcome Congressman Rothfus from Pennsylvania and especially on
this piece of legislation.
Congressman Doyle mentioned it. I also have a lot of sites
that could be recycled. I think Keith proves to be a sound
political mind and does due diligence and we are glad you
finally get a chance to air this bill before the subcommittee
and we want to welcome you.
Likewise to my colleague and friend, Bill Johnson. He's
right. The brick industry is really mom and pop businesses that
have operated and survived for many years. I would just remind
my friends that the biggest damage to the health of our
individual citizens is unemployment and no jobs.
And so our fight is to make sure that we can continue to
provide good-paying jobs with health care benefits to our
citizens before it is too late. With that, I yield back my
time.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentleman yields back.
At this time, the chair recognizes the gentleman from New
Jersey, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today, we are considering two bills that undermine EPA air
rules that are instrumental in protecting public health and the
environment by reducing mercury and other hazardous air
pollutants from power plants and other industrial sources.
Let me start with H.R. 3797, the Satisfying Energy Needs
and Saving the Environment Act, or SENSE Act. This bill would
revise the mercury and air toxics, or MATS rule, and the cross-
state air pollution rule, or CSAPR rule, to allow power plants
that burn coal refuse to emit higher levels of sulfur dioxide
and hydrogen chloride. Sulfur dioxide is known to cause adverse
respiratory impacts and hydrogen chloride is corrosive to eyes
and skin and can irritate the respiratory tract.
Supporters of this bill will say that facilities that burn
coal refuse are doing a good thing by cleaning up the
environment and generating power. But I don't think we are here
today to debate that. Instead, we are here to consider whether
the facilities that burn coal refuse should be given a free
pass on complying with EPA rules to reduce certain air
pollutants and I believe that is a very bad idea. Coal refuse
plants are no different than other coal plants and therefore
should be held to the same emission standards.
Supporters of this bill have also argued that coal refuse
plants deserve special treatment when it comes to these air
rules. In the context of the MATS rule I would note that the
EPA, the courts and the Senate, which considered a coal refuse-
related amendment last January, have all reviewed and rejected
the argument that they should be given special consideration.
In the context of the CSAPR rule, the SENSE Act is unnecessary
and I just think bad policy. The current rule uses a phased-in
approach to achieve emission reductions where facilities
receive emission allowances that decrease over time. The bill
would shift a greater percentage of these emission allowances
to coal refuse plants. EPA has a plan for how these allowances
should be allocated to individual plants. But states also have
the ability to submit their own plan for achieving the required
emission reductions. What this means is the state, if it
chooses, already has the power to give extra allowances to coal
refuse plants as this bill would mandate.
Beyond being unnecessary, this provision undermines the
CSAPR trading system and creates inequities in the market. The
SENSE Act picks winners and losers, tipping the scales in favor
of coal refuse plants at the expense of all other plants within
a state.
Now, briefly turning to the other bill, the BRICK Act
extends compliance deadlines until all legal challenges are
resolved by the courts. If this sounds familiar, that is
because it is. We saw a similar provision in H.R. 2042, the
Ratepayer Protection Act.
We also had a similar discussion at our hearing on that
bill when the witness pointed out that the current judicial
process for delaying a rule ``has withstood the test of time
and ensures the courts will undertake a careful balancing of
interests before granting a stay of agency action.'' And she
further explained that the blanket extension in the discussion
draft would ``create powerful incentives for frivolous
litigation in an effort to stall and avoid compliance.''
I do understand there are special circumstances related to
this particular rule. The brick industry has made good faith
efforts to work with EPA and to reduce their emissions.
However, the litigation delay in the BRICK Act creates a very
bad precedent, in my opinion.
The bills we are considering today would undermine
protections and set bad legislative precedence going forward
and therefore I cannot support either of them, and I yield
back.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Thank you Mr. Chairman. Today, we are considering two bills
that undermine EPA air rules-rules that are instrumental in
protecting public health and the environment by reducing
mercury and other hazardous air pollutants from power plants
and other industrial sources.
Let me start with H.R. 3797, the ``Satisfying Energy Needs
and Saving the Environment Act (or SENSE Act). This bill would
revise the Mercury and Air Toxics or MATS rule and the Cross
State Air Pollution Rule or CSAPR rule to allow power plants
that burn coal refuse to emit higher levels of sulfur dioxide
and hydrogen chloride. Sulfur Dioxide is known to cause adverse
respiratory impacts; and hydrogen chloride is corrosive to eyes
and skin and can irritate the respiratory tract.
Supporters of this bill will say that facilities that burn
coal refuse are doing a good thing by cleaning up the
environment and generating power. We're not here today to
debate that. Instead we are here to consider whether facilities
that burn coal refuse should be given a free pass on complying
with EPA rules to reduce certain air pollutants. I believe
that's a very bad idea--coal refuse plants are no different
than other coal plants and, therefore should be held to the
same emissions standards.
Supporters of this bill have also argued that coal refuse
plants deserve special treatment when it comes to these air
rules. In the context of the MATS rule, I would note that EPA,
the courts, and the Senate--which considered a coal refuse-
related amendment last January--have all reviewed and rejected
the argument that they should be given special consideration.
In the context of the CSAPR rule, the SENSE Act is unnecessary
and just bad policy. The current rule uses a phased-in approach
to achieve emissions reductions--where facilities receive
emissions allowances that decreases over time. The bill would
shift a greater percentage of these emissions allowances to
coal refuse plants. EPA has a plan for how those allowances
should be allocated to individual plants, but states also have
the ability to submit their own plan for achieving the required
emissions reductions. What this means is a state--if it
chooses--already has the power to give extra allowances to coal
refuse plants as this bill would mandate.
Beyond being unnecessary, this provision undermines the
CSAPR trading system and creates inequities in the market. The
SENSE Act picks winners and losers, tipping the scales in favor
of coal refuse plants, at the expense of all other plants
within a state.
Briefly turning to the other bill, the BRICK Act extends
compliance deadlines until all legal challenges are resolved by
the courts. If this sounds familiar, that's because it is: we
saw a similar provision in H.R. 2042, the Ratepayer Protection
Act.
We also had a similar discussion at our hearing on that
bill, when a witness pointed out that the current judicial
process for delaying a rule ``has withstood the test of time,
and ensures that courts will undertake a careful balancing of
interests before granting a stay of agency action,'' and she
further explained that the blanket extension in the discussion
draft would ``create powerful incentives for frivolous
litigation in an effort to stall and avoid compliance.''.
I do understand there are special circumstances related to
this particular rule. The brick industry has made good faith
efforts to work with EPA and to reduce their emissions.
However, the litigation delay in the BRICK Act creates a very
bad precedent. I believe this issue can and should be resolved
by the courts.
The bills we are considering today would undermine
protections and set bad legislative precedents going forward,
and therefore I cannot support either of them.
Thank you.

Mr. Whitfield. Gentleman yields back and that concludes the
opening statements. Like our friend from Illinois, I also want
to welcome Keith Rothfus, a member of Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, with us today.
He is the author of the SENSE Act and has been--I know we
have had many discussions about it. I know he has been talking
to EPA about it and had discussions with other groups as well.
So welcome, Congressman Rothfus, and you are recognized for
a 5-minute opening statement.

STATEMENT OF HON. KEITH J. ROTHFUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Rothfus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for----
Mr. Whitfield. And be sure to turn the microphone on.
Mr. Rothfus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this hearing today on two vitally important pieces of
legislation, the SENSE Act and the BRICK Act. I also want to
thank Vincent Brisini, director of environmental affairs at
Olympus Power, and Dennis Beck, the chairman of the Western
Pennsylvania Coalition for Abandoned Mine Reclamation, for
coming to Washington today to provide additional insight on my
legislation.
The SENSE Act, which stands for Satisfying Energy Needs and
Saving the Environment Act, is a common sense solution that
allows innovative coal refuse-to-energy facilities to generate
affordable reliable energy and continue their essential
environmental remediation work in a responsible manner.
As many of you know, the coal industry has been a central
power to Pennsylvania's economy for many years. Unfortunately,
historic mining activity littered Pennsylvania and a few other
states with large piles of coal refuse, sometimes called waste
coal, which is essentially a mix of lower quality coal, rocks,
and dirt that remain after the mining and processing of coal.
Before technology was invented to make use of this material, it
accumulated in open spaces alongside cities and towns close to
schools and neighborhoods and in fields across coal country.
This led to a number of environmental problems that still
plague affected communities. These include air pollution,
damage to vegetation and wildlife, and water pollution from
acid mine drainage. I have been to several of these sites and
seen firsthand the environmental danger they pose. Coal refuse
piles can catch fire and burn for unacceptably long periods of
time, polluting nearby neighborhoods. Runoff from these sites
can turn rivers orange and leave them devoid of life. According
to Pennsylvania's environmental regulator, it would cost
roughly $2 billion to clean up this hazard in my state alone.
This is a significant challenge, but is one that
Pennsylvanians and others in coal country are prepared to meet.
The coal refuse-to-energy industry has been a leader in solving
this problem. With advanced technology, this industry has been
able to use this previously worthless material to generate
affordable and reliable energy. In the process, they have
removed over 200 million tons of coal refuse in Pennsylvania
alone and remediated many formerly polluted sites. Thanks to
the hard work of the dedicated people in this industry,
landscapes have been restored, rivers and streams have been
brought back to life, and towns across coal country have been
relieved of unsafe and unsightly waste coal piles.
It is important to note that private sector leadership on
this issue has saved taxpayers millions of dollars in cleanup
costs. It has also created hundreds of family-sustaining jobs
in areas that have been economically distressed for many years.
These jobs and the communities they support are at risk today,
unless we stand to defend them.
The work that the coal refuse-to-energy industry has done
is remarkable and it represents an environmental success story
that should transcend partisan lines. Despite my best efforts
to advocate for a compromise, the Environmental Protection
Agency has refused to adjust the regulations that threaten to
shut down much of the coal refuse-to-energy industry and thus
imperil its vital remediation efforts. The intensification of
two existing rules--the Mercury and Air Toxic Standards, or
MATS rule, and the Cross-State Air Pollution Rule, or CSAPR--is
especially concerning.
Though all coal refuse fire-powered generators can meet the
mercury standard under MATS--let me reemphasize that--the coal
refuse fire-powered generators can meet the mercury standards
under MATS, many facilities will be unable to meet the rule's
new hydrogen chloride or sulfur dioxide standards. The SENSE
Act provides operators with alternative compliance standards
that are strict but achievable.
Similarly, although coal refuse fire-powered generators
were provided sufficient sulfur dioxide allocations in phase
one of the CSAPR's implementation, these facilities were
allocated insufficient credits in phase two, which is set to
begin in 2017. The SENSE Act seeks to provide coal refuse fire-
powered plants with the same allocation levels in phase two as
in phase one. My bill also contains provisions to ensure that
this change does not simply create a profit center for the
industry. Credits allocated as a result of the SENSE Act's
implementation must go to covered plants, specifically those
that use bituminous coal refuse and they cannot be sold off to
other operators.
The SENSE Act represents a common-sense compromise between
the legitimate goals of controlling pollutants emitted from
coal refuse-to-energy facilities and ensuring that regulations
imposed on the industry are fair and allow vital remediation at
work to continue. The people who live near coal refuse piles
and all the communities downstream of these hazards expect us
to find a solution. The industrious men and women at the power
plants, on the coal refuse piles and throughout the supply
chain are counting on us to protect their livelihoods. We owe
it to all of them to pass the SENSE Act.
Again, I thank the committee for holding this important
hearing and I welcome any questions that you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rothfus follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Well, Congressman Rothfus, thank you very
much for being with us today, and as much as we would like to
ask you questions we are going to dismiss you because we have
another panel and we are going to be asking them a lot of
questions.
But I want to thank you again for your leadership and
bringing this to our attention and we all look forward to
working with you to try to move this legislation to provide
some assistance. I thank you very much.
Mr. Rothfus. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Now, at this time I would like to call up the witnesses on
the second panel.
We have five of them. We have Mr. Davis Henry, who is the
president and CEO of Henry Brick. We have Mr. Creighton McAvoy,
who is president of McAvoy Brick Company.
We have Mr. Vincent Brisini, who is the director of
environment affairs for Olympus Power and we have Mr. Dennis
Beck, chairman of the Western Pennsylvania Coalition for
Abandoned Mine Reclamation, and we have Mr. John Walke, who is
senior attorney and clean air director at the Natural Resources
Defense Council.
So if you all would come forward and have a seat. I want to
thank all of you for joining us this morning to discuss these
two pieces of legislation.
We know that all of you have your expertise and we, as a
committee, look forward to learning more about both of these
bills and the impacts that they might have.
So, Mr. Brisini, you will be first and so everyone make
sure their microphones are on when you do speak so that our
transcriber here can get everything down.
But, Mr. Brisini, you are now recognized for five minutes
for your opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF VINCENT BRISINI, DIRECTOR, ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS
FOR OLYMPUS POWER; DENNIS BECK, CHAIRMAN, WESTERN PENNSYLVANIA
COALITION FOR ABANDONED MINE RECLAMATION; JOHN WALKE, SENIOR
ATTORNEY AND CLEAN AIR DIRECTOR, NATURAL RESOURCES DEFENSE
COUNCIL; DAVIS HENRY, PRESIDENT AND CEO, HENRY BRICK; CREIGHTON
``BUTCH'' MCAVOY, PRESIDENT, MCAVOY BRICK COMPANY

STATEMENT OF VINCENT BRISINI

Mr. Brisini. Good morning. I would like to thank the chair
and the committee for holding this hearing on the SENSE Act.
My name is Vince Brisini and I am the director of
environmental affairs for Olympus Power. Today, I am testifying
on behalf of ARIPPA, the trade association of the coal refuse-
to-energy industry.
ARIPPA members' facilities remove and convert coal refuse
from historic mining activities into environmentally beneficial
electricity. In fact, our electricity is recognized in the
Pennsylvania Alternative Energy Portfolio Standards Act. Coal
refuse is a material that has been left behind by historic coal
mining activities. This includes the mining and the processes
which separated the coal from rock and other carbonaceous
material. The picture on the screen shows a coal refuse pile on
the left and on the right the mine acid drainage that can
emanate from these piles. If you look at the coal refuse pile
picture you can see the mine acid drainage-polluted stream on
the right and at the bottom of the coal refuse pile. The pink
areas on the pile are evidence that this pile has previously
burned. Where I come from, that material is called red dog.
The next likely question is how much coal refuse is out
there. No one really knows. But it is estimated to be about 2
billion cubic yards in Pennsylvania alone and that is split
about evenly between the bituminous region in the western part
of the state and the anthracite region in the eastern part of
the state. This map shows the abandoned mine lands and the
location of the coal refuse-to-energy plants in Pennsylvania.
It also shows the watersheds impacted by mining-affected lands
including coal refuse piles.
Everyone downstream of mining-affected lands is impacted by
the surface water pollution from these areas. The coal refuse-
to-energy process consists of three basic steps. The coal
refuse is screened and removed from the site and then hauled to
the coal refuse-to-energy plant. The coal refuse is then burned
with limestone in a fluidized bed combuster boiler to make
steam to produce electricity and that results in ash that meets
the criteria for beneficial use in Pennsylvania and that ash is
returned to the mining-affected lands and used to remediate and
reclaim those areas.
The coal refuse-to-energy process is the only process that
permanently addresses the problems associated with coal refuse.
Some key industry metrics in Pennsylvania are 1,500 megawatts
of electric generating capacity, 11 million tons of coal refuse
removed annually for fuel, over 205 million tons of coal refuse
used so far for fuel, thousands of acres of land remediated and
reclaimed, hundreds of miles of streams improved by elimination
of acid mine drainage, 1,200 direct jobs with a payroll in
excess of $84 million per year, 4,000 indirect jobs for project
management, engineering, operations, transportation, logistics
and skilled trades, property tax revenues to support local
schools and communities and over $10 million per year of
business per facility into their local economy--collectively,
$150 million per year into Pennsylvania's economy. The
regulatory issues being addressed by the SENSE Act are the
Cross-State Air Pollution Rule and the Mercury and Air Toxic
Standards.
While ARIPPA has engaged in both verbal and written
communications with EPA regarding the issues associated with
coal refuse-fired boilers, EPA has failed to recognize the
technical differences between coal-fired and coal-fired refuse
boilers and the unique multimedia benefits the coal refuse-
fired boilers provide to Pennsylvania. The SENSE Act, on the
other hand, provides for very targeted appropriate achievable
emission control requirements for certain of these units.
Specifically, under the cross-state air pollution rule the
SENSE Act continues phase one sulfur dioxide allowance
allocations to existing bituminous coal refuse-fired units
only. But it preserves EPA's sulfur dioxide emissions budget by
reallocating a percentage of allowances from retired units in
two plants that were converted from coal to natural gas.
However, it does not allow the transfer of these sulfur dioxide
allowances to other units and upon retirement any banked sulfur
dioxide allowances allocated under the SENSE Act must be
surrendered.These caveats prevent an economic windfall to these
bituminous coal refuse-fired units and most likely they result
in less sulfur dioxide being emitted into the environment.
In the case of the Mercury and Air Toxic Standards, the
SENSE Act adds an additional performance-based standard of 93
percent sulfur dioxide removal to the current acid gas
standards for demonstration of compliance. This again provides
for the necessary relief for the continued operation of the
bituminous coal refuse-fired plants.
The SENSE Act is a reasonable and targeted effort to
address the errors that EPA has made in CSAPR and MATS and is
very important to ensuring that these coal refuse-fired
facilities remain able to conduct their business of reclaiming
and recovering these mining-affected lands and providing high
quality family-sustaining jobs in the communities in which
these facilities are located.
ARIPPA would like to thank Rep. Rothfus and we urge you to
support the SENSE Act and its passage in this session of the
U.S. House of Representatives.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Brisini follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[The addendum to Mr. Brisini's testimony has been retained
in committee files and can be found at: http://docs.house.gov/
meetings/if/if03/20160203/104366/hhrg-114-if03-wstate-brisiniv-
20160203.pdf.]
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much, Mr. Brisini.
And Mr. Beck, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DENNIS BECK

Mr. Beck. Usually I don't need a microphone but I'll tone
myself down today.
Good morning Mr. Chairman, and the rest of the committee
members. My name is Dennis Beck. I am president or chairman of
the Western Pennsylvania Coalition for Abandoned Mine
Reclamation, otherwise known as WPCAMR. We have a sister
organization called EPCAMR, which is the eastern Pennsylvania
coalition.
The coalition appreciates the opportunity to appear today
and share our views and concerns on the effects of the waste
coal-to-energy plants in restoring the degraded environment in
coal-producing areas, especially in Pennsylvania. I am
expressing support for House bill 3797, the SENSE Act, which
will help establish the standards for EPA to regulate waste
coal-to-energy plants. Our efforts focus on returning abandoned
mine lands and waste coal piles to productive use, improving
water quality, and reducing hazards to health and safety, thus
improving the local economy and enhancing the quality of life.
Today, the runoff from these waste coal piles is polluting
our surface and ground water supplies for several miles around
the piles with other numerous impacts on our environment.
Chemicals such as mercury, selenium, chromium, lead, aluminum,
iron, and manganese are seeped out of these coal piles into our
water supplies.
Where I live in Cambria County we are at the head waters of
the Ohio River and Pennsylvania is also part of the head waters
for the Chesapeake Bay. So any pollution that rolls off these
coal piles affects everyone downstream. Changes in the PH in
these streams destroys aquatic life from the macro
invertebrates to fish. None survive in it, from some of the
pictures that Vince had shown.
Here is an important part: if left alone, many of these
piles will self-ignite. We have got 40 piles in the state of
Pennsylvania that are burning at this time. In Lackawanna
County, in 2014 Pennsylvania's DEP had to extinguish that pile.
It cost them over $2 million to extinguish the one pile that
was burning.
The three coal generation plants in my county have
significantly improved and impacted our county. They have
burned over 25 million tons of waste coal while supplying
electricity to the 280,000 residences. The three plants employ
200 people directly, and indirectly 300 more. They have
reclaimed over 525 acres of abandoned mine lands, contributed
over $25 million to the local community since they have been
put in place and have won numerous state and environmental and
safety awards since 1992.
I just want to talk a little bit about two of the
reclamation sites in Cambria County. In Revloc, the Blacklick
Creek was a dead stream for several decades. That has been
restored. Over 100 acres of land have been restored. The south
branch of the Blacklick is now designated as a cold water
fishery by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission and it is
eligible for fish stocking for the local fishermen.
In Washington township, there has been 3.5 million tons of
waste coal removed. In its place, there are four ball fields,
two and a half miles of walking trails, a community hall, a
coal miners monument and a bell tower. It is now a gathering
place for the entire community both young and old, improving
the vitality of a once dying community. A contractor has also
subdivided numerous acres for housing growth in that area.
Another one of these big projects that was undertaken is
called the Big Gorilla project in northeast Pennsylvania. It
cost DEP $4.5 million to reclaim those acres, and they
estimated if the waste coal plants had not come in to take the
waste coal out of there that reclamation cost would have been
$80 million and it cost $4.5 million to get it cleaned up and
restored.
I want to look at net benefits. Several people have talked
about the benefits of cleaning these sites up and stuff that we
have put on it. I have mentioned a couple of them. Let me just
mention what would happen if they are not cleaned up. There is
over 5,000 piles of waste coal left in Pennsylvania. There are
40 of them burning at this time. If they are left alone,
numerous more are going to self-ignite and what comes off of
those piles in the smoke and the steam that come off of there
are, again, your mercury, your sulfates, your chlorides,
hydrogen sulfide. You have polycyclic organics, which are
phenols, coming off of there in that smoke. Furthermore, let me
mention this one also.
EPA has indicated from past statements that because of the
unique environmental benefits that coal refuse-fired electric
generating units provide, these units warrant special
consideration so as to prevent the amended NSPS, the new source
performance standards, from discouraging the construction of
future coal refuse-fired plants in the U.S. and that is in the
ARIPPA report that was updated. It is a white paper updated on
October 5th of 2015.
We feel it is not equitable and one regulation does not fit
all the plants the same. It's an over-burdening and unfair
regulation and we support Rep. Rothfus' House bill that will
examine the EPA regulation on emissions of these waste coal
plants.
We feel that waste coal plants provide a greater benefit to
the environment, communities and residents of the unregulated
coal mining regions of the past. The amount of pollution
removed and streams restored to new life must be considered as
greatly beneficial to the people of the United States.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Beck, excuse me. I have let you go over
about a minute and a half so----
Mr. Beck. Three lines. Three lines.
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Mr. Beck. These waste plants are a great example of
ingenuity, cutting-edge technology and concern for the
environment. The positive impact of the waste coal burning
plants include enhancements on land, water, air, living
organisms as well as social, cultural, and economic
environments.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Beck follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you so much.
Mr. Walke, welcome back. We appreciate your being here this
morning. You're recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOHN WALKE

Mr. Walke. Thank you, Chairman Whitfield and members of the
committee. It is good to be back.
My name is John Walke and I am clean air director and
senior attorney for the Natural Resources Defense Council, a
nonprofit organization of scientists, lawyers and environmental
specialists dedicated to protecting public health and the
environment.
H.R. 3797, the Satisfying Energy Needs and Satisfying the
Environment Act, is a flawed bill that would weaken air
pollution standards for waste coal plants and increase
dangerous and deadly pollution under two of the most important
clean air rules ever adopted for coal-burning power plants. I
am not here to dispute or to debate beneficial uses of waste
coal to energy production, as Congressman Pallone noted. H.R.
3797 will, however, increase emissions of harmful sulfur
dioxide and particulate matter pollution as well as hazardous
air pollution in states with coal plants. This will impose
additional avoidable health hazards on Americans. My oral
testimony will make four basic points.
First, H.R. 3797 picks winners and losers under EPA's
signature interstate air pollution program, the cross-state
rule. It does so by favoring waste coal power burning--waste
coal power burning plants at the expense of all the other in-
state power plants that generate electricity with other types
of coal or oil. H.R. 3797 even deprives some of these other
coal plant operators of valuable economic assets to which they
are entitled under current law. This political favoritism
upends the neutral performance-based legal system that Congress
has maintained for interstate air pollution for 39 years. H.R.
3797 deprives valuable allowances from non-waste coal plant
operators that make cleaner decisions. This deters cleaner
generation and penalizes other in-state coal burning power
plant operators. H.R. 3797 penalizes the coal plant operators
that do not burn waste coal by reducing valuable sulfur dioxide
allowances that the operator is entitled to hold or trade or
sell under current law. This especially harmful element of the
bill has the unjustified effect of rewarding dirtier operation
by waste coal plants and penalizing less polluting decisions by
coal plant operators to switch to natural gas or cease
operation. Indeed, were this legislation to become law the bill
would create immediate disincentives to repowering coal units
to natural gas or shutting down older inefficient units. This
is not good public policy.
Second, the bill attacks state rights under the Clean Air
Act. The legislation deprives state officials of the
flexibility and prerogative to determine from which in-state
sources sulfur dioxide reductions are best secured to comply
with the cross-state rule and how to achieve those reductions
most effectively, equitably, and cost effectively. The
legislation would take control away from states to make these
basic decisions for the first time in the 39-year history of
the Clean Air's program. Remarkably, the bill even goes on to
place the U.S. EPA administrator in charge of decisions that
the Clean Air Act today reserves to states. If state officials
in Pennsylvania or West Virginia, for example, wish to
incentivize the waste coal energy industry, they may do so
today under current law. State officials may grant more sulfur
dioxide allowances to waste coal plant operators from the
state's total emission budget under the cross-state rule. There
is no need to pass legislation like this to accomplish that.
Indeed, the bill would paradoxically deny state officials the
flexibility and authority that they enjoy under today's law.
Third, the bill allows unhealthy levels of sulfur dioxide
pollution to increase above a state's total budget level,
worsening air quality in upwind and downwind states. Due to a
fatal flaw in the bill discussed in my written testimony, there
is no constraint in the real world on the sulfur dioxide
emissions exceeding a state's overall pollution budget. The
result would be more pollution in upwind and downwind states.
Fourth and finally, the bill harms Americans' health and
air quality by letting waste coal plants emit excessive levels
of dangerous hazardous air pollution. It adds an alternative,
more lax emission standard for sulfur dioxide emissions to the
two more protective standards in the rule already. The EPA has
noted that some waste coal plants already are meeting either
the rule sulfur dioxide standard or hydrogen chloride standard
or both. Others will do so by April of this year after seeking
compliance extensions and installing available pollution
controls to meet the standards. When waste coal plants owners
filed lawsuits challenging the mercury rule, claiming it was
``virtually impossible to meet the acid gas and sulfur dioxide
limits,'' the court had little trouble rejecting these
arguments unanimously. The judges pointed to evidence showing
that eight out of 19 waste coal units with data already could
meet the rule's acid gas standard or alternative sulfur dioxide
standard. Indeed, the court noted that some of these already
compliant plants are among the best performers--let me repeat
that--among the best performers in achieving hydrogen chloride
reductions among all coal-burning power plants around the
country.
Finally, H.R. 3797 would allow higher levels of sulfur
dioxide emissions and hazardous air pollution. This outcome is
harmful for Americans living in states with these coal plants
and harmful to Americans living downwind from these plants.
This too is bad public policy and I urge members of the
committee not to approve the bill. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walke follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Walke, thank you very much.
And, Mr. Henry, you are now recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAVIS HENRY

Mr. Henry. Chairman Whitfield, distinguished members of the
subcommittee, good morning and thank you for inviting me to
testify.
Mr. Whitfield. Have you turned your mic on?
Mr. Henry. Sorry about that. Chairman Whitfield and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, good morning and
thank you for inviting me to testify on this important issue.
My name is Davis Henry and I am the president of Henry
Brick, which has manufactured clay brick in Selma, Alabama for
over 70 years. I represent the third generation of Henrys to
operate this plant. I also currently serve as the vice chairman
of the board for the Brick Industry Association, the national
trade association that represents manufacturers and
distributors of clay brick and pavers. I am here today to speak
on behalf of both my company and my industry.
Henry Brick currently employs 58 people including our
manufacturing, sales, and support staff. That number hopefully
will grow this year to about 95 when we bring plant two back
online. It has been idle since June of 2008 due to the economy.
As you can imagine, the last 8 years have been a very trying
time for our company as well as the rest of the brick industry.
We are committed to doing our share to protect our environment,
but with a finite amount of resources we need to be sure that
we know what is required of us and that the expectations will
not change once the resources are committed. I am here today
because we were directly impacted by a previous change in
regulation and I want to ensure that my company and all
remaining brick companies do not fall victim to this again.
In 2003, the first maximum achievable control technology,
or MACT, standard was promulgated for our industry. This rule
applied only to major sources of hazardous air pollutants, or
HAP, and only to the larger kilns in our industry. For our
industry with only two pollutants emitted in any large amount,
the only definition of major source that really applies is a
facility that has the potential to admit ten tons or more of
any single HAP. Henry Brick was a major source of HAP in 2003
and had two kilns considered to be large by the EPA. We had
until 2006 to install and begin operating control devices to
meet the limits, which we did. We installed limestone-based
systems called DLAs, or dry lime absorbers, on both our kilns
at a total capital cost of about $1.5 million.
In 2007, almost a full year after our industry achieved
compliance with the 2003 MACT, it was vacated by the courts for
deficiencies. Unfortunately, most of us, including Henry Brick,
were unable to turn off our control devices because our
existing air permits would not allow us to stop operating the
controls. The cost to operate the control devices over the last
eight plus years has been significant as well. During the
compliance time for the 2003 Brick MACT, the number of
controlled kilns in our industry soared from just over 20 to
more than 100 kilns.
In 2008, the EPA began developing the replacement MACT that
eventually became the 2015 Brick MACT. To develop the standard,
the EPA looked at the best performing kilns including those
brand new controls that would not have been in place except for
the 2003 Brick MACT to establish the limits. Unfortunately,
like many who installed DLAs, our kilns could not meet these
new more stringent limits. We recently conducted a stacked test
at our facilities that confirmed our inability to meet the
limits for two of the three HAP categories. We cannot meet the
mercury limit nor the PM nonmercury metals limit. To comply
with the 2015 Brick MACT, we believe we would need to take out
the DLAs we installed in 2006 and install a new system called a
dry injection fabric filter. The EPA estimates this would cost
us about $3.8 million per kiln, almost $8 million to our
company. There is an alternate solution that may be as little
as $1.65 million but it has not been proved and we don't know
how that will pan out. The EPA's estimated emission reduction
for an average kiln for mercury metals is less than 400 pounds
per year for an uncontrolled source. So our incremental
reduction from our control kilns would be even less.
There is a way to avoid MACT compliance. In fact, the EPA's
first listed option for complying with the rule is to avoid the
rule by becoming a synthetic matter or synthetic area source.
To become a synthetic area source a facility accepts federally
enforceable limits that ensures they never emit more than the
ten tons per year that makes you a major source. If you are
like Henry Brick and have both of your kilns controlled with
air pollution control devices, the EPA assumes that you can
become a synthetic area source at little or no cost. If you
follow EPA's approach to assigning cost, you would assign an
annual cost of less than $20,000 per year.
Unfortunately, our most recent tests also demonstrate that
we cannot become a synthetic area source as we currently
operate. We have some issues with raw materials and other
things but it is going to cost money to solve these issues and
it will be a lot more than $20,000.
While compliance with this regulation alone threatens small
businesses like Henry Brick, if you consider that this is the
only regulation we face correctly identifying the appropriate
place to spend our finite sources is critical to our survival.
For example, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
is about to finalize a new permissible exposure limit for
silica dust that, if promulgated as it was proposed, will add
almost another million dollars in equipment that my company may
need to finance and install to remedy a nonexistent silicosis
threat in brick plants. Regulations like these threaten the
continued existence of many small companies in our industry
including mine. In fact, compliance with both of these rules at
the same time could devastate much of our already threatened
industry where 75 percent of the companies are small
businesses.
Henry Brick simply cannot afford to try and hit another
potentially moving target of Brick MACT compliance. We acted in
good faith to comply with the 2003 Brick MACT and now face some
of the steepest costs in the industry because we may need to
take out our DLAs and replace them with this. We need the BRICK
Act to ensure that we are not required to invest again until we
know that the standard is not going to change. This is not a
hypothetical issue for Henry Brick. It is real. It has happened
to us. Please do not let it happen again.
Thank you for introducing this bill and for taking the time
to listen to me today. I am happy answering any additional
questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Henry follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[The addendum to Mr. Henry's testimony has been retained in
committee files and can be found at: http://docs.house.gov/
meetings/if/if03/20160203/104366/hhrg-114-if03-wstate-henryd-
20160203-u2.pdf.]
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much.
Mr. McAvoy, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CREIGHTON MCAVOY

Mr. McAvoy. Thank you.
Chairman Whitfield and distinguished members of the
subcommittee, good morning and thank you for inviting me to
testify on this issue that could have potentially devastating
consequences to my company and to my industry.
My name is Creighton McAvoy. I am president of the McAvoy
Brick Company, which has manufactured clay brick and pavers in
Phoenixville, Pennsylvania for over 120 years. However, my
family history with brick making goes back five generations to
1866 when my grandfather started a brick plant in Philadelphia
with his brother-in-law. He eventually started two more brick
yards in south Philadelphia with his sons and in 1895 he and
his sons started a new corporation to make vitrified street
pavers in Phoenixville. We are still making brick on that site
today.
In 2006, McAvoy Brick employed 26 hourly union employees
and six salaried employees working year round and had sales of
over $5.5 million. In 2012, due to the effects of the Great
Recession on our industry, McAvoy Brick sales bottomed out at
just under $2.5 million and we employed four salaried employees
and 20 hourlies, most of which were laid off 5 to 6 months of
that year. Last year, business slightly improved to just under
$2.8 million in sales and employment increased to five salaried
employees and 21 hourly employees, most of which were employed
over 8 months. Throughout all this downturn, McAvoy Brick has
been able to pay all its bills and for the most part stay in
the black. As you can see, we are a very small business, even
for the brick industry.
I am here today because while we were not required to put
on controls in the last round of this regulation, it appears we
will need to under this new rule. We are concerned that this
regulation could become the moving target that the last Brick
MACT did and that regulatory uncertainty could cripple my
ability to remain in business. We are here to ask your help to
ensure that what happened to companies like Henry Brick does
not happen again. We believe the BRICK Act can give us this
certainty we need.
I am not only here on behalf of my company; I am here on
behalf of my industry, as I serve on the board of directors of
the Brick Industry Association. Approximately 75 percent of the
companies in the brick industry are small businesses like
McAvoy Brick. They have been making brick for a hundred years
or more and have been good employers and neighbors in their
local communities. Our industry is committed to do our share
and doing the right thing for our employees, our vendors, our
customers and our community. However, as our industry continues
to struggle to come out of the Great Recession, we, like all
industries, have limited resources. It is imperative that these
limited resources be used judiciously and on the most important
issues. It is important that there is some benefit to every
dollar spent and that the money not be spent needlessly or
prematurely.
We were actually one of the fortunate companies when it
came to the 2003 Brick MACT. As we were able to take a
production limit from 12 tons of brick per hour through our
kiln down to just below 10 tons per hour, making our kiln a
small kiln and not subject to those regulations. That did not
come without a cost, as we could have sold some of the product
from that surrendered capacity in the few years before the
recession. However, we were still better off than what
compliance did to our fellow brick manufacturers with large
kilns.
In 2015, the 2015 Brick MACT does include some of the
innovative requirements including health-based standards for
over 99 percent of the hazardous air pollutants emissions from
our industry's kilns. Unfortunately, the requirement for the
remaining 1 percent emissions, mercury and nonmercury metals,
will require the same multimillion dollar controls that would
have been required before the health-based standards were
conceived.
Under the 2015 Brick MACT, we will likely be required to
install controls on our kiln. We will be conducting tests to
determine our specific situation. According to EPA's cost
estimates, they expect that we will install and operate a
control device that will cost approximately $1.5 million and
become a synthetic minor source, thus avoiding the Brick MACT
requirements. This control device is the same one Henry Brick
installed on their kilns. If that control is incapable of
helping us get out of this rule, as it was incapable for Henry
Brick, we believe we will have to install a control system that
EPA estimates at costing $2.7 million to control three to five
pounds of mercury and 100 to 200 pounds of metals each year. We
are simply not sure anyone will loan us the money to purchase
these controls or that we will be able to pay this money back,
particularly if it is for the more expensive system that has
never been demonstrated to work on a brick kiln emission.
While we did not have experience complying with control
limits for the 2003 Brick MACT, another small company similar
to ours does have experience trying to borrow money from a
financial institution. In their case, the money was for
renovations at one of their kilns, an investment that would
make them more efficient and more productive. They spent the
last 2 years trying to obtain financing for a renovation of one
of their kilns. This renovation would reduce their energy cost
by approximately $500,000 per year and it took two years to
find a financial institution willing to lend them the money.
That company is one of the few brick companies to have had
steady profit since 2007. Their financial status was very good
for all those loan applications with plenty of collateral.
However, it still took two years to find an institution willing
to lend them the funds.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. McAvoy, I let you go over about 2
minutes. If you would summarize your testimony.
Mr. McAvoy. You may think that the loss of one small brick
company will not make any difference in our overall economy.
However, if McAvoy Brick is required to close their doors, more
than $2.8 million will be lost from our local economy. We pay
over $1 million in wages for 26 families. Many of these
employees will have difficulty finding other employment.
Basically, we are really happy that this legislation has been
introduced and we hope that it will able to be passed. I thank
the committee for allowing me the time to speak and I will be
more than happy to answer any question at this time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McAvoy follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you and I thank all of you for
your testimony and at this time I recognize myself for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Henry, how many employees do you have in your company?
Mr. Henry. Currently, 58.
Mr. Whitfield. Fifty-eight. And you have 26 families, Mr.
McAvoy?
Mr. McAvoy. Yes.
Mr. Whitfield. Recently I was reading an article and this
article happened to be talking about some environmental groups
who basically were saying that the end justifies the means. And
that struck a chord with me because you look at the Brick MACT
of 2003, that regulation which was vacated by a federal court.
You look at the Utility MACT.
The Supreme Court recently found that rule to be legally
flawed and remanded it back to EPA, and the day after the
Supreme Court's decision EPA said in a blog that the Supreme
Court ruling was of no practical impact, stating that the
majority of power plants are already in compliance with our
regulation or well on their way to compliance.
It is disturbing to me personally that EPA seems to be
developing a pattern and they are doing the same thing with the
Clean Air Act--I mean, the Clean Power Plan in which they--even
Larry Tribe says it looks like you are burning up the
Constitution what you're doing here and now it is at the
Supreme Court on whether or not there is going to be a stay to
the implementation of this act or not.
But they seem to be developing a pattern of they come forth
with these regulations knowing full well the only avenue open
to a company is to file a lawsuit or an association or groups
to file lawsuits, knowing full well that that's going to take a
period of time and the deadline for meeting the regulation is
going to expire before that can be decided in the courts.
And so that is a disturbing trend and it seems to me that
both of you in the brick industry are concerned about that with
this 2015 act that you are going to have to comply, you are
going to spend the money and the lawsuits are going to be filed
and you may end up winning but in effect it is a hollow
victory. Would you agree with that comment or not?
Mr. Henry. Certainly. When we came into compliance in 2006
with the original MACT, as I have stated, we spent a million
and a half dollars.
A year later it was vacated. We have had to operate those
control devices since 2007 regardless of whether there was a
MACT in place or not. So we have spent no telling how much
money over that time operating them.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
Mr. Henry. And now to be faced with having to replace those
with new control devices that are exponentially higher in cost
for only a 4 percent gain or reduction in emissions seems
outrageous.
Mr. Whitfield. We all recognize the Clean Air Act is a very
important piece of legislation and I don't think America has to
take a back seat to anyone on clean environment and we can
credit the Clean Air Act for it. But I do think we have to be
concerned when a pattern is developing where they are going so
extreme on some of these regulations they cannot withstand
legal challenge and yet the practical impact is it makes no
difference because there is no avenue available.
So I think that's something we are all concerned about. Let
me just ask you on the coal refuse issue and the BRICK, have
you all had a lot of discussions with EPA about your particular
problem?
Mr. Brisini. Yes. In fact, those discussions occurred.
There were meetings on February 29th, 2012, May 30th, 2012,
March 19th, 2013, May 7th, 2013, November 5th, 2013 and----
Mr. Whitfield. And do you feel like you are making any
progress in working on a solution with EPA on this?
Mr. Brisini. Not at this point, no. We don't believe----
Mr. Whitfield. OK. What about the brick industry? Have you
all been meeting with them as well?
Mr. McAvoy. Oh, yes, we have. We worked with them and we
were also able to get a health-based rule which is somewhat
ground breaking.
Mr. Whitfield. So it has been productive for you?
Mr. McAvoy. Oh, yes. It has been productive. However, other
issues come up, the mercury and the metals and it just also
seems like outside sources suing, caused these problems.
Mr. Whitfield. Suing to make them to comply?
Mr. McAvoy. Well, making the change--to vacate the rule.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes, right. To make--yes, right. Right.
Well, yes, it is really frustrating and my time is expired. So
Mr. McNerney, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. I want to thank the chairman.
Today's hearing focuses on a couple of bills--oh, sorry.
That was my opening statement.
We have heard today that the coal refuse facilities are
unable to meet the EPA mercury and air toxic standards. But
this isn't the first time we have heard that kind of claim that
they can't meet the EPA standards only later to find out that
the innovation made the standards achievable at minimal cost.
Mr. Walke, it is my understanding that the EPA used their
maximum achievable control technology program in setting up the
mercury and air toxic standards. Could you briefly describe how
that program works?
Mr. Walke. Sure. The Clean Air Act's air toxic program
requires the EPA to look at the best performers in reducing
toxic air pollution. EPA did so for coal electric plants and
found that waste coal plants were among the very best in the
country among all coal plants including those that burned
bituminous, lignite and otherwise and reducing the HCL
emissions that are the subject of this bill and this hearing.
The executive branch has found those emissions can be
controlled. The judicial branch has found the same thing. State
officials have found the same thing and plant operators are
meeting the standards with equipment that is running today.
Mr. McNerney. Very good. So Congress, in setting up this
program, did not want to merely maintain the status quo.
Congress wanted all facilities with an industrial sector to
make up the necessary upgrades to reduce their emissions in
line with the best performing units. Is that right?
Mr. Walke. That's correct, sir. And if I just may add some
important context to a discussion that just occurred, the
federal court in 2003 that struck down the BRICK standard found
that the Bush administration had adopted illegally weak rules
that did not reflect what the best performers can do. The rule
was overturned following urgings by the Brick Industry
Association, the trade group, to adopt those illegal elements
in the rule and that's why the courts overturned it.
I agree it is an unfortunate situation but if anything the
Bush administration induced these companies to install illegal
and inadequate controls and that was overturned in court which
is, unfortunately, where we are today.
Mr. McNerney. Well, the advocates for this bill claim that
the coal refuse facility should be treated differently from
other coal fuel generation facilities, that the technology and
that the fuel used would prevent these facilities from meeting
MATS standards.
Did the EPA look at the coal refuse facilities while
establishing the MATS standards? You sort of already answered
that. Go ahead.
Mr. Walke. They absolutely did and found them to be among
the best performers, a conclusion that was validated by the
court and rejecting the same arguments that you are now hearing
from the waste coal industry when they were advanced
unsuccessfully in a lawsuit.
Mr. McNerney. Well, has the EPA considered treating these
facilities differently from the other coal burning facilities?
Mr. Walke. They already do. They allow these plants alone
to meet alternative limits of HCL or sulfur dioxide in the air
toxics rule and----
Mr. McNerney. Is that appropriate?
Mr. Walke. And I think that's perfectly appropriate as long
as they are strict. What this bill does is relax the sulfur
dioxide limit.
Another point is really critical. State officials today
have the authority to treat these plants differently.
They have the authority to exempt the plants from the
cross-state rule. They have chosen not to do so. They have also
chosen to give them their fair share of allowances. But that is
a decision that can be changed by state officials tomorrow.
Mr. McNerney. Well, in your testimony you mentioned that
the courts have also considered challenges to the mercury and
air toxic rule based on assertions that the waste coal plants
should regulate differently.
Were these challenges successful?
Mr. Walke. They were not because the assertions were found
to be unfounded.
Mr. McNerney. Well, based on your response then there
appears to be no justification for allowing these facilities to
emit more pollution than other similar facilities.
Mr. Walke. We certainly do not believe so, especially
because we are talking about hazardous toxic air pollution and
we are talking about pollution control devices that are both
available and in use today.
Mr. McNerney. Quickly, the results of this legislation
would be, in my opinion, that other power plants in a given
state covered by the CSAPR would have to drastically cut their
emissions to make up the differences. Is that appropriate?
Mr. Walke. That is a strange paradox of the bill. They
favor waste coal plants by requiring all other coal-burning
plants in a state with waste coal plants to give up quite
valuable assets, these sulfur dioxide allowances that can be
traded or sold or used at a later time.
So it's a zero sum game and the bill takes it out of the
hide of remaining coal plant operators.
Mr. McNerney. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time has expired. At this
time the chair recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Shimkus, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It's a great hearing
to have and it's unfortunate we have two different--same but
two different because I would like to get in depth on both of
them and I want to try to.
First, to Mr. Henry and Mr. McAvoy, thank you for creating
jobs and livelihoods. Mr. McAvoy, what's your payroll
approximately? I know you probably don't have those numbers in
front of you.
Mr. McAvoy. About a million dollars.
Mr. Shimkus. How much taxes do you pay?
Mr. McAvoy. You mean federal or whatever?
Mr. Shimkus. Federal, state. Illinois has property taxes.
Mr. McAvoy. Well, property tax I think to the school
district I think we're, like, $60,000 a year. We're a
subchapter S corporation so I don't have a federal number.
Mr. Shimkus. And how about health care benefits that you
provide?
Mr. McAvoy. About $20,000 a month or more.
Mr. Shimkus. Right. And these are bargain--you got--your
hourly folks are bargained, correct?
Mr. McAvoy. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. What's the union?
Mr. McAvoy. Steelworkers.
Mr. Shimkus. OK.
Mr. McAvoy. Steelworkers.
Mr. Shimkus. So, again, those are always important aspects
to debate because in my opening statement the greatest driver
of health concerns to our population is poverty.
So it's an important debate to have to how much you push on
emissions for the sake of health when you drive people into
poverty or you cause them to lose their jobs or you put them on
the welfare state. So I want to continue. Thank you for
fighting for that aspect.
Mr. Walke, and I appreciate you being here and I know the
organization and association and you laid out a compelling case
on technology in the SENSE Act. But you didn't make another
credible defense of technology in respect to the BRICK Act. In
fact, you said nothing about the BRICK Act. Can you tell me
why?
Mr. Walke. Sure. I was invited to testify about the SENSE
Act. I have some familiarity with the Brick rule and I related
some of that.
Mr. Shimkus, I will try my best to answer your questions
but I didn't prepare a written testimony.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. Because obviously the brick industry--the
debate is also rules, regulations we tried to meet. Now they're
changing the rules. Now we may not be able to meet it.
So if you would, that would be helpful to me if you would
come because it's just important in this debate, the cost
benefit analysis.
Let me go to the--kind of segueing now to the SENSE Act.
Back to you, Mr. Walke. I mean, those photos that was put up by
I think Mr. Brisini are fairly compelling on reclamation and
reuse.
But in your opening statement you also said I am not going
to dispute or discuss--you didn't want to talk about those
benefits. Why not?
Mr. Walke. I wasn't disagreeing with those benefits is what
I meant to say.
Mr. Shimkus. So that is part of this debate. If there are
benefits and you all accept that premise, can't we get to how
do we incentivize this that's beneficial to the health and the
environment of our citizens based upon those very compelling
photos?
I think part of the SENSE Act is let's help each other.
Let's help clean up the environment but let's give a benefit
for the reuse so that this can happen in an affordable--I think
the other compelling thing Mr. Beck had mentioned was the
reclamation of this site the cost could have been $60 million
and ended up being $4 million. From a taxpayer's perspective,
that's hard to argue--the benefits.
Mr. Walke. And I am not. I have three specific ideas. I am
going to use Pennsylvania as an example. The state officials
can do today without needing to resort to a lot of the----
Mr. Shimkus. But they have to take from emissions of
current operating facilities. I mean, so if there's a set
standard and then you penalize--you know, we don't incentivize
this and they give them the credits that then the proposals
will take away from other operating facilities.
I need to go to, and I apologize because we really don't
have much time, I want to give Mr. Brisini a chance to respond
to some of the claims Mr. Walke made as far as the litigation--
Bush administration and a response. Could you do that for me?
Mr. Brisini. I would love to, thank you.
Let's talk about MACT. What MACT did in that regulation EPA
lumped two groups. They said you're coal or you're lignite.
There was no differentiation between coal refuse and I believe
they kept coal refuse because of the exact reason Mr. Walke
mentioned.
We are extremely low emitters of mercury. So they need to
lump them in to the larger group so they can force the lowest
mercury limit on the coal-fired plants. Also, we are extremely
low emitters of particulate matter. They use a nonmetal mercury
particulate alternative standard. Again, we helped set the bar
lower for the other plants. But once we got drug in to allow
that to happen, at that point we have HCL.
I do not agree with what he said around these plants being
able to meet hydrochloric acid. There are actually two
bituminous plants that can meet the hydrochloric acid. No other
plants, whether they are bituminous coal refuse or anthracite
coal refuse, they don't do it.
One is the last plant built in 2004 and there is a
particularly unique sulfur dioxide control system which as a
co-benefit happens to control hydrochloric acid. The other unit
happens to burn coal refuse that doesn't have chlorine. In
fact, to control mercury at that plant you need a halogen, be
it chlorine. They use bromine and that is how they are able to
capture the mercury because you can't capture mercury unless
it's oxidized. You can't oxidize the mercury unless there's a
halogen present.
Now, as far as the authority to exempt or I can do a
surgical reallocation tomorrow, no, they can't. This is a FIP.
This is a federal implementation plan, and to change that
federal implementation plan you need a new state implementation
plan.
EPA has up to 18 months to respond to a federal
implementation plan change. So the idea that I can come in
there and fix this tomorrow is not true and I will say it that
bluntly.
Now, as far as increasing emissions and having emissions
increased, no. We preserve the budget but we don't take
anything away from an operating unit. There are a considerable
number of units that have been retired in both Pennsylvania and
in West Virginia that these are the source of the allowances.
We do not increase the cap developed by EPA for Pennsylvania
for SO
2
. We simply say let's reallocate from the
retired units. So units that are sitting there with this stuff
that no longer provide jobs, no longer provide tax base, no
longer provide the things that they previously provided. But we
don't say take them all away.
In Pennsylvania, the reallocation split would be 65 to 35.
In West Virginia, they would retain 86 percent of the
allowances and the bituminous refuse plants would get 14
percent of the allowances. So there's a fundamental issue. Now,
as far as the--there are some plants that are meeting the
alternative sulfur dioxide standard. Yes, that is true. They
are the anthracite plants. They have low sulfur coal refuse.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Brisini. We get into this
issue when--I always like to give people an opportunity to
answer, particularly when they're asked the question with about
four seconds left in the--it's an art.
So thank you for your comments and particularly that part
about states being able to immediately give you an exemption.
Mr. Doyle, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just want to maybe just go a little further with that,
Mr. Brisini.
You acknowledged that some of these coal refuse plants that
burn bituminous coal--even some that burn bituminous coal are
able to meet MATS and CSAPR and they have not asked for an
extension to comply with the regs. You imply in your testimony
that is so because they are burning low sulfur bituminous coal
refuse. Are there any other distinguishing features at these
plants that are able to comply? Are there any technologies that
other plants could adopt to mitigate the release of these
pollutants and comply with the standards?
Mr. Brisini. The circumstance you have is that there is one
bituminous plant that meets the HCL. They cannot meet--because
they are a bituminous plant they can meet the HCL but they
cannot meet the current alternate SO
2
limit. The
other plants that can meet the alternate SO
2
limit
are anthracite refuse plants in the eastern part of the state
but they don't meet the hydrochloric acid limit either. Only
one other plant does and there is not chlorine in the coal
refuse that they burn.
Mr. Doyle. So you are saying that there are no new
technologies that are available that would allow them to
comply?
Mr. Brisini. I suppose that there would be a way. But we
looked at a number of things to try to do that including the
ejection of additional limestone. But it ultimately ends up in
increasing of mass emissions. And something else that happens
is that there is varied sulfur content in the coal refuse piles
in the bituminous region that can get even higher. To simply
pick a number and not look at a performance-based standard for
removal would eliminate the opportunity to pursue the highest
sulfur coal refuse piles to reclaim them and they probably have
the highest level of acidic discharge with the greatest
negative effect on a waterway.
Mr. Doyle. Couldn't some of these plants add another type
of fuel or make the waste coal their secondary fuel source so
that it reduces the sulfur or HCL and helps them comply with
the standards?
Is there an alternative way to deal with this?
Mr. Brisini. Not really, no. Not from the standpoint of
entering a different fuel. You can't start burning--number one,
there is limitations by virtue of financing and other issues
that these coal plants are obligated to burn at least 75
percent coal refuse. There is also--as you go through there is
chlorine in the coal that's also burned. But there is--you
can't dilute it. Plus, you are also limited into the calorific
value that can go into a fluidized bed combuster. For example,
the most recent one built, and as they build them they build
them to be able to burn lower and lower quality coal refuse,
the older ones that were built require--they burned or designed
to burn about 6,800 BTUs per pound for their heat input for
their fuel. The most recent one built is at 5,500 and coal is
generally 12,000 to 13,000 BTUs.
Mr. Doyle. OK. Thank you. I want to ask Mr. Walke, too.
Mr. Walke, I understand and appreciate your concern that
states maintain their rights under the Clean Air Act. But you
know, in my state, particularly in Pennsylvania, many elected
officials strongly value these coal refuse plants on both sides
of the aisle, I might add, and our own DEP, Pennsylvania's
Department of DEP, submitted official comments to the EPA
urging special consideration of the coal refuse-fired
facilities under CSAPR. In their comments they explain the
importance of these facilities to restoring the environment and
preventing acid mine drainage. They ultimately concluded that
constructing a rule that results in the closure of these
facilities will have significant impacts on my state's ability
to restore these mine-affected areas to benefit our state and
our downstream neighbors.
What do you recommend the Pennsylvania DEP should do, going
forward?
Mr. Walke. Congressman Doyle, thank you for your thoughtful
question and I did read those very thoughtful comments by the
Pennsylvania DEP. Several things that can be done and some of
them are actually mentioned in the letter. States today have
the authority to differently allocate allowances within the
emitters in their state. They can do it to other coal-burning
electric utilities. They can do it to non-electric sector. They
have the full array of choice about how best to achieve those
reductions cost effectively.
So if Pennsylvania wants to incentivize a waste coal energy
production, they can do so by reallocating sulfur dioxide
allowances within the electric sector. They can do a mix within
the electric sector----
Mr. Doyle. So they would have to submit a new SIP. Is that
what you are saying?
Mr. Walke. I did not mean to suggest and maybe I did by
using tomorrow that this could be accomplished by midnight
tomorrow. Clearly, not. But there are----
Mr. Doyle. It sounded that way when you said it.
Mr. Walke. Yes. Well, I apologize for that impression.
The state has the authority to design their own plan to
allocate things differently than the federal model. They have
the option not to do that.
Mr. Doyle. So that gets them though CSAPR but how does that
get them to comply with MATS?
Mr. Walke. That's an excellent question. So you actually
hit upon some of it yourself. There are plants in West
Virginia, for example, that are using waste coal as a secondary
fuel that are installing scrubbers and meeting the standard.
They will do so by April. There are Pennsylvania plants who
have told the state that they will undertake limestone
injection in order to satisfy the standard. EPA found that
there are scrubbers that can reduce emissions by 96 percent of
sulfur dioxide.
The bill, of course, weakens that standard. So there are
waste coal plants across the country complying with the
standard or that will be complying with the standard with off-
the-shelf technology that is available and EPA and the courts
have both found that to be the case.
Mr. Doyle. Mr. Chairman, thank you for your indulgence.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes, sir. And at this time the chair
recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Latta, for five
minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks for
conducting today's hearing, and to our panel thanks very much
for your testimony today. It's very enlightening.
If I could just start maybe between Mr. Henry and Mr.
McAvoy to ask you some questions about the brick industry in
general. Are bricks made all over the country? Are they
regionalized? Where are most bricks being made at today?
Mr. Henry. I am sorry. What was the----
Mr. Latta. Where are the bricks being made at today? Is it
regional or all over?
Mr. Henry. Predominantly in the southeast and up through
the Atlantic east coast but there is brick plants located all
over the country.
Mr. Latta. The next question I have is because bricks
aren't light. They are pretty heavy. So I was just thinking on
the transportation costs, we are looking on the transportation,
how far you have to get to transport those bricks. And the
question on the transportation costs, of course, when you look
at the weight and the costs there, when you are having these
costs being associated with the EPA coming down on you, you are
going to have to pass those costs on. I would assume you are
doing that.
So Mr. McAvoy, you are shaking your head. If you would like
to comment on that.
Mr. McAvoy. Yes, it is another burden cost that is going to
have to be either absorbed by us or our customers or a
combination of the two.
Mr. Latta. Well, again, when you are looking at, absorbing
by you because, with the--I am not sure exactly what your
margins are.
But you are going to have to somehow get that cost down to
the--on the construction industry but then that is going to be
cost passed on to the owner, then. It's going to be that
homeowner out there that wants to build a new house that's
going to have to pay more cost for the brick. Or if you are a
hardworking American out there that wants to build a new
factory or plant or some type of business that they are going
to be using some type of brick product that is going to have to
be added into that cost, I would assume.
So just in general if you could give me an idea of maybe
over like the last since these regulations have come on which
you have seen that you might see an average cost of a brick
going up that would be passed on then to the ultimate consumer
of that brick.
Mr. McAvoy. Do you want a specific number?
Mr. Latta. Or just an approximate, if you can do that.
Mr. McAvoy. It would all depend on what kind of scrubber or
whatever we put in. There are different options.
Davis might be able to answer that since you have been
running one. How much more did that add to your cost?
Mr. Henry. Well, you would like to think you could pass on
all these costs to your customers and we certainly try. A lot
of it does end up with us and it reduces your margins, makes it
harder to reinvest and continue your business.
But those you can't pass on it is probably in the dollars--
dollar or two per thousand range. It's not a--you can't pass on
all of it. How about that?
Mr. Latta. Right. Let me ask this, Mr. Henry, if I could.
The EPA estimates that this rule would have an annual cost in
the neighborhood of $25 million while the Chamber of Commerce
report cites industry estimates as high as $100 million.
Would you like to comment on that difference between--if
you have any knowledge on that from the EPA estimate of $25
million to the Chamber estimating at $100 million, how--we are
talking $75 million. That's quite a bit of difference there.
Mr. Henry. Well, based on Henry Brick itself, for us to
comply with the new MACT is going to cost one company $8
million and there's a lot more than one brick company around.
So I would say it's probably in the--closer to $100 million
versus the $25 million.
Mr. Latta. Mr. McAvoy?
Mr. McAvoy. The EPA's numbers have a lot of assumptions
that we have problems with. You know, they are just doing a
guess. They don't have the exact data. We feel that we have
better data and that the cost will be higher than what they
project.
Mr. Latta. Where does the EPA get their data from that they
are coming up with that estimate of $25 million?
Mr. Henry. I don't know. I don't know.
Mr. Latta. OK. Mr. Brisini, if I could ask you a quick
question with my last 35 seconds. I'll try to be better than
the gentleman from Illinois with only four seconds.
Are coal refuse-to-energy facilities typically located in
smaller communities? Are these coal refuse-to-energy facilities
typically located in a smaller community or a larger community?
Mr. Brisini. The coal refuse plants are located in small
communities. They are extremely important to the small
communities. In the case of the three bituminous coal refuse
plants that are near where I live in Edensburg, it is the
county seat of Cambria County. It is less than 4,000 people
population.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I see my time has expired and I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Latta.
At this time I will recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Green, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and ranking member, for
holding the hearing today. I want to thank our witnesses for
coming and testifying.
Mr. Beck, in 2014 the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection submitted comments to the
Environmental Protection Agency. In these comments, the
Pennsylvania DEP requested an exemption for coal waste
facilities. DEP further recommended EPA establish a subcategory
for waste coal technology.
Can you offer your thoughts on why your state agency
submitted these comments? Oh, Mr. Beck, you're chair of the
coalition of abandoned mines. Why did your state environmental
agency submit those comments?
Mr. Beck. Why did they what?
Mr. Green. Why did they submit those comments about
recommending the EPA establish a subcategory for waste coal
technology? Your state environmental agency submitted comments
to EPA and was there any reason for it or did they do research?
Mr. Beck. Mr. Brisini worked for DEP too so I think he----
Mr. Brisini. I can explain. I can explain, and it gets back
to the point I made about how they did MACT. When EPA did MACT
they did not----
Mr. Green. Could you pull the mic a little closer?
Mr. Brisini. Yes, sure. They did not establish separate
categories for coal refuse or different types of coal,
anthracite coal or bituminous coal. They turned it into two
categories--lignite, everybody else.
So the point that was being made is to appropriately
address and prepare appropriate standards for the coal refuse
plants you should look at the emissions that are achieved by
the coal refuse plants. That's how you do a MACT regulation.
You look at the top 12 percent of the performing existing
facilities and you pick from those numbers. That's exactly why
they put them together though because they wanted the mercury
number to be as low as possible.
Mr. Green. Most of the testimony offered today highlights
the environmental benefits of the coal waste technology. In
2011, however, the Clean Air Council submitted comments to the
EPA stating the more environmentally friendly way of dealing
with waste coal would be more cost effective as well. Can any
of the panel comment on the Clean Air Council's proposal to
plant, for example, beach grass and if their comment holds
true?
Mr. Brisini. Well, we have tried to investigate the beach
grass claim and what they did, and I have only ever been able
to find an overview of the study--I have never found the study,
I have never found background information on the particular
pile they wanted to introduce the beach grass to. The
fundamental premise of that study is they want to introduce
beach grass and it will grow for a period of time and then they
will start to repopulate and then other native species will
overtake the refuse pile. We don't believe that that addresses
the issue because it doesn't address percolation, surface
runoff and it doesn't prevent future fires from occurring
within the piles because a coal refuse fire does not start on
the top by somebody throwing a match on it. It starts from the
inside. In my written testimony, I provided a coal refuse white
paper that discusses refuse fires and those sorts of things.
But no, we do not believe beach grass is any solution.
I kind of look at it as, if somebody's coming and you want
to clean up the house so you throw the stuff in the closet.
Mr. Green. OK. Mr. Walke, in your testimony you cite White
Stallion and in that case the D.C. court states, among other
things, that EPA notes that CFBs were among the best and worst
performers of various pollutants.
Is the technology and retrofitting the difference between
the best and the worst in the categories discussed by the D.C.
court?
Mr. Walke. Well, the D.C. court upheld EPA's standard in
all respects and that finding wasn't challenged by the Supreme
Court with respect to the standards themselves and the
achievability of the standards and the propriety of the
emission limits. The EPA did create a separate subcategory for
the lignite coal in your state, Congressman Green, and there
are technologies that are more appropriate to lignite. But the
court specifically rejected a challenge by the trade
association for the waste coal industry and said EPA was
correct not to have established a subcategory for waste coal,
and then Pennsylvania DEP asked EPA to reconsider that after
the failed court challenge.
Mr. Green. Mr. Chairman, in our district you heard over the
years I have five refineries that generate tons of petroleum
coke that we can't burn and we're lucky enough to have a ship
channel where we load it onto a ship and send it to Africa,
India, wherever else. That is not possible in Pennsylvania
because the rail cost of the transportation to somewhere would
be, I guess, huge and so economically disadvantaged. Is that
correct?
Mr. Walke. I think that's correct and it is important to
note where there is agreement here. I am not arguing that we
shouldn't be able to combust this and they are not arguing that
they shouldn't have to control emissions. What we are arguing
about is whether the standards that have been issued by EPA and
upheld by the courts and that are being achieved today and that
will be achieved with available technology should be weakened
by this bill or allowed to continue.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, the chair will recognize the
gentleman from West Virginia, Mr. McKinley, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I suppose I really want to just address the SENSE Act over
the coal refuse legislation. I am trying to take it from a
little bit different perspective, maybe from 30,000 feet and
that is all these new standards.
Just imagine the less--there will be so much less acrimony,
differences of opinion, particularly back to you, Walke--if
these were applicable only to new construction.
If a new coal refuse facility had to be constructed it has
to follow these new standards. What I find offensive here in
Washington is these new standards are put together and then
they are applied retroactively back to existing facilities.
I come from the construction industry and I can just assure
you right now that the Cannon Office Building doesn't comply
with all the proper air quality--indoor air quality standards.
It is laden with asbestos but yet we don't go back and make
them retroactively address that unless we are going to do a
major renovation. This room in and of itself also doesn't
comply with indoor air quality standards of air turnovers.
Neither does the Cannon Office Building.
The Capitol building doesn't comply. But yet we are allowed
to continue to use it. We walk across floor tile that's laden
with asbestos. We have got asbestos in our plaster walls and it
is OK. But yet you go after a coal refuse energy facility and
say these new standards, you have to go back and retroactively
do that.
I just think it is disingenuous the way we approach some of
these things and I think it's a disservice to the taxpayers and
anyone else when we apply--in your words, picking winners and
losers. In schools and office buildings, we don't make them go
back and retroactively do that but yet we are doing it to
industry. We are doing it to the coal industry and I am
troubled with that and I just know that we'd have a lot less
acrimony--I think we could get along with a lot of our
regulations if we imposed a new reg only applicable to a new
power plant, not to go back and shut them down.
And I am a little concerned because I'm hearing from
testimony from the--and reading the document that when we have
two facilities in my district in West Virginia, they are going
to shut down under these standards and we are treating as
though as they are not being truthful.
They can do it. I guess they can if they can get the money
to do it and people are willing to pay the additional cost of
energy that they are going to create as a result of that, and
apparently what they have found out is that there is no
interest in that. The people that are consuming don't want to
pay that so they are going to close down and we are talking
about in these two over $3 million in taxes that will be lost
as a result. Sixty percent of that in West Virginia goes for
schools.
We just cut out another $1.8 million, almost $2 million
from our schools in West Virginia to accomplish something that
should go forward, not retroactive. What are we thinking about
when it comes to that?
I go to you, Walke. Is it more responsible to say go ahead
into the future? Wouldn't you find we would have more common
interests if we used common sense to apply these regs, whether
it's new source performance standards? All of this and this,
wouldn't it be better if we just applied it to new construction
rather than old construction?
Mr. Walke. Congressman, thank you.
I don't think so and when the 1990 law was passed----
Mr. McKinley. So do you think we should shut down the
Cannon Office Building then and make sure everyone leaves here
because we're not in conformity with the standards that have
been adopted across this country.
Mr. Walke. So this clean air program was promoted for----
Mr. McKinley. But this is indoor air quality, though,
Walke. That's what I'm talking about. You're subjecting all
these people to have indoor air quality that is detrimental to
their health. We spend 90 percent of our time indoors and we
are not complying with the indoor air quality standards. But we
allow that to continue because we understand the problems there
would be if we tried to retroactively address old buildings.
Why aren't we looking at it into the future? Don't you
think--my time is over--I am going to submit that if we made it
effective to new construction, new brick plants, new coal to
refuse, coal energy, that we would not have this problem right
now--that they would be designed accordingly and they would be
built into the cost. But to do this retroactively is not common
sense, and I yield back my time. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, the chair will recognize the
gentleman from New York, Mr. Engel, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Engel. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walke, I have a series of questions I would like to ask
you. One of them was touched on when you had an exchange with
Mr. Doyle so I would like to ask you to emphasize certain
things. We have heard testimony today that all waste coal
plants can meet the mercury standard under MATS but many cannot
meet the hydrogen standard or the sulfur dioxide standards.
Firstly, do you agree with that assessment and in your
answer if possible could you discuss the D.C. circuit court's
decision in White Stallion Energy Center versus EPA?
Mr. Walke. Certainly. Thank you, Congressman.
Let me take those one by one. One thing that hasn't come
out yet at this hearing is that one of the reasons waste coal
plants are meeting the mercury standard and the particulate
matter standard is they qualified for an exemption--a low-
emitter exemption where they are not actually--I mean, I guess
you could call that meeting the standard but they qualify for a
low-emitter exemption, which I think is appropriate.
Other plants have coal waste profiles or controls in place
to achieve compliance. It is simply incorrect to suggest that
coal waste plants burning any type of coal waste are incapable
of achieving either the HCL or the SO
2
standard in
the existing MATS rule.
The court rejected that claim. EPA has rejected that claim.
What you have here is a case of, you know, if I can say so,
special pleading to Congress to try to overturn those findings.
We have applications submitted from coal waste operators
announcing the controls they are going to install.
We have controls that are going to go into a place by April
of this year. We have controls on plants already that are being
operated.
So when the D.C. Circuit in its decision heard the full
legal arguments from the trade association for waste coal
operators and looked at all the evidence they presented and the
evidence in the administrative record that EPA had compiled,
they squarely rejected those claims in a three to nothing
decision and that decision was left untouched by the Supreme
Court in that relevant respect.
Mr. Engel. Thank you.
Janet McCabe, the acting assistant administrator for the
Office of Air and Radiation of the EPA, submitted a written
statement for today's hearing.
She says that the bill we are discussing today would remove
the economic incentives to reduce emissions at waste coal
plants because emissions allocations for those plants could not
be traded under the cross-state air pollution rule, or CSAPR.
She argues that the result would be less efficient and more
costly compliance with CSAPR. Do you agree with her assessment?
Mr. Walke. Absolutely. She is just describing the mechanics
of the program.
The units that retired that were referred to by one of my
fellow witnesses generated valuable allowances that are held by
those coal operators and that can be used by those plants or
that can be traded.
And yet this bill would take them away. It would do the
same for plants that converted to natural gas. There is a very
robust market in tradeable allowances that was created by the
1990 law and then continued in other forms and it is just
inescapable that the design of this bill would take away those
valuable assets from coal plant operators in Pennsylvania, West
Virginia and elsewhere and simply transfer them to waste coal
operators who want to pollute at higher levels than the law
today allows.
Mr. Engel. You mentioned that Section 2(b) of this bill
would interfere with a state's rights to determine how to best
comply with the requirements of EPA's cross-state air pollution
rule and favors waste coal burning plants over other in-state
power plants.
So this bill takes long-standing state authority, transfers
it to the federal government and then uses that authority to
pick winners and losers. Is that right and can you explain?
Mr. Walke. That is right and I find it a particular paradox
for sponsors whose voting records in the past have suggested
such strong support for states' rights.
The law today is even handed with respect to the decisions
that state officials may make about how to allocate those
allowances and states make their own decision.
This disrupts that and for the first time in any interstate
legislation I have ever seen takes it away from the states and
paradoxically transfers it up to Washington to override the
ability of those states to make different allocation decisions.
It is just puzzling.
Mr. Engel. All right. Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr.
Walke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Brisini, you want to make a comment?
Mr. Brisini. I sure do. Thank you very much.
I find it really interesting that we keep hearing this--
well, this SENSE Act picks winners and losers when in fact the
federal implementation plan picked the winners and losers and
they happened to pick in CSAPR the bituminous coal-fired refuse
plants to be the losers in the CSAPR phase two allocation.
And they also picked the bituminous coal-fired refuse
plants to be the loser in MATS because, as I have said all
along, the anthracite refuse plants can meet the alternative
0.2 standard.
That is because the sulfur content of the coal refuse in
the anthracite region is lower. It is not because the
technology is different or they have anything special and it is
part of the problem when you lump all of these things together
not recognizing the technical and the differences in these
kinds of fuels.
Mr. Engel. OK.
Mr. Brisini. Now, as far as the idea that they are usurping
states' rights I find that interesting because the federal
government just did that in the FIP.
If you go on to read the Pennsylvania DEP comments, you
will often find in the comments what happened to cooperative
federalism and that is really one of the arguments you have
then.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Brisini, I gave you a chance to respond
there but I need to recognize Mr.----
Mr. Engel. I was going to ask, Mr. Chairman, if perhaps Mr.
Walke could respond to something that Mr. Brisini----
Mr. Whitfield. I will tell you what. Let me finish with
these two and then what we will do we will let Mr. Walke and
Mr. Brisini sit next to each other and then we will go at it
some more.
At this time, I will recognize Mr. Johnson of Ohio for 5
minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate so
much the panel being here today. Very important issues we are
talking about--the health of an industry, jobs, our economy.
Very important.
Mr. Henry or Mr. McAvoy, can one of you talk more about the
ability to get a loan for a control device to comply with the
EPA's MACT? I mean, if you had to get one of these loans how
would it affect your employment level at your facility?
Mr. McAvoy. It would greatly affect it because we probably
couldn't obtain the loan and even if we were able to structure
it in such a way that we could make payments, the cyclical
nature of our industry and so forth, you know, would probably
cause us to default at some point in time.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Mr. Henry?
Mr. Henry. The one thing that makes it really hard at this
current juncture is that we have been through a very rough 8
years. I don't think anybody in the brick industry would say
they have enjoyed the last eight years.
And so our balance sheets reflect that and so to go and try
to secure a loan now and look a banker in the face and go,
well, here are my financials----
Mr. Johnson. Sure.
Mr. Henry [continuing]. I need $7 million or $8 million,
there is not a bank out there that would look at ours and feel
very good about being paid back.
Mr. Johnson. Right. Well, there's this status of a
synthetic minor. You are able to get underneath the caps and
that you would be then given some relief from some of this.
But how would that affect--let us say you were to be
identified as a synthetic minor. How would that affect the
company's ability to grow?
Mr. Henry. That is a very good question. We have two plants
that are side by side in Selma and if we became a synthetic
minor we would no longer have the ability to grow in our local
community. If we grew we would have to grow outside of that
area.
Mr. Johnson. So basically that limits your ability to
create jobs and provide economic growth in your community. For
both of you again, Mr. Henry and Mr. McAvoy, how would this
particular legislation that we are talking about, the BRICK
Act, be helpful?
I mean, considering that the industry has already spent
hundreds of millions to comply with a similar EPA rule in the
past only to have the courts vacate the rule a few years later,
how would the BRICK Act be helpful?
Mr. Henry. I would say first we all want to do our part in
the industry to be good to the environment. We want to do that.
But there is only finite resources we have to spend on that
and what we don't want to have happen is have another rule
vacated or the baseline change and we have spent a lot of money
unnecessarily to comply with a rule that may not take effect or
be changed down the road and it is a lot of money to spend not
knowing that it is necessary.
Mr. Johnson. So letting the judicial reviews and letting
the process play out before you have to comply certainly would
be financially more acceptable to your industry?
Mr. Henry. Certainly. We would know exactly what we had to
do. We would have 3 years to comply with the final, final rule
and make sure that we don't waste resources.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Mr. Henry, continuing with you, the study
that you attached to your testimony states that foreign
competition in the brick industry has not been a factor in the
past. Is that correct?
Mr. Henry. Foreign competition as far as importing brick
from other countries, no.
Mr. Johnson. And can you explain why that is not a factor?
Mr. Henry. Brick weigh a lot. They cost a lot to ship.
Mr. Johnson. Sure. I knew that but I wanted the rest of the
committee to understand that.
How might this unique situation--that is, the relative
absence of foreign competition coupled with the EPA's rules
which threaten the very survival of many of the family-owned
brick plants across America, how would this affect the future
availability of U.S. brick?
We don't have any coming in imported. If you guys go out of
business and can't produce brick, are we back to building
buildings with sticks and straw?
Mr. Henry. Or vinyl or something, yes. The brick industry
is very expensive to get into not only because of the control
devices but just the process itself is. And so there would not
be a lot of newcomers to our industry, if I had to guess.
Mr. Johnson. All right. All right.
Mr. McAvoy, my time has expired but if we could--go ahead.
Mr. McAvoy. My guess what would happen is the few
multinational brick companies that have access to capital and
so forth would be there----
Mr. Johnson. To fill that void. Yes.
Mr. McAvoy [continuing]. In the market and the small----
Mr. Johnson. So it would be other countries that would
benefit from----
Mr. McAvoy. Yes. They wouldn't be made overseas but
definitely the profits would be going there.
Mr. Johnson. All right. Another example of policies that
enable our competitors overseas, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. Thank you.
At this time the chair recognizes the gentleman from New
Jersey, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wanted to ask Mr.
Walke a series of questions.
The SENSE Act would give coal refuse facilities special
consideration under the cross-state air pollution rule, or
CSAPR, and EPA issued this rule to protect the health of
millions of Americans by reducing air pollution and requiring
states to reduce power plant emissions that cross state lines
and contribute to air quality problems in other states.
CSAPR ensures that downwind states don't have to impose
more stringent controls on local businesses to make up for the
effects of increased out-of-state pollution and the rule
achieves all this by creating economic incentives to reduce
pollution from power plants.
So Mr. Walke, if enacted how would the SENSE Act impact the
operation of the CSAPR program? Would pollution reductions
still be incentivized?
Mr. Walke. No, certainly not. Well, what the SENSE Act does
is it establishes these static permanent higher pollution
levels for sulfur dioxide available just to waste coal plants
and everyone else has to make the accommodating reductions
whether that is in your downwind state of New Jersey,
Congressman Pallone, or within the State of Pennsylvania
itself.
And there is available technology in the form of scrubbers
to meet the lower sulfur dioxide limits in the cross-state rule
and in the mercury and air toxics rule and you have plants that
are either operating that equipment today or installing it.
And so this it is just kind of a raw political transfer
from one sector to another after that sector suffered losses in
courts when its arguments on the merits were not successful.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Now, some of today's testimony
characterizes the CSAPR provisions in the SENSE Act as merely
correcting errors in how the EPA set up the CSAPR rule.
But I wanted to ask you are coal refuse facilities
different than traditional coal facilities? Should EPA have
treated them differently under the CSAPR rule?
Mr. Walke. Well, certainly they are different in the fuel
they burn but just as lignite and bituminous and anthracite and
other types of facilities are.
What Congress said in 1990 in a law that was actually voted
on by Congressman Barton. What they said is that you are
supposed to look at the best performers and the best
performance and EPA found that waste coal plants met that
criteria with respect to the HCL emissions that we are talking
about here today.
I don't disagree with my colleague about mercury and
particulate matter but that is not what this bill is about. It
is about HCL and sulfur dioxide relaxations under the cross-
state rule and the mercury rule.
There is available technology to meet those standards and
that is really not disputed in the rulemaking record or the
judicial record and I haven't seen any testimony today that
actually overrides EPA's conclusion that scrubbers can meet 96
percent control reductions that will satisfy these standards
and that there are plants today that are meeting those
standards sometimes with lime injection being used as well.
But the coal sector has been reducing these forms of
pollution for 40 years in this country and that is no different
than a boiler that is using what we call waste coal.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Well, if a state wanted to treat
coal refuse facilities differently, do they have that ability
to do so under the EPA rule?
Mr. Walke. They absolutely do. That has been the hallmark
of the interstate program since its inception in 1977 that they
have the first crack and in fact the final crack if they want
to take it.
What is really instructive after all this talk that we have
been hearing of how much of a burden it is to coal waste plants
that should be incentivized, there is not a single state in the
country covered by the cross-state rule that departed from the
formula that EPA adopted for allocating allowances.
Why is that? Because EPA used a formula that was based upon
highly cost effective reductions. And so the power generators
in all of those states including states with waste coal plants
didn't want that formula disrupted.
Now, the waste coal plant operators did but they did not
prevail in Pennsylvania or West Virginia. Their state officials
made different decisions. They could change that decision and
EPA would approve that change.
Mr. Pallone. So, are the CSAPR provisions in the SENSE Act
even necessary?
Mr. Walke. No, they are not necessary and I read EPA
Administrator McCabe's statement and I believe she uses that
exact word. They are unnecessary.
If the State of Pennsylvania wants to reallocate allowances
along the lines in the SENSE Act and to take them away from in-
state coal generators or take them away from manufacturers or
whomever they choose they may do so under today's law without
any need for this legislation.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time the chair recognizes the
gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Long, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Beck, you state
in your testimony that the EPA wants the small coal waste
plants to reduce mercury emissions, 70 percent of just 8
ounces.
How does this compare to large coal plants? Turn your mic
on. Pull it real close there. People listen on the Internet and
they can't hear unless you get your mic up close.
Mr. Beck. On the mercury--70 percent on the mercury, did
you say?
Mr. Long. Right. In your testimony you say EPA wants small
coal waste plants to reduce the mercury emissions.
Mr. Beck. That was my understanding of the rule that they
were going to put a blanket over it and require all the coal-
fired power plants to reduce mercury 70 percent.
Mr. Long. So it is the same as the large coal?
Mr. Beck. Yes.
Mr. Long. There is no difference in the small coal plants?
Mr. Beck. I am not sure what the amounts are or the
concentrations are on the anthracite coal that they have out
there. But I know about the waste bituminous coal and the
regular bituminous coal plants.
Mr. Long. Are you in a position where you could discuss the
financial impact of this rule on small coal waste plants?
Mr. Beck. The problem is 70 percent of 8 ounces. The one
waste coal plant did a stack emission test----
Mr. Long. Can you pull your mic a little closer for me?
Mr. Beck [continuing]. On 8 ounces----
Mr. Long. Can you pull your microphone closer to you?
Mr. Beck [continuing]. And found 8 ounces per year coming
out of the stack on an actual emissions test and the larger
normal coal plants which burned the deep coal or the strip
mined coal the one was producing 1,600 pounds of mercury here.
So, 70 percent of 1,600 pounds--that is a lot of emissions
coming out. But how do you reduce 8 ounces by 70 percent? That
is probably not detectable.
Mr. Long. What is the impact of this for the industry as a
whole, then?
Mr. Beck. They would have to spend a lot of money to try to
get it down that low.
Mr. Long. Or go out of business maybe?
Mr. Beck. And it would probably put them out of business.
And my issue with that is if the small waste coal burning
plants go out of business there are going to be more piles that
ignite and throw many times more mercury into the atmosphere
than the waste coal plants ever did.
Mr. Long. OK. And Mr. Brisini, could you discuss the
alternative compliance options and the SENSE Act for coal
refuse facilities burning high sulfur coal?
Mr. Brisini. The alternative option is to identify a
performance standard 93 percent sulfur dioxide removal and add
that as an option to provide for a compliance demonstration.
That would only be used by the bituminous coal refuse fired
plants. People keep talking as though we are talking about all
of the coal refuse plants.
The SENSE Act really provides relief for bituminous coal
refuse plants. Because of the fuel makeup, the anthracite, they
can meet the current alternative SO
2
standard. As
far as the statement that was made that everybody meets HCL,
that is not in fact true at all.
In Pennsylvania, there is one coal refuse plant of either
type, bituminous or anthracite, that meets the HCL. The
circumstance is that that plant is a low emitter and that one
plant was used in the development of the MACT floor.
But that's one plant. That's an outlier. It was the last
plant built, came online in 2004. There are vast differences
between coal and coal refuse plants. It's not only the fuel. It
is the technology used to burn the fuel to make the material.
Large coal-fired power plants or pulverized coal-fired
power plants, they can be equipped with selective catalytic
reduction for nitrogen oxides. They can be equipped with wet
flue gas scrubbers in a cost effective fashion.
That is, by the way, how the large coal-fired plants will
control mercury. They will not be doing it with any mercury-
specific control technology. The mercury will be removed as a
co-benefit of the sulfur dioxide controlled in the coal-fired
power plants.
But as far as another statement that the state gets a first
crack, that is not the case in CSAPR. It's been a FIP from day
one, and in fact if you go back and you look at other
Department of Environmental Protection letters from
Pennsylvania DEP there was great consternation raised over the
FIP first because the states were not given the opportunity in
CSAPR to do anything.
It was not similar to CARE where a budget was established
and the states had the opportunity to develop their own
allocation methodologies, which is what we did in Pennsylvania
and other states did the same thing.
Mr. Long. I am a little confused on my time. I have gone
from 8--the chairman was very generous, gave me 8 minutes and
20 seconds for a while and it stopped and then a minute and now
38 seconds. I'm not sure----
Mr. Whitfield. You've actually been over 5 minutes but
we'll give you----
Mr. Long. Well, with that I will yield back. I have been
trying to watch the clock and fit in my questions but that
didn't work too well. So I think the regulators have taken a
hold of our clocks.
Mr. Brisini. The regulated, not the regulators. The
regulated.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Thank you. At this time I will recognize
the gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr. Mullin, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
panel for being here.
Mr. Walke, where are you from?
Mr. Walke. I am from South Carolina.
Mr. Mullin. South Carolina. What is your interest in
Pennsylvania?
Mr. Walke. My interest is in air pollution and this bill
concerns coal plants that are----
Mr. Mullin. Do you believe in states' rights? But do you
believe in states' rights?
Mr. Walke. Sure. There is a whole----
Mr. Mullin. So what you are opposing is going to affect----
Mr. Walke. South Carolina is going to award it without
that.
Mr. Mullin. Yes, but what you are opposing is going to
affect the people that really live in Pennsylvania and I have a
big problem with people that are injecting their opinion in a
community they don't live in.
You don't understand how important it is, the way of life
it is, for those that live in Pennsylvania but yet you want to
inject your opinion in it. That is why we set up states' rights
to begin with and you said you believe in it.
You say there's a way that states can go around it and they
have the final say in it. Well, you and I both know that is
absolutely not true because what happens is the EPA sets the
standards and then they hold the entire state hostage for it
and that is how we are putting an entire industry out of
business.
And then you say that there are scrubbers that is
available. Well, how much do those scrubbers cost? How much do
those scrubbers cost that you are talking about to install?
What do they cost an individual or the industry to install
per scrubber?
Mr. Walke. Congressman, there are different sizes according
to the size of the plant.
Mr. Mullin. Give me an average.
Mr. Walke. I don't think an average is possible. I don't
know----
Mr. Mullin. So you're saying that this technology is
available but you don't even know what it costs and then again
you are not even going to pay it because you don't even live in
the state. But yet you want to put your opinion in there. I
have a big problem with this.
Mr. Walke. Congressman, I was invited to testify at this
committee.
Mr. Mullin. I understand you were invited.
Mr. Walke. I've only lived in two states my whole life but
I am testifying about a field that applies across the country.
Mr. Mullin. I understand that you were invited. You can
listen because I'm talking right now. So I understand that you
were invited and I get that and I appreciate your being here.
But you start acting like all this technology is available
and it is just as simple as installing it like it would be
hooking up a garden hose. But you don't even know what it costs
and I don't even actually know if the technology is actually
there.
And Mr. Brisini, is that right? Does the technology really
exist that Mr. Walke is talking about?
Mr. Brisini. Well, this is very, very important. You can
look at this and say what is--technically if you had all the
money you wanted and all the money you needed and you had all
the opportunity for design engineering could you design a
technology to take out the difference.
Yes, you probably could but nobody would be in business
anymore, especially in Pennsylvania where we operate as
competitive wholesale generators. We are not rate based.
We are competitive companies no different than any other
competitive company. We have to recover our costs from the PJM
wholesale electric market.
If you were to attempt to build a scrubber, and I do know
what scrubbers cost because I have put them on coal-fired power
plants and I have put them on big plants and I know that they
don't go on little plants because the plants I used to take
care of in many cases are now retired because they can't afford
to put it and they are considerably larger than these plants.
In the case of a large coal-fired facility that I used to
take care of as the environmental air quality manager it was a
1,700 megawatt facility. The scrubbers cost $675 million.
You go to these small plants, and if you look at a dollar
per ton you were starting with no control essentially of sulfur
dioxide.
Now you look at these plants. These plants are actually
controlled and they are controlled to 93 percent. The scrubber
gets to 98 percent. So you are looking at this little
difference of 5 percent.
So if you look at a dollar per ton basis, all of a sudden
you stick a $100 million dollar scrubber to get 5 percent more
when in fact you have allowances going to retired units which
are only going to sell them in the market so somebody can emit
them, this is a net wash.
All of this upwind downwind discussion is not an accurate
reflection. This is about preserving the budget established by
EPA. It is about having a pragmatic solution that works.
It is about making it so everybody can be OK. But somebody
can't be OK because they want everything the way they want and
there is a way to get to the right solution.
Mr. Mullin. Right. And just to sum it up, this isn't as
easy, Mr. Walke, as just putting a muffler on a car and that is
how you make it sound. And I don't mean to come across
confrontational to you but you are here to testify. But yet you
don't have all your facts.
I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back and that concludes
the questions and concludes today's hearing on these two pieces
of legislation.
Once again, I want to thank all of the witnesses for being
here and for giving us your perspective on both of these pieces
of legislation.
We will keep the record open for ten days and we look
forward to working with all of you as we make an effort to
bring these bills to the floor.
And do you have anything else, Jerry? OK. So that concludes
the hearing. Thank you all once again.
[Whereupon, at 12:15 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

EPA regulations impact nearly every facet of the American
economy, especially manufacturers and energy producers. When
unnecessary or duplicative, they can have a devastating impact,
particularly in small communities where job opportunities are
limited. That is why Congress needs to make targeted
corrections when we believe the agency has gone too far. The
SENSE Act and the BRICK Act are two bills that restore balance
to EPA rulemaking and merit our support.
The problem of coal refuse--the piles of unusable coal
mixed with other materials near abandoned mines--is a very
serious one in rural Pennsylvania and other coal mining areas.
Coal refuse is a cause of air, water, and ground contamination
problems in these communities.
Fortunately, a solution has emerged. Coal refuse-to-energy
plants have been developed that can use this waste material to
generate electricity. About 20 such facilities are currently in
operation, mostly in Pennsylvania. These power plants have thus
far removed 214 million tons of coal refuse from the
environment, while producing energy and jobs.
Given the proven environmental benefits of these
facilities, one would hope EPA would support them, but instead
the agency has issued two rules that threaten to close many of
them down. Both the Cross State Air Pollution Rule (CSAPR) and
the Mercury and Air Toxics Standards (MATS) apply to all types
of coalfired power plants, but are ill-suited to the unique
features of coal refuse-to-energy operations. Many owners of
such facilities say that these rules may force them to shut
their doors.
Rep. Keith Rothfus has sponsored the SENSE Act that would
provide relief for these much-needed facilities. This bill
would make limited changes to the CSAPR and MATS rules in order
to provide coal refuse-to-energy plants with an alternative
means of compliance. It's a win for the environment and a win
for affordable energy and jobs in coal country.
EPA has also targeted the brickmaking industry with
stringent new emissions standards, commonly called Brick MACT.
Meeting these standards is simply unrealistic for most brick
makers, especially those that are small businesses. America's
131 brick facilities are major employers in their communities,
like Forterra Brick in Corunna, Michigan.
It is not clear that Brick MACT will survive judicial
scrutiny either--EPA's previous version of the rule in 2003 did
not--but it may take several years before a final decision is
handed down by the federal courts.
The BRICK Act would provide a measure of relief for this
industry. The bill would delay EPA's compliance deadlines for
the rule until after judicial review is completed. This will
provide both additional time and much needed regulatory
certainty for this sector. I thank my colleague Bill Johnson
for his work on this draft bill.
The SENSE Act and BRICK Act are two reasonable measures to
help ensure that jobs are protected in two important sectors of
the economy. I urge my colleagues to support this legislation.
----------

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
