- MEDICARE PART D: MEASURES NEEDED TO STRENGTHEN PROGRAM INTEGRITY

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MEDICARE PART D: MEASURES NEEDED TO STRENGTHEN PROGRAM INTEGRITY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 14, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-66

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
97-834 PDF                          WASHINGTON : 2016
_________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

_____

Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania
Chairman
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          KATHY CASTOR, Florida
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
BILL FLORES, Texas                   YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma               Massachusetts
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       GENE GREEN, Texas
CHRIS COLLINS, New York              PETER WELCH, Vermont
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
JOE BARTON, Texas                        officio)
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Timothy Murphy, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Diana DeGette, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Colorado, opening statement.................................     4
Hon. Marsha Blackburn, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Tennessee, opening statement..........................     5
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     7
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................    66

Witnesses

Shantanu Agrawal, M.D., Deputy Administrator and Director, Center
for Program Integrity, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services, Department of Health and Human Services..............     9
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Answers to submitted questions...............................    74
Ann Maxwell, Assistant Inspector General, Office of Evaluation
and Inspections, Office of Inspector General, Department of
Health and Human Services......................................    23
Prepared statement...........................................    25
Answers to submitted questions...............................    85

Submitted Material

Subcommittee memorandum..........................................    68
Statement of the National Community Pharmacists Association, July
14, 2015, submitted by Mr. Murphy..............................    72

MEDICARE PART D: MEASURES NEEDED TO STRENGTHEN PROGRAM INTEGRITY

----------

TUESDAY, JULY 14, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:02 a.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Tim Murphy
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Murphy, McKinley, Barton,
Burgess, Blackburn, Griffith, Bucshon, Flores, Brooks, Mullin,
Hudson, Collins, DeGette, Schakowsky, Castor, Tonko, Yarmuth,
Clarke, Kennedy, Green, Welch, and Pallone (ex officio).
Also present: Representative Bilirakis.
Staff present: Leighton Brown, Press Assistant; Noelle
Clemente, Press Secretary; Jessica Donlon, Counsel, Oversight
and Investigations; Charles Ingebretson, Chief Counsel,
Oversight and Investigations; Alan Slobodin, Deputy Chief
Counsel, Oversight; Traci Vitek, Detailee, Health; Jessica
Wilkerson, Oversight Associate; Ryan Gottschall, Democratic GAO
Detailee; Meredith Jones, Democratic Director of
Communications, Member Services, and Outreach; Christopher
Knauer, Democratic Oversight Staff Director; Una Lee,
Democratic Chief Oversight Counsel; and Elizabeth Letter,
Democratic Professional Staff Member.
Mr. Murphy. Good morning. I convene this hearing of the
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. TIM MURPHY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

We are here again today to discuss an ongoing problem with
our entitlement programs--waste, fraud, and abuse--this time in
the Medicare Part D program. However, the failures that we will
hear about today go far beyond lost dollars and cents, rather,
they are helping to feed the prescription drug abuse crisis
that is gripping the country.
Medicare Part D is the fastest growing component of the
Medicare program, providing approximately 39 million
beneficiaries with supplemental prescription drug coverage.
Given this rapid growth, Medicare Part D has been a prime
target for fraud and abuse. In fact, this past June, the
Department of Justice announced a nationwide Medicare fraud
takedown, which led to charges against 243 individuals for
approximately $712 million in false billings. More than 44 of
the defendants were arrested on fraud related to Medicare Part
D. This joint law enforcement effort, which involved the
Department of Justice, the Department the Health and Human
Services, the Office of Inspector General, and the FBI should
be commended. But more work needs to be done at the agency
level to ensure that fraudsters are not able to take advantage
of the program in the first place.
Thankfully, since the inception of the Part D program, the
Office of Inspector General has been working diligently to
reduce waste, fraud, and abuse in the program. The OIG has
released numerous reports and issued several recommendations
intended to strengthen the integrity of Medicare Part D, which
would save taxpayers a tremendous amount of money and would
ensure that prescription drugs are being used as intended and
not overprescribed or diverted.
Unfortunately, CMS has not implemented these
recommendations. In its portfolio, the OIG highlighted at least
nine recommendations that CMS has not implemented. All of these
recommendations were issued to CMS in at least one previous OIG
report, and in some instances, up to five previous reports that
date back to December 2006. And these are commonsense
recommendations; for example, requiring plan sponsors to report
all potential fraud abuse to CMS or the Medicare Drug Integrity
Contractor. This recommendation was issued in five different
OIG reports.
Another important recommendation: implement an edit to
reject prescriptions written by providers who have been
excluded from the Medicare program. That makes sense. Yet CMS
hasn't taken action to implement these recommendations. And
just 6 weeks ago, one of today's witnesses, Dr. Agrawal,
testified before this subcommittee and said, ``holding our feet
to the fire is appropriate,'' and when asked about fraud
occurring under CMS' watch, and as I said, that's precisely
what we are going to be doing today.
CMS' failure to implement these recommendations has led to
trends of questionable billing associated with pharmacies,
prescribers, and beneficiaries. In fact, in its Data Brief,
which analyzed prescription drug events, OIG found that a lot
of questionable billing was tied to commonly abused opioids.
This subcommittee has held a series of hearings examining
the growing problem of prescription drugs and heroin addiction
we know is ravaging our country. The opioid abuse epidemic
resulted in a loss of 43,000 lives last year, and the problem
continues to get worse.
As we examine the Medicare Part D program, it troubles me
that between 2006 and 2014, the total number of beneficiaries
receiving commonly abused opioids grew by 92 percent, compared
to 68 percent for all drugs. Similarly, the average number of
prescriptions for commonly abused opioids per beneficiary grew
by 20 percent, compared to 3 percent for all drugs. Since 2006,
Medicare spending for commonly abused opioids has grown faster
than spending for all Part D drugs. We need to take a closer
look at those numbers and make sure that this program is not
contributing to this devastating epidemic.
The OIG has outlined several commonsense recommendations
that CMS can implement. Now it is incumbent upon CMS to take
action and actually prevent fraud and abuse before it reaches a
level that requires a nationwide takedown.
The committee is concerned that it continues to hold
hearings like this one today where we see steps not taken and
tools not utilized to protect the integrity of these programs
as well as taxpayers' dollars. Now, we acknowledge it is the
people who are committing fraud, whether they are physicians or
pharmacists or other people, they are the ones we are going
after, but we are listening today to the ideas of Dr. Agrawal
and Ms. Maxwell of how we can do that.
So I thank our witnesses for joining us. You have the
ability to save the American taxpayer massive amounts of money,
and of course, save lives in this process.
It is this subcommittee's hope that we will hear concrete
plans from you on how you will go about accomplishing this
task. I might say, we need funds in other areas of care, and so
we'd also like to hear when you make recommendations if there
are some things that actually save us money that we know we
need--for example, the mental health sphere--please tell us
that as well.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Murphy follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Tim Murphy

I convene this hearing of the Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations. We are here again today to discuss an ongoing
problem with our entitlement programs: waste, fraud, and abuse.
This time in the Medicare Part D program. However, the failures
that we will hear about today go far beyond lost dollars and
cents, rather, they are helping to feed the prescription drug
abuse crisis that is gripping the country.
Medicare Part D is the fastest growing component of the
Medicare program, providing approximately 39 million
beneficiaries with supplemental prescription drug coverage.
Given this rapid growth, Medicare Part D has been a prime
target for fraud and abuse. In fact, this past June, the
Department of Justice announced a nationwide Medicare fraud
takedown, which led to charges against 243 individuals for
approximately $712 million in false billings. More than 44 of
the defendants were arrested on fraud related to Medicare Part
D.
This joint law enforcement effort, which involved the
Department of Justice, the Department the Health and Human
Services, the Office of Inspector General, and the FBI should
be commended. But more work needs to be done at the agency
level to ensure that fraudsters are not able to take advantage
of the program in the first place.
Thankfully, since the inception of the Part D program, the
Office of Inspector General has been working diligently to
reduce waste, fraud, and abuse in the program. The OIG has
released numerous reports and issued several recommendations
intended to strengthen the integrity of Medicare Part D, which
would save taxpayers a tremendous amount of money and would
ensure that prescription drugs are being used as intended and
not overprescribed or diverted.
Unfortunately, CMS has not implemented these
recommendations. In its Portfolio, the OIG highlighted at least
nine recommendations that CMS has not implemented. All of these
recommendations were issued to CMS in at least one previous OIG
report, and in some instances, up to five previous reports that
date back to December 2006.
And these are commonsense recommendations. For example,
requiring plan sponsors to report all potential fraud abuse to
CMS or the Medicare Drug Integrity Contractor. This
recommendation was issued in five different OIG reports.
Another important recommendation: implement an edit to reject
prescriptions written by providers who have been excluded from
the Medicare program. That makes sense. Yet CMS hasn't taken
action to implement these recommendations. Just six weeks ago,
one of today's witnesses, Dr. Agrawal testified before this
subcommittee and said, ``holding our feet to the fire is
appropriate,'' when asked about fraud occurring under CMS'
watch, and that's precisely what we are here to do today.
CMS' failure to implement these recommendations has led to
trends of questionable billing associated with pharmacies,
prescribers, and beneficiaries. In fact, in its Data Brief
which analyzed prescription drug events, OIG found that a lot
of questionable billing was tied to ``commonly abused
opioids.'' This subcommittee has held a series of hearings
examining the growing problem of prescription drugs and heroin
addiction that is ravaging our country. The opioid abuse
epidemic resulted in 43,000 lives lost last year and the
problem continues to only get worse. As we examine the Medicare
Part D program, it troubles me that between 2006 and 2014, the
total number of beneficiaries receiving commonly abused opioids
grew by 92 percent, compared to 68 percent for all drugs.
Similarly, the average number of prescriptions for commonly
abused opioids per beneficiary grew by 20 percent, compared to
3 percent for all drugs. Since 2006, Medicare spending for
commonly abused opioids has grown faster than spending for all
Part D drugs. We need to take a closer look at these numbers
and make sure that this program is not contributing to this
devastating epidemic.
The OIG has outlined several common sense recommendations
that CMS can implement. Now it is incumbent upon CMS to take
action and actually prevent fraud and abuse before it reaches a
level that requires a nationwide takedown. The committee is
concerned that it continues to hold hearings like this one
today where we see steps not taken and tools not utilized to
protect the integrity of these programs as well as our
taxpayers' dollars.
I would like to thank our witnesses for joining us -you all
have the ability to save the American taxpayer massive amounts
of money, and save lives in the process. It is this
subcommittee's hope that we will hear concrete plans from you
on how you will go about accomplishing this task.

Mr. Murphy. So thank you for being here today, and I now
recognize the ranking member of the subcommittee, Ms. DeGette
of Colorado, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DIANA DEGETTE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Medicare Part D represents the fastest growing component of
the Medicare program overall. From 2006 to 2014, spending for
Part D drugs increased by 136 percent from $51.3 billion to
$121 billion. In the last 5 years, the OIG has reported a 134
percent increase in complaints and cases involving the Part D
program. The Office of Management and Budget has declared
Medicare Part D a high-error program with an estimated improper
payment rate of 3.3 percent, or $1.9 billion. That could make
up the difference with the 21st Cures and the money we had to
take out. P.S.
As with all Federal healthcare programs, reducing improper
payments and protecting taxpayer dollars must be a priority of
the Department and a priority of this committee, but here's the
part where I pile on to the chairman's statement because it is
not just about Federal taxpayer dollars, it is about all of the
other problems you have with Medicare Part D.
As the chairman said, we are in the midst of a prescription
drug abuse crisis. In 2013, prescription painkillers were
involved in over 16,000 overdose deaths, and heroin was
involved in an additional 8,200 deaths. Over 2.1 million
Americans live with a prescription opioid addiction while
467,000 Americans are addicted to heroin. These are absolutely
devastating numbers, and the chairman is right: this series of
hearings that we have had this year has been, I think, one of
the most eye-opening series of hearings that we have ever had
in this committee illuminating this problem. And Part D is a
part of it because drug diversion and overprescribing are
serious challenges in the program.
Between 2006 and 2014, Part D spending for commonly abused
opioids grew by 156 percent, which outpaced the growth of
spending for all Part D drugs. Additionally, generic Vicodin
was the number one prescribed drug in the Part D program in
2013.
The OIG is going to testify that investigations into Part D
fraud, waste, and abuse have uncovered not only financial harm
to the program but also serious medical harm to individual
patients from the inappropriate prescribing and diversion of
opioids as well as other prescription drugs. Complex criminal
networks involving healthcare professionals, pharmacies, and
street traffickers are becoming a pervasive element of Part D
fraud schemes. In fact, last month, the Department announced
the largest takedown in the history of the Medicare Fraud
Strike Force, resulting in charges against 243 individuals
involving about $712 million in false billings. More than 44 of
the defendants arrested were charged with fraud related to Part
D.
So I want to take a minute to recognize both the OIG and
CMS for the excellent work in achieving this important outcome
and sending a message to the perpetrators that those who steal
from Federal healthcare programs will pay a high price for
their crimes.
I look forward to hearing from Dr. Agrawal, our perennial
witness to this committee now, about what the agency has done
to strengthen program integrity in Part D, particularly as it
pertains to the issue of drug diversion and overprescribing. I
know that the agency's Overutilization Monitoring System has
already resulted in a substantial reduction in the number of
opioid overutilizers in Part D, and I think this is an
excellent step in the Federal effort to address the
prescription drug abuse epidemic.
However, as we are going to hear from OIG today, Part D
remains vulnerable to fraud, and there are additional
opportunities to identify fraud, waste, and abuse. As the OIG
describes, ensuring the integrity of the Part D program
requires constant and proactive efforts at every level from the
plan sponsors to CMS Program Integrity Contractors to the
oversight role. However, CMS does not require plan sponsors to
report potential fraud and abuse. In 2012, only 35 percent of
plans reported such data voluntarily. In the opinion of the
OIG, the low level of fraud identified by some plan sponsors
raises questions about the sufficiency of their fraud and abuse
detection programs.
I know, Dr. Agrawal, you will have more to tell us about
this today. I think it is important, Mr. Chairman, that we
follow up with the plan sponsors themselves to find out why
they are not reporting this information about the fraud
detection system. It would have been helpful to have them here
today but perhaps we can have another hearing, and with that, I
yield back. Thanks.
Mr. Murphy. The gentlelady yields back.
I now recognize the vice chair of the full committee, Mrs.
Blackburn, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to say thank you to our witnesses. It is not your
first appearance, and I am certain it is not going to be your
last. We are so pleased to dig into this issue. The chairman
spoke very well to that.
And going back to what Ms. DeGette was saying, when you
look at the opioids, you have got the abuse. The beneficiaries
receiving these prescriptions grew by 92 percent in 8 years.
Now, common sense is going to tell you something is wrong with
that. I mean, that is just common sense. And then last month we
had 243 individuals charged with $712 million in false
billings. These people were also charged with money laundering,
aggravated identify theft, and what these crimes highlight and
what this growth highlights is basically what is happening at
CMS, Dr. Agrawal, which is the pay-and-chase model, and it is
just not working. My office has just completed a study going
back and looking at the Inspector General reports, and I want
you to know, HHS ranks as, I think it is number 4 over the past
10 years in collective abuse of--no, number 2. They are number
2 on the list, $10.3 billion wasted. OIG has pinpointed this.
And you have good suggestions. You have got nine outstanding
recommendations made for CMS right now that you can do
something about this, and hasn't been implemented.
Now, you are going to say we need more money. Well, guess
what? When you have got a budget that is closing in on a
trillion dollars and you have got $10.3 billion worth of waste
that you have done nothing about, we need to come dock you that
$10.3 billion. And by the way, that is just a 4-year window.
You don't deserve more money. You don't deserve it because
you're not taking good care of the taxpayer dollars that are
coming your way.
What we want is to make certain that people that need a
program and deserve a program and are rightfully in a program
are going to receive the benefits of that program, but waste,
fraud, and abuse is going to be targeted and it is going to be
rooted out, and when you are given recommendations, we expect
those recommendations to see an action. And don't tell me you
are overworked and don't tell me you don't have enough money
because when you have got a job to do, you work until the job
is done, and that is what we are wanting to see is that you are
going to do your job.
So my question to you today is going to be very pointed.
You have been given recommendations. Do you agree with the
recommendations? What are you doing to enact those
recommendations, and what is your timeline for having them
completed?
And those are the questions I am going to have, Mr.
Chairman. I will yield my time to whomever would like the
balance of my time.
Mr. Murphy. Is there anybody on this side who would like to
speak on this?
If not, the gentlelady's time, she yields back, and now
recognize the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Pallone, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Medicare Part D program has been a great success for
our Nation's seniors and for people with disabilities, and I am
glad we are here today to discuss ways to strengthen and
improve it.
For decades before its enactment, seniors and disabled
Americans, often living on fixed incomes, struggled to afford
the rising costs of prescription drugs. Now, more than 40
million Americans have access to affordable medications through
the Medicare Part D program, and the ACA strengthened Part D
and took crucial steps to improve affordability and access by
closing the gap in coverage where beneficiaries pay the full
cost of their prescriptions, known as the donut hole. Before
the ACA, many beneficiaries struggled with crippling out-of-
pocket costs in the coverage gap. The ACA gradually phases out
the donut hole, and closes it completely by 2020. Since the
law's enactment, 9.4 million seniors and people with
disabilities have saved over $15 billion on prescription drugs,
an average of $1,598 per beneficiary. In 2014 alone, nearly 5.1
million seniors and people with disabilities saved $4.8
billion, or an average of $941 per beneficiary. These are real
dollars and real savings for Americans, allowing them to live
healthier lives and have the peace of mind that they won't have
to decide between putting food on the table or paying for
lifesaving medications.
In addition, the ACA strengthened Medicare by improving the
solvency of the program and strengthening program integrity.
Notably, the law moved beyond the traditional pay-and-chase
model to a preventative approach that seeks to keep fraudulent
suppliers out of the program before fraud, waste, and abuse
occur. For example, under the authorities in the ACA, CMS
recently issued a final regulation that requires all Part D
prescribers to enroll in Medicare. This will help ensure that
Part D drugs are only prescribed by individuals who are
qualified under State law and under the requirements of the
Medicare program, and it implements a longstanding
recommendation by the Department's Office of Inspector General.
The same rule also gives CMS the authority to revoke a
provider's Medicare Part D enrollment status under certain
circumstances, including if CMS determines that the provider
represents a threat to the health and safety of Medicare
beneficiaries or has a pattern of prescribing Part D drugs that
is abusive.
And finally, to reduce prescription drug abuse and
diversion, CMS now requires plan sponsors to implement internal
controls to prevent overutilization of both opioids and
acetaminophen. These steps and many others are transforming
Medicare Part D program integrity efforts, making them more
data-driven and risk-based, and I look forward to hearing from
both the Office of Inspector General and from CMS about the
important steps the Agency has taken to improve program
integrity in Part D.
I also wanted to highlight the important bipartisan work of
this committee to address one of the OIG's recommendations to
improve Part D program integrity. In 2014, the OIG once again
recommended that CMS seek statutory authority to implement a
pharmacy lock-in program that would allow prescription drug
plan sponsors in Medicare Part D to develop safe prescribing
and dispensing programs for beneficiaries that are prescribed
high volumes of controlled substances, and I introduced
legislation on this issue immediately following the OIG's
earlier work, the Medicare Prescription Drug Integrity Act of
2013. I am gratified that H.R. 6, the 21st Century Cures Act,
passed overwhelmingly by the House last Friday, acts on this
recommendation and gives Part D plan sponsors the authority to
establish these lock-in programs. This provision strikes the
right balance to protect the integrity of the Part D program
and improve patient safety, while carefully protecting
beneficiary access. It is a strong example of what this
committee can achieve when working in a bipartisan manner to
implement commonsense policy solutions.
So I look forward to hearing from Assistant Inspector
General Maxwell about the OIG's outstanding recommendations and
from Dr. Agrawal regarding CMS' ongoing efforts to strengthen
Part D.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for convening this hearing today.
I was going to yield to--I don't know if anybody else wants the
time. I guess not, so I will just yield back. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Thank you, Chairman Murphy, for holding this important
hearing. The Medicare Part D program has been a great success
for our Nation's seniors and for people with disabilities, and
I am glad we are here today to discuss ways to strengthen and
improve the program.
For decades before its enactment, seniors and disabled
Americans, often living on fixed incomes, struggled to afford
the rising costs of prescription drugs.
Now, more than 40 million Americans have access to
affordable medications through the Medicare Part D program.
The Affordable Care Act strengthened Part D and took
crucial steps to improve affordability and access by closing
the gap in coverage where beneficiaries pay the full cost of
their prescriptions, known as the donut hole. Before the ACA,
many beneficiaries struggled with crippling out-of-pocket costs
in the coverage gap.
The ACA gradually phases out the donut hole, and closes it
completely by 2020. Since the law's enactment, 9.4 million
seniors and people with disabilities have saved over $15
billion on prescription drugs, an average of $1,598 per
beneficiary. In 2014 alone, nearly 5.1 million seniors and
people with disabilities saved $4.8 billion, or an average of
$941 per beneficiary.
These are real dollars and real savings for Americans,
allowing them to live healthier lives and have the peace of
mind that they won't have to decide between putting food on the
table or paying for lifesaving medications.
In addition, the ACA strengthened Medicare by improving the
solvency of the program and strengthening program integrity.
Notably, the law moved beyond the traditional ``pay and chase''
model to a preventative approach that seeks to keep fraudulent
suppliers out of the program before fraud, waste, and abuse
occur.
For example, under authorities in the ACA, CMS recently
issued a final regulation that requires all Part D prescribers
to enroll in Medicare. This will help ensure that Part D drugs
are only prescribed by individuals who are qualified under
State law and under the requirements of the Medicare program,
and it implements a long standing recommendation by the
Department's Office of Inspector General.
The same rule also gives CMS the authority to revoke a
provider's Medicare Part D enrollment status under certain
circumstances, including if CMS determines that the provider
represents a threat to the health and safety of Medicare
beneficiaries or has a pattern of prescribing Part D drugs that
is abusive.
Finally, to reduce prescription drug abuse and diversion,
CMS now requires plan sponsors to implement internal controls
to prevent overutilization of both opioids and acetaminophen.
These steps and many others are transforming Medicare Part
D program integrity efforts, making them more data-driven and
risk-based. I look forward to hearing from both the Office of
Inspector General and from CMS about the important steps the
Agency has taken to improve program integrity in Part D.
I'd also like to highlight the important bipartisan work of
this committee to address one of the OIG's recommendations to
improve Part D program integrity. In 2014, the OIG once again
recommended that CMS seek statutory authority to implement a
pharmacy ``lock-in'' program that would allow prescription drug
plan sponsors in Medicare Part D to develop safe prescribing
and dispensing programs for beneficiaries that are prescribed
high volumes of controlled substances.
I introduced legislation on this issue immediately
following the OIG's earlier work, the Medicare Prescription
Drug Integrity Act of 2013. I am gratified that H.R. 6, the
21st Century Cures Act, passed overwhelmingly by the House last
Friday, acts on this recommendation and gives Part D plan
sponsors the authority to establish these lock-in programs.
This provision strikes the right balance to protect the
integrity of the Part D program and improve patient safety,
while carefully protecting beneficiary access. It is a strong
example of what this committee can achieve when working in a
bipartisan manner to implement commonsense policy solutions.
I look forward to hearing from Assistant Inspector General
Maxwell about the OIG's outstanding recommendations and from
Dr. Agrawal regarding CMS' ongoing efforts to strengthen Part
D.
Thank you to the chairman for convening this hearing today,
and I yield back.

Mr. Murphy. I thank the gentleman for yielding back.
I might comment on the opening statement. You can see that
I think this committee does its best work when we are united,
and it is clear that that is the case today.
I also want to make sure I ask unanimous consent if any
other Members want to introduce any opening statements for the
record, they can do so, and without objection, those documents
will be accepted.
You are now aware that the committee is holding an
investigative hearing, and when doing so has the practice of
taking testimony under oath. Do either of our witnesses today
have any objections to testifying under oath? Both of them say
no. The Chair then advises you that under the rules of the
House and the rules of the committee, you are entitled to be
advised by counsel. Do either of you desire to be advised by
counsel during your testimony today? And both say no.
In that case, if you would please rise and raise your right
hand, I will swear you in.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. You may be seated. Both witnesses
said yes.
You are now under oath and subject to the penalties set
forth in Title XVIII, section 1001 of the United States Code.
You may now give a 5-minute summary of your written statement,
and we will start with you, Dr. Agrawal. You may begin.

STATEMENTS OF SHANTANU AGRAWAL, M.D., DEPUTY ADMINISTRATOR AND
DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR PROGRAM INTEGRITY, CENTERS FOR MEDICARE &
MEDICAID SERVICES, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES; AND
ANN MAXWELL, ASSISTANT INSPECTOR GENERAL, OFFICE OF EVALUATION
AND INSPECTIONS, OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL, DEPARTMENT OF
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

STATEMENT OF SHANTANU AGRAWAL

Dr. Agrawal. Chairman Murphy, Ranking Member DeGette, and
members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the invitation to
discuss CMS' recent work to improve the Medicare prescription
drug program, also known as Medicare Part D. Our objective is
to ensure that all Medicare beneficiaries receive the medicines
they need while reducing and preventing prescription drug
abuse.
We appreciate the subcommittee's continued focus on the
problem of opioid abuse and efforts to combat the
overutilization of prescription drugs. We also thank the OIG
for its work to help us improve the Part D program.
The growth of prescription drug abuse has touched
providers, pharmacies and beneficiaries in the Part D program.
As this committee has heard, the problems with overutilization,
drug diversion, and a variety of other issues are far reaching.
The statutory construct of operating the Part D program
requires CMS to work through hundreds of plan sponsors, which
presents unique challenges to our program integrity efforts. It
requires a coordinated, multifaceted approach to address the
major players in Part D including prescribers, pharmacies,
PMSs, and plan sponsors.
CMS has taken concrete actions in recent years to
strengthen the Part D program and address weaknesses identified
by the OIG and others. One element of these changes has been
enhancing the culture around Part D to focus--to include a
focus on program integrity, one that emphasizes prevention over
the pay-and-chase model, instituting and implementing new
administrative authorities to ensure only legitimate providers
are prescribing drugs to beneficiaries, and improving
collaboration and data sharing with Part D plan sponsors, law
enforcement, and other stakeholders.
In particular, CMS is focused on holding sponsors,
prescribers, pharmacies and our contractors accountable for
prescribing that is consistent with our goals and values of
providing safe, high-quality, evidence-based care.
CMS has also taken steps to protect beneficiaries by
ensuring that they are receiving prescription drugs from
legitimate providers. CMS has announced plans to undertake a
major programmatic change which will require prescribers of
drugs paid for by Part D to enroll in Medicare, just as they
would in Parts A or B of the program, and have begun outreach
efforts to enroll over 400,000 prescribers by January 2016. We
will then begin enforcement in June 2016 by requiring plans to
deny Part D prescriptions that are written by prescribers who
do not meet the necessary requirements.
During the enrollment process, prescribers will be subject
to the same risk-based screening requirements, which have
already contributed to the removal of nearly 575,000 provider
and supplier enrollments from the Medicare program since the
enactment of the Affordable Care Act. This enrollment standard
will directly address issues OIG has noted including
prescriptions by excluded or invalid prescribers through new
point-of-sale edits Part D plan sponsors will be required to
implement.
CMS also has new authorities to remove problematic
prescribers from the Medicare program for abusive prescribing
behaviors. Together, we believe these new policies will help
prevent bad actors from taking advantage of the Part D program
and potentially harming beneficiaries. We are also utilizing
Part D data more effectively. CMS is doing more to analyze and
share data with Part D plan sponsors to enhance the detection
and prevention of fraud and overutilization in Medicare Part D.
This includes the Overutilization Monitoring System, in which
CMS identifies beneficiaries with potentially dangerous opioid
utilization. We share a list of those beneficiaries with plan
sponsors, which are then expected to use enhanced drug
utilization review strategies such as case management and
point-of-sale edits to prevent continued overutilization.
Further, plans are now allowed to share information about
potentially dangerous beneficiary opioid use, actions that can
help prevent beneficiaries from changing plans to avoid
detection.
CMS has also developed high-risk pharmacy and prescriber
assessments, which we produce for Part D plan sponsors. These
assessments contain a list of pharmacies or prescribers
identified by CMS as high risk based on a methodology which
goes beyond simple outlier analysis. We provide plan sponsors
with this information so they can initiate investigations and
conduct audits, and ultimately terminate pharmacies or
prescribers from their networks. Since 2013, plan sponsors have
taken action against hundreds of pharmacies as a result of our
Pharmacy Risk Assessments. Our newly implemented PLATO system
allows plan sponsors to report back actions they have taken to
address issues posed by pharmacies and prescribers.
We have also taken steps to improve data sharing with our
colleagues in law enforcement. From January 2010 through the
present, CMS made nearly 2,300 referrals to law enforcement. We
are working closely with the OIG to prevent bad actors from
fraudulently extracting trust fund dollars. Since 2013, CMS has
been referring providers who qualify for permissive or
mandatory exclusion from participation in Federal healthcare
programs to the OIG for exclusion. CMS takes seriously the
recommendations of the OIG and has taken strong steps to
improve the integrity of the Part D program. We are committed
to continue to work with the OIG, this committee, and others as
we strengthen Medicare Part D.
I look forward to answering your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Agrawal follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Murphy. Ms. Maxwell.

STATEMENT OF ANN MAXWELL

Ms. Maxwell. Good morning, Chairman Murphy, Ranking Member
DeGette, and other distinguished members of the subcommittee. I
am pleased to join you today to discuss how we can protect
Medicare's prescription drug program from fraud and abuse.
The OIG has made a strong commitment to help safeguard
Medicare Part D. Just last month, OIG special agents and other
law enforcement personnel fanned out across the country to
conduct the largest criminal healthcare fraud takedown ever. A
number of the arrests were for doctors and pharmacy owners
involved in prescription drug fraud, and there are likely to be
more arrests because we have found that Part D continues to be
vulnerable to fraud.
Recently, we identified 1,400 retail pharmacies with
questionable Medicaid payments. In one example, a Detroit-area
pharmacy billed for commonly abused pain medications--opioids,
to be exact--for 93 percent of its Part D patients. As this
committee is well aware, abusing opioids can lead to patient
harm and event death. It is also tied to illegal drug
trafficking, which is why the OIG is not stopping with the
recent takedown.
As our special agents investigated and built these cases,
OIG analysts were already proactively mining the data to
identify new leads to help us--CMS--shut down and--target and
shut down this problem.
As important as our law enforcement efforts have been, we
cannot arrest our way out of this problem. We have to
strengthen our defenses. OIG has several outstanding
recommendations for fixing some of the systemic vulnerabilities
that allow fraud and abuse to slip through undetected. To
start, CMS can better leverage data as a tool to improve
oversight and to keep up with the ever evolving fraud
landscape. This should include collecting the data necessary to
ensure that plan sponsors, the hundreds of private companies
that administer the program, are effectively protecting the
program. These plan sponsors are Part D's first line of
defense.
Currently, as you already heard, CMS does not require these
plan sponsors to report on the fraud and abuse that they
identify. While plan sponsors may report this information
voluntarily, given the choice, we found that less than half
chose to report. Information on identified fraud and abuse as
well as how sponsors handle these cases would help CMS assess
the effectiveness of sponsors' efforts to protect Part D.
Better leveraging data should also involve expanding the
analysis of the data CMS already collects. We recommend that
CMS and plan sponsors monitor payment data for a wider range of
drugs prone to abuse.
CMS does have several key initiatives underway focused on
opioids, and while opioid abuse is certainly a major concern,
OIG has identified questionable billing patterns related to
other drugs. This includes non-controlled substance, which can
present a substantial financial loss to Medicare and can be
abused in combination with controlled substances.
In addition to better leveraging data, plan sponsors and
CMS should buttress current defenses by adding the following
three oversight tools to their current efforts.
First, plan sponsors and CMS need to implement stronger
payment controls to stop paying for things they shouldn't be
paying for, like payments for drugs prescribed by doctors
excluded from the Medicare program, or paying for illegal
refills of controlled substances. Second, another powerful
preventative measure would be a lock-in program that restricts
certain beneficiaries to a limited number of pharmacies and
prescribers. This tool allows for better monitoring to prevent
at-risk beneficiaries from overutilizing drugs that might harm
them or diverting those drugs for illegitimate use. Finally, we
recommend that CMS improve processes to recover inappropriate
Part D payments.
Our recent law enforcement and data-mining efforts show
that the current defenses are not strong enough. Plan sponsors
need to reinforce that first line of defense but they cannot be
the only line of defense. Ultimately, it is CMS that is
responsible for ensuring the integrity of Part D.
For our part, we will continue to focus our full array of
resources on protecting the program, and we stand ready to work
with you, with CMS and others to improve program integrity.
At this time, I am happy to be of assistance and can answer
any of your questions. Thank you so much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Maxwell follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Murphy. Thank you. I will now recognize myself for 5
minutes as we go through this.
First of all, we know that prescription drugs and
medications can heal, they can reduce symptoms, they can keep
people out of hospitals. Dr. Agrawal, does CMS have any kind of
report that really takes an accounting as the prices have gone
up in Medicare Part D? Has there been any corresponding
decrease in hospitalizations or doctor visits? Is there any
report of that type out there?
Dr. Agrawal. Chairman, that is a good question. I am not
aware of a report along those lines. I may have just not seen
it, so I am happy to take that question back.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. I wish you would.
Ms. Maxwell, you pointed out in your testimony about nine
unimplemented recommendations that the OIG identified. So as
she stated that, Doctor--and some of those go all the way back
to 2006. Does CMS agree with the recommendations made by OIG?
Dr. Agrawal. I think we do agree with the recommendations.
I think we have expressed that in writing to those reports. You
know, what I would emphasize is, these are all recommendations
that we are working to make progress on. I think it is very
fair to say, you know, that we need to continue to work on it,
need to get to completion. These are often multifaceted
recommendations that require, you know, multiple levels of
implementation.
Mr. Murphy. But you recognize some of these go back to
2006, so I am sure many members are going to key in on trying
to get some commitments from you to get that done.
But let me focus on one of those. The OIG recommended that
CMS exclude schedule II refills when calculating final payments
to plan sponsors at the end of each year. So what action has
CMS taken to implement that recommendation? Ms. Maxwell, can
you answer that first? Do you know if they have taken action on
that?
Ms. Maxwell. Absolutely. It is my understanding--and this
is one of the recommendations in which CMS did not concur.
Seven of the nine initially CMS did concur with. There are two
they didn't. This is one of them. It is my understanding that
CMS is concerned about the data that is available and the data
does not make it obvious what is a partial refill versus what
is an illegal refill, and that they have instituted actions to
make it more clear in the data. Our position is, once the data
is clear, then you have the opportunity to put in an edit, and
we would continue to recommend that they do put in an edit to
stop those illegal refills.
Mr. Murphy. Dr. Agrawal, what is your plan of action here?
Dr. Agrawal. Yes, I think Ms. Maxwell has characterized
that correctly. So our concern is that the data is not
completely accurate at this point. Early refills of schedule II
drugs are illegal. We of course don't support early refills of
those drugs. However, partial fills, particularly for
beneficiaries that may be in long-term-care facilities, are
totally legitimate and may actually help to address pain and
other issues that they have. So what we are doing is working
with plan sponsors to clarify coding requirements so that we
can differentiate the legitimate payments from the illegitimate
payments and then would be seeking to make the kind of change
that is being described.
Mr. Murphy. And as part of that, hopefully you will also be
going after people who have made the wrong claims and getting
that money returned.
On page 3 of your testimony, Doctor, you had mentioned the
President's budget proposes to provide the Secretary with new
authorities to suspend coverage and payment for drugs
prescribed by providers who have been engaged in misprescribing
to suspend coverage and payment for Part D drugs when those
prescriptions present an imminent risk to patients and require
additional information on certain Part D prescriptions such as
diagnosis instant codes and conditional coverage. Do you have
any estimate that this will actually save money in terms of
reducing some of the fraud and abuse to implement those
recommendations?
Dr. Agrawal. Yes, I think these kinds of recommendations
really go at the heart of prevention, moving away from the pay-
and-chase model that others have commented on. We did
promulgate policy, as you know, last year requiring enrollment
to prescribers and also with that implementing the ability to
revoke providers for abusive prescribing. I think all of those
things really do take a very strong step towards prevention,
just as we have done in other parts of the program and have
been shown to be effective.
Mr. Murphy. I was hoping that was something you can give us
some numbers on in terms of what you estimate that would be
savings to Medicare Part D. That would be important to us if we
implement those.
Let me mention something else here. This is on Medicaid but
it is important, because a report just came out in March issued
by the HHS Office of Inspector General and found that 92
percent of Medicaid enrolled children who are prescribed
antipsychotic medications lacked ``medically accepted pediatric
indications'' that would warrant such prescriptions. There were
instances there of very young children being prescribed
antipsychotics, 4-year-olds. It was a very disturbing and
alarming report. That 92 percent number of not medically
indicated was absolutely astounding. So given that, and I don't
expect you to know this today, but if you do know, I would like
to know what steps CMS is taking to root out the providers who
are prescribing children powerful psychotropic medications when
it isn't medically necessary. Would you make sure you get back
to us on that?
Dr. Agrawal. Absolutely.
Mr. Murphy. And finally, the OIG has recommended that CMS
implement an edit to reject prescriptions written by excluded
providers. So Ms. Maxwell, what actions has CMS taken to
implement that recommendation of those who aren't supposed to
be prescribing at all?
Ms. Maxwell. It is my understanding that the sponsors are
required to be monitoring excluded providers and making sure
that the payments don't go to them. However, when we did look,
we did find that CMS did accept PDE records from the sponsors
that included excluded providers. There was about 15 million in
gross payments over a 3-year period. So again, we continue to
appreciate the steps that have been taken but there's obviously
need for further steps and stronger payment controls be put
into place.
Mr. Murphy. OK. I would like to follow up, but I am out of
time so I will now turn to Ms. DeGette for 5 minutes.
Ms. DeGette. Let me sort of extend that previous line of
questioning, which is, we are talking about the OIG report on
Medicare Part D integrity and the report notes ``CMS relies on
plan sponsors to be the first line of defense against fraud,
waste, and abuse in Part D.'' I am wondering if both of you can
each comment on the role that plan sponsors play in this first
line of defense against waste, fraud, and abuse. I am wondering
what tools they use and what can be done. Dr. Agrawal?
Dr. Agrawal. Sure. Thank you. I do think, you know, the
role of Part D plan sponsors is extremely important since they
are paying claims or PDE records directly.
Let me just address maybe the prior point about providers
first.
Ms. DeGette. Sure.
Dr. Agrawal. You know, I think it is absolutely
indefensible for a Part D plan sponsor to pay the prescription
of an excluded provider. Now, we have implemented edits behind
those plan sponsors to indicate when they have done that so
they can make the appropriate recoveries on their end. I also
think prescriber enrollment and the screening requirements that
I mentioned earlier will go a long way, because it will move
those edits from after the PDE record to the point of sale when
we have all 400,000 prescribers enrolled in the program.
So we can clearly buttress Part D plan sponsors but their
role is absolutely vital. I think they need to be on top of the
data. We share a lot of data with them so that they are aware
of who the outlier prescribers and pharmacies and their
networks are. They also have the ability to implement drug
utilization reviews and other kinds of programs including case
management to stem both abusive prescribing as well as abusive
utilization.
Ms. DeGette. So let us talk about that data for a minute
because they are not required to report the data on potential
fraud and abuse, and in fact, the percentage of plan sponsors
that voluntarily report this has declined over the last few
years down from 40 percent in 2010 to 35 percent in 2012. Do
you have any more recent data about the trends on this?
Dr. Agrawal. I don't think we have more recent data that I
can share today. However, this is an area that we have been
working to make progress as well. So as I mentioned, we give
data to the plan sponsors on a quarterly basis, and just this
year implemented a system for them to be able to report back to
us what actions they took as a result. I think that system,
which allows the data to be reported, and then for it to be
searchable and analyzable has been an important step moving us
towards better reporting.
Ms. DeGette. What is your view on this, Ms. Maxwell?
Ms. Maxwell. It is absolutely true that, as I said in my
oral, that the sponsors are the first line of defense. They
administer the program and they are the ones that are paying
the pharmacies but CMS, as I said, is the second line of
defense, and if things do slip through the processes and edits
they have in place, it is incumbent upon CMS to have the second
line of defense to prevent that from happening. That prevents
the Federal Government from actually reimbursing the mistakes
the sponsors might be making.
Ms. DeGette. And do you think CMS is doing enough to
encourage that?
Ms. Maxwell. I think CMS has made significant strides in
response to many of our recommendations, and of course, we
outline nine in the report that we believe are important to be
included in their ongoing effort to improve program integrity.
Ms. DeGette. And what about the plan sponsors' fraud
detection programs themselves? Do you think that the plan
sponsors are doing enough or can they be beefing up that over
time?
Ms. Maxwell. If we had the data about the fraud and abuse
incidents that they are detecting as well as the data about how
they are responding, we would be able to answer that question
with more authority. We really don't have the visibility that
we think is necessary to hold them accountable.
Ms. DeGette. Is that something, Dr. Agrawal, you think you
could provide?
Dr. Agrawal. Well, as I mentioned, we are getting some data
from plan sponsors, and in particular, we are focused on where
we give them a clear lead such as an outlier pharmacy or an
outlier prescriber, what are they doing to investigate that
lead downstream and then take the relevant actions. What we
have found is certain plan sponsors are actually good at
following up. So we have been able to see hundreds of
pharmacies be excluded from networks because of the leads we
give them. We also conduct compliance reviews of plan sponsors
to make sure that program integrity processes are a robust part
of their operations. Again, some plan sponsors I think do quite
well there and others have opportunities for improvement.
Ms. DeGette. Well, this is an area where it seems like
there could be a lot of problems, and OIG has recommended
making it mandatory that they report potential fraud and abuse.
I am wondering, first, Ms. Maxwell, could you comment on that
recommendation?
Ms. Maxwell. Absolutely. As you have pointed out, given the
current state of affairs that it is not currently voluntary, we
don't have full compliance.
Ms. DeGette. Right.
Ms. Maxwell. And so we believe we will not have full
compliance unless it is mandated, and without the comprehensive
reporting of that data, we can't look across the entire program
and see----
Ms. DeGette. Dr. Agrawal, what is your agency's response to
that?
Dr. Agrawal. Yes, I think we can essentially agree with
that, you know, the notion a lot. I think the question for us
is, what kind of reporting is the most beneficial for other
plan sponsors and the agency, and so implementing something
like the PLATO system, giving them leads, and then getting
results from those leads is a step towards answering exactly
that question of what kind of information return is useful to
the agency and would be useful to other plan sponsors. I think
as we get more information and get better understanding of the
utility, we will be able to require more of plan sponsors.
Ms. DeGette. I am sure we have more questions around that
line too. Thank you.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. I now recognize the gentlelady from
Tennessee, Mrs. Blackburn, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I am going to
follow right along with what Ms. DeGette was saying.
It is troublesome when we hear--and Ms. Maxwell, of course,
you all have done so much work on this--with the voluntary
nature of the reporting, and you have recommended that they
make it mandatory, and so Dr. Agrawal, what are you doing to
beef up the compliance? You can say well, we have PLATO, well,
we have this, you know, but what are you doing to enforce this?
How do the people that work at CMS understand this is an
imperative, you have got to do this? I mean, how do you
communicate that?
Dr. Agrawal. I think we take all of OIG's recommendations
as important contributions, as imperatives. We do work to
implement----
Mrs. Blackburn. Whoa, whoa, whoa. Wait a minute. They are
not contributions. They have pointed out to you--let us not
even start down that road. It is not a contribution. It is, you
are doing this wrong, you are wasting money, the fraud has been
identified. Let us just say it like this. They have got nine
recommendations on the table. Do you agree with those
recommendations, yes or no?
Dr. Agrawal. I think we have indicated that we largely
agree with those recommendations, yes.
Mrs. Blackburn. That is not the question that I asked. Yes
or no?
Dr. Agrawal. Well, I think Ms. Maxwell has pointed out that
the agency has agreed with seven of the nine recommendations.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Well, the problem is, what are you
doing then to take an action, and what is your timeline? You
know, you seem to come here and punt, and we have got another
report that came out this morning. You are saying oh--and oh,
by the way, it is only 2 months late. You are 2 months late
with your report. People in the private sector that deliver a
report 2 months late generally are, you know--they have other
problems.
OK. So let us look at this. You are saying you have
recovered $454 million and that your Fraud Prevention System is
returning a 10:1 ratio on this investment, and you are very
proud of that, but you have got a lot of other waste that is
out there, so I want to know from you specifically how are you
enforcing the recommendations and what is your timeline for
bringing your agency's work into compliance on a program that
is really important to our Nation's seniors, and that is not
that difficult a question. Now, getting the work done obviously
that is a little bit harder for you, but we want to know
specifics on your enforcement and specifics on your timeline of
meeting this.
Dr. Agrawal. First, Congresswoman, let me just say on the
Fraud Prevention System report that those numbers have been
certified by the OIG itself, and this was a report that we
worked on in conjunction with them throughout the timeline----
Mrs. Blackburn. I am fully aware of that.
Dr. Agrawal. So I think the 10:1 ROI is positive,
obviously, a good development for the system. As to your
questions about the various recommendations, I am happy to take
that back and we can give you responses for each
recommendation, what we have done to implement them. I think on
every recommendation we have worked to make progress to
implement various systems and changes towards finally
completing that recommendation, but these recommendations do
take time to implement.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. You said you had the authority to do
the job. We know that you have the money and the personnel. Why
does the job not get done? Is it not a priority?
Dr. Agrawal. This is an absolute priority. We have many
staff focused every day on the integrity of the Medicare
program----
Ms. Blackburn. Do they understand that they are expected to
meet a timeline? Do you all have a timeline? You still haven't
spoken to the timeline.
Dr. Agrawal. It think it depends on which recommendation
you are referencing.
Mrs. Blackburn. No, no, all of them. You have got--you
can't pick and choose on this. You have got a list of
recommendations. You have had waste, fraud, and abuse
identified. You know you have got problems with the opioids.
You know that voluntary reporting gets you part of the way but
it doesn't get you all the way, that this needs to be made
mandatory. So as to the leader, what are you doing to make
certain that there is a set timeline? When is the timeline? Is
it the next report? Is it the next hearing? Is it the end of
the year?
Dr. Agrawal. Yes, so let me give you an example,
Congresswoman. So we have been very specific when it comes to
something like prescriber enrollment, which will actually go
towards resolving at least two of the recommendations I believe
that OIG has put forward around excluded providers or other
kind of invalid prescribers. We have stated--you know, we
promulgated the necessary rulemaking last year. We are now
working with Part D plan sponsors to get these prescribers
enrolled so that we don't cause an interruption in legitimate
access to services, and we have said that that enrollment
requirement needs to be met by January 2016 between both the
plan sponsors and CMS working collaboratively together. We will
then implement point-of-sale edits behind that enrollment in
June of 2016, which I think will take a significant step
towards really eliminating excluded prescribing or other
invalid prescribing----
Mrs. Blackburn. So basically you are giving yourself a year
to come into compliance with something that you know has been a
problem.
Dr. Agrawal. Well, I think that that----
Mrs. Blackburn. I yield back my time.
Mr. Murphy. I now recognize Mr. Pallone for 5 minutes. We
can let him answer? I will let him answer. Go ahead. You can
answer. Let me do that first.
Dr. Agrawal. Thank you. I think it highlights some of the
technical challenges in actually getting this work done. So we
have to be very careful to actually enroll 400,000 prescribers
so that we do not interfere in legitimate access to services
that the Part D program provides beneficiaries. We balance that
against the need to do this quickly and effectively to stem the
various weaknesses and issues that the OIG has correctly
pointed out. This is a balance we work to achieve every day. So
yes, it takes time. It takes time for prescribers to get up to
speed on the requirements and get enrolled. It takes time for
our Part D plan sponsors to initiate the necessary actions on
their part and get the point-of-sale edits in place as well.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
Mr. Pallone.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you. I believe that both of our
witnesses here today have studied a growing phenomenon that is
deeply concerning, and that is the overprescribing and/or the
overuse of opioids in Medicare Part D. This is an issue that we
have all worked on for many years in response to OIG's earlier
work on this topic.
I introduced the Medicare Prescription Drug Integrity Act
of 2013. Since that time, OIG has repeatedly recommended that
CMS seek statutory authority to restrict certain beneficiaries
to a limited number of pharmacies or prescribers when warranted
by excessive or questionable billing patterns. This practice,
commonly referred to as lock-in, I mentioned in my opening
statement has been successful implemented in the private
insurance market and some State Medicaid programs.
In the 21st Century Cures legislation that the House
overwhelmingly passed on Friday, there is a provision that
would allow Medicare Part D plan sponsors to use these types of
drug management programs to curb potentially harmful use of
opioids and other controlled substances, and that provision as
agreed to in the legislation strikes the right balance between
protecting beneficiary choice and access while also improving
continuity of care by ensuring that those high-risk patients
obtain and fulfill prescriptions for controlled substances only
from designated providers, and I think that is a big step in
the right direction.
So let me ask some questions. Ms. Maxwell, can you
summarize OIG's findings that have led the agency to repeatedly
recommend that Congress gives CMS authority to allow Part D
plan sponsors to create these so-called lock-in programs?
Ms. Maxwell. Absolutely. As our current data shows, the
rate of increase of use of opioids within Part D has far
outpaced the general increase in drugs. In fact, it has grown
156 percent since the inception of the program. We also see, as
I mentioned, the pharmacy fraud where we see pharmacies
allowing for opioids to flow into the streets and be diverted.
This poses not only a patient harm issue for the beneficiaries
but also is a public health issue for some of those things that
flow into the streets end up back on pharmacy shelves, which
affects all of us. This is a significant issue, and we believe
the lock-in would be a significant move forward in protecting
the program beneficiaries from patient harm as well as the
program from significant financial loss.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Dr. Agrawal, do you believe that if a pharmacy lock-in
provision in 21st Century Cures was signed into law, CMS would
have a much-needed tool to address opioid abuse and
overprescribing in Part D, and have these types of lock-in
programs been successful in curbing opioid abuse and other
programs?
Dr. Agrawal. Yes, I would certainly agree with Ms. Maxwell
that we have seen beneficiaries that are really at safety risk
from the levels of utilization of their opioid medications. We
have been supportive of this kind of legislative change to
provide a lock-in approach. It is part of the President's
budget. I do believe that it would have impact as it has, as
you have already pointed out, in both the private sector as
well as in various Medicaid programs.
Mr. Pallone. OK. I want to switch to that report that Mrs.
Blackburn mentioned, the Fraud Prevention System report that
the agency released this morning. The FPS uses predictive and
analytics to detect troublesome billing problems and provide it
to the Medicare program, and after 3 years of operation, CMS
today reported that the system identified or prevented $820
million in inappropriate payments in the program's first 3
years.
So Dr. Agrawal, first of all, I want to commend you on your
work on the FPS. In its third year, how has the program changed
and matured? And let me throw in the second question too
because of time. Does CMS plan to expand the program to Part C
and Part D in the near future, and what additional plans does
the agency have to expand the FPS to additional fraud detection
activities?
Dr. Agrawal. Sure. Thank you for the question. Currently,
the FPS streams all Medicare A, B, and DME claims, so about 4
\1/2\ million claims per day. I think what we have seen over
the last 3 years in terms of evolution of the program is more
models being implemented, more sophisticated models being
implemented that not only look at outlier behavior but are
truly predictive models based on the input of our own
investigative field staff as well as the input of law
enforcement, both OIG and DOJ, based on prior kind of patterns
of fraud and abuse that they have noted. So that is one really
big change is on sort of the technology side and just improving
the modeling.
The second is making sure that these leads are actually
being followed. So this was almost a cultural change or just a
contractor accountability change to make sure that our Program
Integrity Contractors took these leads seriously, they formed a
substantive, substantial part of their workload, and they were
driving towards real administrative outcomes as quickly as
possible.
I think what we will continue to do with this program is
continue to leverage the technology to implement new approaches
like edits so that claims can be stopped from being paid, you
know, before they are actually ever paid. We have been doing
some of that already in the first 3 years, and we are looking
to expand that capability substantially going forward. I think
also the maturing of the modeling will facilitate this process.
To your question about other data sources, we have started
to fold in Part D PDE records and we will be looking to do that
more. I think in Part C, we still have the challenge of getting
accurate encounter data from plan sponsors, so we are still
working with the relevant parts of CMS and plan sponsors to
help improve that encounter data.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
I now recognize Mr. Barton for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I guess the first thing we ought to do is thank HHS and the
Inspector General for conducting the investigation and actually
beginning to try to correct the problem and at least
identifying some of the bad guys. That is a good start.
My first question I guess would be to Dr. Agrawal. Is that
correct?
Dr. Agrawal. You nailed it.
Mr. Barton. Well, how about that? Just a lucky guess.
How in the world can somebody be on Medicare Part D if they
are not enrolled in Medicare? If I heard correctly, you said
some people are actually getting the benefit but they are not
in the program. I don't understand that.
Dr. Agrawal. No, sir, it is not on the beneficiary side of
the equation. It is the prescriber, the physician or advanced-
practice nurse, for example, who actually sends a prescription
in, hands it to a patient. Currently or prior to last year,
there was no specific enrollment requirement for the provider.
There is now, so going forward, all prescribers are going to
have to come into the program, be subject to the same screening
standards as in the rest of Medicare.
Mr. Barton. OK, but prior to this year, a provider could
reject Medicare patients but prescribe Medicare Part D
prescriptions?
Dr. Agrawal. Correct. It is been a huge program integrity
focus to bring this up to the rest of the level--to the level
of the rest of the program.
Mr. Barton. But that is no longer a problem? That is one
loophole that has been closed?
Dr. Agrawal. We are in the process of closing it as we----
Mr. Barton. In the process----
Dr. Agrawal [continuing]. Get through enrollment. As I
mentioned, we have to enroll 400,000 prescribers by January.
Mr. Barton. OK. And if they have a doctor that is not in
the program, you just send a letter to the patients that that
is not a valid prescriber. Is that correct?
Dr. Agrawal. Yes. So the balance with beneficiary access to
medications is important. What we have done is created
essentially a transition period. So if a beneficiary takes a
prescription to a pharmacy from a prescriber who is not
enrolled, they will get that information but they will also get
the medication so that there is no interruption in their
therapy. They will not get it the second time. By that time we
would have expected the provider to either be enrolled or for
the beneficiary to go to a different provider.
Mr. Barton. OK. Now I am going to switch to Ms. Maxwell.
One of the recommendations that hasn't been acted on but
apparently you all are beginning--the program is beginning to
act upon is this idea of mandatory reporting from the plans. I
am not a big fan of mandatory anything except people paying the
taxes. I guess that ought to be mandatory. Why not go the other
way? Why not create--I heard that--voluntary compliance, but
you go to jail if you don't voluntarily comply. All right. A
minor point.
Why not go the other way and provide an incentive to the
plan that you don't have to report, but if you do and it really
is fraudulent and we recover some of the program funds, we will
give you a percentage of the monies that are fraudulently--have
been fraudulently paid and then recovered? Why not create an
incentive program? That works for me, and I think most
Republicans would prefer it. Now, I may be wrong but I would
rather have an incentive to do it than a mandate they have to
do it.
Ms. Maxwell. You know, the heart of our recommendation is
to have the visibility to oversight, so as long as we have the
data and the visibility to what the plan sponsors were doing to
protect the program, that is ultimately what we are after.
Mr. Barton. Congressman Gingrich when he was Speaker put in
or at least requested that this committee put in a program
where you could create a hotline that people could call in to,
and if it turned out that--and this wasn't just for Medicare,
this was before Medicare Part D obviously--but if there was
fraud involved and somebody reported it and it was proven and
stopped, the person who reported it got some sort of a bonus,
and that would be another idea to think about.
I will go back to the doctor. This is my last question. You
may have to get back to me on this. Just at the basic level, I
would like to know where you think the primary cause of the
fraud is. Is it from the patient's standpoint? You have got
phantom patients perhaps. Is it from the pharmacy standpoint?
Is it from a plan who is overbilling even though they don't
have patients? Or is it possible it could even be in the
Government itself where they work in conjunction with the plan
to create fraud? Do you have any data on that?
Dr. Agrawal. I think what we see is that overutilization in
Part D is multifaceted. It occurs at patient, prescriber, the
pharmacy, which is why the response to it--and I think the OIG
has pointed this out as well--the response to has to be
multifaceted. The program has to try to address all of the
different areas that fraud or abuse could be occurring.
Mr. Barton. If you identify the most prevailing area, then
you put most of your assets there and you will have a better
chance to get a greater return on your investigations.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr.
Kennedy, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kennedy. Mr. Chairman, thank you, and thank you for
holding an important hearing. Thank you to our witnesses once
again for coming back.
I am going to touch on some--try to flesh out a little bit
some of what my colleagues have already touched on for both of
you. Obviously Medicare Part D is a large and important
program, serving millions of seniors across the country and a
good deal of them in my district. Given the scope and the
number of transactions involved, proactive data analysis is an
essential tool to focus on fraud detection and enforcement
efforts.
The OIG Data Brief does just that, highlighting some
notable outliers when it comes to pharmacy billing. In
particular, the suspicious prescriptions for opioids are
especially troubling, given the nationwide epidemic that we
have heard about at previous hearings and some of my colleagues
have already touched on.
So according to the Data Brief, ``spending for commonly
abused opioids grew at a faster rate than spending for all
drugs.'' That was on page 3, I believe.
So Dr. Agrawal, it is my understanding that the initial
comparison with 2011 data shows that there has been a
substantial reduction in the number of acetaminophen and opioid
overutilizers. I was hoping you can try to flesh out a little
bit more about CMS' measures to prevent the overutilization of
prescription medications within the Part D program.
Dr. Agrawal. Sure. So I think where there are--so again,
multiple facets to the issue where there is beneficiary
overutilization where, you know, we can identify beneficiaries
that have exceeded what we would consider kind of standardly
accepted safety thresholds. We share that information with Part
D plan sponsors through our Overutilization Management System.
That gives them the specific beneficiaries that they can then
implement I think more proactive drug utilization reviews
around including case management. What we have seen when we
focus on things like schedule II drugs is a 30 percent decline
in the prevalence of those beneficiaries, which shows that both
the data sharing and the actions being taken on the part of the
plan sponsors is having an impact, and we continue to provide
that information on a quarterly basis so that plan sponsors can
continue that work.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you.
And Ms. Maxwell, you touched on in your opening statement
one of the pieces that were highlighted in the report of a
Detroit-area pharmacy that billed for commonly used opioids for
93 percent of its beneficiaries. It amounted to 58 percent of
all of its Part D prescriptions. Can you talk a little bit
about OIG's plan for follow-up in the questionable pharmacy
billing 3-year study and tell us a little bit more about the
proactive analysis that you ensuring Medicare to take in a
broader report?
Ms. Maxwell. Absolutely. As I mentioned in my opening
remarks, when we were proceeding in the takedown, we were
already mining the data for new leads. We already have 1,400
retail pharmacies targeted that had questionable Medicare
billing. We are actively investigating some portion of those,
and we have referred the rest to CMS for investigation. So the
Data Brief allows us to see where there are areas for
questionable billing and the next step is to investigate and
weed out which one of those really represent legitimate
business and which are fraud that we need to pursue either with
OIG investigations or in conjunction with CMS.
Mr. Kennedy. And Dr. Agrawal, what's the--after those are
referred over to CMS, what is CMS' next steps?
Dr. Agrawal. Yes, so again, I would agree that these--that
the analytical work is a good starting point for further
refinement and then also investigative activity. Now, let me
just say it is the construct of the program that CMS doesn't
have a direct relationship with pharmacies. That relationship
really occurs with Part D plans. Pharmacies don't enroll or
anything like that in the program.
For that reason, we have to work through Part D plan
sponsors by giving them better data and, you know, then they
take the necessary investigative and other administrative
actions. We certainly will utilize the information given to us
by the IG so they gave us about a thousand of the roughly 1,400
pharmacies have been sent over to us, and we have been sharing
that, or have shared that already with plan sponsors.
In addition, on a quarterly basis, we do similar work
utilizing sort of a greater set of variables to identify high-
risk pharmacies and again share that information on a quarterly
basis, which has yielded literally hundreds of pharmacies being
excluded from plan sponsor networks.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you. And then the brief highlights some
geographic hotspots as well, some metro areas where average
payments for certain drugs are much more than the average
nationwide.
Ms. Maxwell, in conducting the analysis, did OIG evaluate
patterns for all non-controlled drugs or did you just focus on
specific ones?
Ms. Maxwell. We chose some examples to highlight the
potential problems with non-controlled drugs, so there are
other drugs that might be of concern that are not highlighted
in that Data Brief but the ones we did highlight again like the
questionable billing for the pharmacies are worthy of further
scrutiny to understand what is happening and stay in front of
the evolving healthcare fraud trends.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Dr. Burgess is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I think you can
tell, it is great that we are having the hearing on the
integrity of the program as it relates to Part D drugs,
particularly with respect to opioids, but you can tell there
are a lot of general questions about inappropriate expenditures
within the various programs at HHS, and Mr. Chairman, I hope
you will take this as perhaps a reason to consider having a
general hearing, a general oversight hearing on inappropriate
expenditures within the Medicare and Medicaid system.
Mr. Barton talked about previous efforts towards the
concept of predictive modeling, and it does seem to me that
this is an area where this would be perhaps a particularly
useful type of activity. I mean, I got a call at 6 o'clock in
the morning a couple of Sundays ago that there had been
inappropriate expenditures on my MasterCard. It seems to me
that with the amount of data that you all collect on a daily
basis, you ought to be able to do a pretty good job of
isolating--identifying and isolating and investigating unusual
trends and expenditures. Is that not possible?
Dr. Agrawal. Dr. Burgess, I agree that it is. We have
been--as I mentioned earlier, we are looking to include Part D
data to a greater degree in the FPS system implementing new
models just around this program as we demonstrated the impact
of the FPS.
Mr. Burgess. It just calls up the question of, you know,
the scale of the problem is likely to be much more massive than
any recovery that has been affected to date.
I do want to ask a couple of questions, and I realize it is
a little bit off topic, but I know, Dr. Agrawal, we have talked
about this before. Ms. Maxwell, I apologize, I don't remember
whether our offices talked to you directly, but it does affect
you also.
We had a hospital in Texas--Dr. Tariq Mahmood--who took $18
million for the development of an electronic record system and
basically just put his medical records down to the basement and
let the mice eat them, not computer mice, real furry mice. So
what can you all do--I mean, yes, one of the manager has gone
to jail, the doctor will have a trial at some point and likely
will face jail time through the Department of Justice, but what
can you all do to recover that $18 million that was
inappropriately dispensed under the stimulus plan to this
hospital chain?
Dr. Agrawal. So thank you for the question, and I am aware
of the case. I have to tell you, I think it occurred a while
back so we--you know, I think the general answer is, we do
conduct audits of the EHR payments, incentive payments that we
make, and where we find discrepancies, we are able to recover
those dollars. This was the case that I know we worked on
conjoinedly with the OIG so I can't tell you if the audit came
first or the OIG investigation did. If you are interested in
that, perhaps I can take it back. But these audits are meant to
address exactly the vulnerability that you are identifying,
which is, you know, essentially false statements that you have
implemented an EHR, a viable EHR system. We do look at that
question.
Mr. Burgess. And to answer your question, I would be
interested, but see, this is the problem and this is what just
drives people crazy. We kind of get into this circuitous stuff
between agencies, and I think--again, I think we have had this
conversation before. I am told it is under investigation. But
really, where are we at getting the 18 million bucks that the
taxpayer is on the hook for for sending these dollars down to
Dr. Mahmood? Does either office have that interest in
recovering that money?
Dr. Agrawal. Of course we do, and I will happily take that
question back, I mean, to specifically address whether the $18
million has ever been recovered. I don't want to leave you with
a false impression about this particular case. This was
something that we did work in coordination with the OIG. It
wasn't sort of a turf battle or anything like that, you know.
My answer is just, I don't know if they identified the issue
first and then came to us or vice versa. But we did coordinate
across this case.
Mr. Burgess. I actually think it was my newspaper, the
Dallas Morning News, that identified the problem and I brought
it to your attention.
But, I mean, again, this is what just drives people crazy.
You have a massive inappropriate expenditure of Federal money,
and then no one seems to be primarily responsible for going and
recovering it, and quite honestly, reporting back to Congress
about what the status of that recovery is. In your own
statement this morning, Dr. Agrawal, you said well, this was
some time ago. Yes, it was some time ago, so we would like the
dollars back, please, and I know this individual has--it has
been reported that he has got plenty of assets so this is
something that you would think with the full force of the
Federal Government and Department of Justice we would be able
to go and effect that recovery.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back the time, but I
do want to follow up with both of you and understand where the
status of this recovery is.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
I now recognize Mr. Yarmuth for 5 minutes.
Mr. Yarmuth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate your
holding this hearing. I think as has been demonstrated, both
sides are very much interested in rooting out all the waste,
fraud, and abuse that exists in the Medicare system. Thanks to
the witnesses for the work you are doing.
I tend to--I do have a question about that, but before I do
that, I want to take this opportunity as I often do to talk
about the experience in Kentucky with the Affordable Care Act
and the great work that my Governor, Steve Beshear, and his
team have done in implementing the expansion of Medicaid and
what has meant for our State. We have more than a half-million
people who are newly enrolled in Medicaid and in private
insurance as a result of the ACA. That is in the range of 4.4
million. We have reduced the uninsured rate by almost 50
percent in Kentucky. In my district alone, the uninsured rate
has dropped by 81 percent. Pretty astounding.
More importantly, for those who say that this is
economically nonfeasible, the State employed the Deloitte firm
to analyze the prospects for Kentucky's economy over the next 6
years under ACA, and they determined that under ACA, Kentucky
would experience added economic activity of $30 billion, the
creation of 40,000 new jobs, and I think most importantly, from
the taxpayer's perspective, an impact, a positive impact on the
State budget of $819 million. So I think those statistics
demonstrate that the ACA can be very, very positive, not just
in insuring people, giving them access to quality care but also
from an economic perspective.
So we have talked a lot about Medicare Part D and the fraud
provisions and your work in those areas. There is a related
issue when we talk waste as well, and I wanted to talk about
prescription drug costs. One of the things that--when I was
part of the Democratic Majority back in 2007, one of the first
things we did was to pass a bill to allow Medicare to negotiate
with drug providers on cost that was not implemented into law.
But I was talking with a physician friend of mine the other
day, who has done a lot of work in this area, and he was
showing me some really incredible statistics about the
difference in cost of certain prescription medicines just in my
district, and in some areas, the cost was 60 to 70 percent
different from one outlet to another.
So my question is, if there are those kinds of potential
savings involved just in terms of going from one drugstore or
one grocery store to another, why can't we have some kind of
systemic approach to that from CMS? Doctor, do you want to
respond to that?
Dr. Agrawal. Sure. Thank you for the question.
You know, I can tell from my own practice in the ER, drug
costs are an important factor in this whole equation, and the
ability of people to be able to pay for the drugs that they
get.
I will tell you, as you pointed out, that this is an area
where we do not have legislative authority to kind of engage in
the negotiation that you are describing.
Mr. Yarmuth. Do you think that it could have a substantial
impact on saving money for the taxpayers if you did have
legislative authority to do that?
Dr. Agrawal. You know, I am not aware. I am sure there is
analyses that have been done. I am not aware at this moment
what the expected impact would be. Perhaps we could get back to
you about that.
Mr. Yarmuth. Well, again, this person has done a lot of
work in the area, and he mentioned one drug--I know Ranking
Member DeGette talked about saving a billion-plus something in
one area--one drug that now is responsible for about $8 billion
worth of sales in the United States every year that actually
can be purchased for about 15 percent of that, so you are
really talking there about a savings of almost $7 billion to
the system per year if we just had that kind of power to deal
with price. So I will just mention that for the record because
I think that is something that--as we look at continuing to
make Medicare and Medicaid sustainable over time, we are going
to have to deal with the issue of the cost of prescription
drugs as well as the fraud and abuse side.
So I thank you for your----
Ms. DeGette. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Yarmuth. I will yield.
Ms. DeGette. So the CBO estimates that allowing CMS to
negotiate Part D prescription drugs would save $155 billion
over the next 10 years.
Mr. Yarmuth. That is real money.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Murphy. And obviously there is more to it than that,
and we will continue that discussion. Thank you.
I now recognized Dr. Bucshon for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I was a surgeon before, so I am intimately familiar with
the situation, and the bottom line, it seems to me that, you
know, nobody out there is defrauding the Government over Lasix
or Hyzaar to a large extent. I mean, in my view, we are talking
about narcotics. We are talking about a funding stream from the
Federal Government that is helping to facilitate the use of
narcotics in our country. I mean, that is not the only issue
but that is a huge part of it. Without the funding stream, the
problem goes away.
And so there are multiple funding streams, and people that
abuse narcotics, people that sell narcotics, when they find an
avenue to get that paid for in some way, they will take it, and
so my point is, there are a lot of other issues other than just
payment that this subcommittee has been trying to address, the
interconnectability amongst EMRs including those at pharmacies,
at the State level, at the Federal level is critical so that we
know who is prescribing these medications better than we know
today. We know who is using these medications better than we
know today. And it is going to take a multiagency approach at
the Federal level to address this problem. The payment is only
a piece of the pie, right? Payment is a big part of it.
We had a meeting of the Doctors Caucus this morning with
the Surgeon General of the United States, a very impressive
physician who we talked with him about trying to address this
and using his national stage that he potentially has to address
this problem. I have worked with--tried to work with the FDA,
with the States, with physician organizations and many others.
So this is a problem we are going to have to tackle, and I want
to thank this subcommittee and the chairman for bringing that--
multiple hearings on that.
So the question I have, Dr. Agrawal, is, how much
communication with the other agencies do you have, and is there
the development of a plan that is coming together maybe to
address this problem knowing that really the big problem why
you are being defrauded in Medicare Part D is because of the
narcotics. I mean, that is the biggest problem. We all know it.
Dr. Agrawal. Thank you for the question. So I would
highlight a few things. First, the Secretary of HHS has
identified prescription drug abuse as a major priority for the
Department, and there is a sort of three-part strategic
approach to addressing this issue that the Department has taken
on inclusive of all of its agencies. So one is exactly what you
are describing, which is communication with the provider
community to make sure that prescribing is appropriate, that
utilization is appropriate. We are also looking at other
facets, so medication-assisted therapy for substance abuse
issues and the use of naloxone, for example, for emergent
overdose issues.
CMS has a role to play in the broader kind of social
landscape, and I think again, your point that this is not just
a Part D issue but a kind of broader societal issue is exactly
right. We are approaching it as a payer using every lever that
we can from looking at prescribers to the beneficiaries that
might be abusing the program, identifying pharmacies that might
be part of the problem and working very closely with plan
sponsors. One even sort of broader partnership that I would
point out is the Health Care Fraud Prevention Partnership where
we are working with not just Part D or C plan sponsors but the
private sector generally, a number of private payers, to look
at these issues and others. So we have done, for example, an
outlier pharmacy study with this public-private partnership,
identified 8,000 pharmacies not just in the Part D world but
also in the private just of pure private payer world that we
are now looking at and working kind of individually. So I
completely agree that partnership is at the center of this. We
are trying various approaches to partnership to help ameliorate
the issue.
Mr. Bucshon. Well, I mean, what does Anthem do, for
example? I don't want to throw out any names, but big insurance
companies that pay for that are a payer, right? Because for the
narcotics, if there is a funding stream, people are going to
look to the funding stream to try to obtain these medications.
I mean, that is just human nature.
Is there anything the private sector companies are doing
differently than maybe CMS is doing on that front?
Dr. Agrawal. Yes, also an important question. So I think
one of the advantages of the construct of the Part D program is
that we do work through the private sector. So the common
payers that you could identify are Part D plan sponsors, and so
we are able to utilize the exact same tools and approaches that
they have in their pure private side for the advantage of
Medicare, whether it is----
Mr. Bucshon. So basically you are working through them. I
know Medicare Part D works through plan sponsors. We have
talked about that. So you are basically working through them
and using their techniques to try to tackle this problem?
Dr. Agrawal. Correct, correct, in addition to the other
things that we can do from an agency kind of Federal leadership
standpoint.
Mr. Bucshon. OK. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Mr. Green, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, and I want to thank both of you for
being here today, and I want to take a few minutes to talk
about the recent successes in combating fraud and abuse in the
Medicare program.
In June, HHS and the Department of Justice announced a
sweep led by the Medicare Fraud Strike Force resulting in
charges of 243 individuals for approximately $712 million in
false billing. This was the largest takedown in the Strike
Force history. More than 44 of the defendants arrested were
charged with fraud related to the Medicare Part D program.
Ms. Maxwell, the Office of Inspector General was an
integral part of this takedown. Can you tell me more about the
OIG's role?
Ms. Maxwell. Absolutely. I would be happy to provide you
more details about the national takedown.
As I mentioned, it is the largest criminal fraud takedown
in the Medicare Strike Force history. About a third of the
cases focused on Medicare Part D prescription drug fraud and
also focused on Medicaid personal care services and Medicare
home health. In particular, focused on the prescription drug,
there were 44 defendants charged in related prescription drug
fraud. We have----
Mr. Green. Go ahead. I was wondering, have those gone to
trial yet or is it too early?
Ms. Maxwell. Too early. So the takedown just happened last
month, so we are still in the process of working through those.
Mr. Green. I understand the takedown involves a significant
component of prescription drug fraud. Can you elaborate? Is
this type of criminal fraud scheme increasing in prevalence in
the Part D program?
Ms. Maxwell. Yes. We have seen an increase of 134 percent
of our Part D cases. We have 540 pending cases in Part D alone.
Mr. Green. OK. The Health Care Fraud and Abuse Control
program, which funds the Medicare Fraud Strike Force, has
recently seen record-breaking fraud and recovery efforts as
well. In the fiscal year 2014 alone, the program recovered $3.3
billion from individuals and companies facing healthcare fraud
allegations. Since its inception in 1996, the program has
recovered $27.8 billion. The Affordable Care Act significantly
increased funding for HCFAC, indexing the program's mandatory
baseline and funding to inflation, providing over $3 million in
additional funding.
Ms. Maxwell, how can we build on these successes in the
future?
Ms. Maxwell. The HCFAC funding has been integral to the
success of the OIG. It, as you mentioned, funds our Medicare
and Medicaid operations both in investigations, audits and
evaluations, and as we are looking at this Part D problem, that
is the IG's approach. We have recognized this as a priority and
we are taking an all-hands-on-deck approach. So we are using
those funds to use all the tools available to the OIG to focus
on this issue.
Mr. Green. The ACA provided new authorities to combat
waste, fraud, and abuse such as enhanced penalties for
fraudulent providers. Ms. Maxwell, how are these new ACA
authorities assisting the Inspector General in successfully
combating Medicare fraud?
Ms. Maxwell. The authorities have been incredibly helpful.
We have been able to use our civil monetary penalty and
exclusion authorities to help buttress and protect Medicare
Part D.
Mr. Green. OK. Dr. Agrawal, same question.
Dr. Agrawal. Yes, the authorities in the ACA for CMS have
also been very significant. You know, what it did 5 years ago
was, it embarked us on a pathway of enrolling every single
provider and supplier that is in the program, subjecting them
to common and consistent screening standards, which have led to
over 500,000 enrollments now being deactivated or revoked.
Bottom line is, they can no longer bill the program. So that
kind of screening approach has been, I think, extremely
effective. We have also obviously implemented other approaches
along the way like the predictive analytic system that we
described earlier to really augment these enrollment
activities.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
Mrs. Brooks is recognized next for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am a former United States attorney, and so used to be
involved when I was in Medicare fraud-type of cases, and so I
do want to commend you for this huge, massive sweep that just
happened.
I am curious if you could share a little bit more about--
during the time I was U.S. attorney, mortgage fraud was kind of
overtaking the country and we had massive schemes involving
mortgage fraud. Now it seems that we have massive schemes
involving Medicare fraud, and I am curious whether or not in
these investigations you have found are there connections
between the different communities, and are there schemes that
are more commonly being utilized than others, particularly with
prescription drug issues? And I would like both of you to
comment as to, you know, how prevalent were the identity theft
issues in these prescription drug cases as well, whether it was
identity theft of the beneficiaries or identity theft actually
of prescribers? And I am just curious whether or not you were
seeing any sort of certain types of enterprises and certain
types of patterns bubbling up in these cases?
Ms. Maxwell. Absolutely. We are seeing a wide range of
fraud schemes emerging in Part D, certainly in the national
takedown that just happened last month, and it can range from
small physician or pharmacy to a full-on criminal enterprise.
One of the new schemes we have been seeing in the emergence
of patient recruiters that go out and they are in the
community, trusted individuals in the community that bring
patients in to these schemes and bring them in as complicit
beneficiaries. The fraud schemes in the takedown, we focused
primarily on pharmacy fraud, and we see--for one example we saw
in Miami, five pharmacy owners were charged with paying for
beneficiaries' numbers so they could illegally bill and also
paying a clinic provider to provide them adulterated
prescriptions to bill for drugs they did not dispense.
Mrs. Brooks. And so in these different schemes,
particularly going back to the patient recruiters, were they
also charged and were they conspiracy charges that were brought
against these individuals? Do we have appropriate laws on the
books to deal with all of the different actors in the schemes?
Ms. Maxwell. I know that we are going after the entirety of
the scheme and all the people involved. I am not a lawyer, so I
would want to get back to you with specifics about our
authorities to combat this.
Mrs. Brooks. OK. I would be very interested in knowing
whether or not if as the schemes--and we found this in the
mortgage fraud issues of the 2000s, that people would be
recruiting potential home buyers as well who really weren't
going to be buying homes. And so I think we could see these
kinds of schemes obviously happening here.
I am curious what DEA's role is, Dr. Agrawal. It is my
understanding that you don't have authority to revoke licenses,
that it has to go from DEA to a medical licensing board or to a
pharmacy board. What is the type of work that you are doing
with DEA and are there any impediments that you and/or DEA have
with respect to revocation of licensing, which is a huge
penalty for any pharmacist or any physician or prescriber?
Dr. Agrawal. Yes, I would agree with you that licensure
either medical licensure or the specific, you know, schedule II
authority that the DEA license gives you is incredibly
important and valuable to, you know, legitimate prescribers.
Those authorities, as you pointed out, are levied somewhere
else, either at the State level and the State medical board or
through DEA directly. But where we have really tried to get
involved is making sure that our licensure information is up to
date and that we are taking the relevant downstream actions
from any licensure changes, whether it is a suspension or
revocation or whatever.
The rulemaking that we engaged in last year that I
mentioned earlier actually specifically links our revocation
authority to the DEA license, and needing to have a valid DEA
license in place actually prescribed in the program. So that is
a place--you know, I think these are examples of where we can
key off the work of other agencies as they engage in their
oversight and enforcement responsibilities.
Mrs. Brooks. Do you report anything to the licensing
agencies of the States yourself?
Dr. Agrawal. We do. So we are able to make referrals
informally to them about concerning prescribing habits, and we
have done that. I think we see a wide degree of discrepancy
between licensing boards that actually do something as a result
versus not.
Mrs. Brooks. OK. Thank you. I have nothing further. I yield
back.
Mr. Murphy. Mr. Tonko, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
This subcommittee held a number of hearings earlier this
year to examine the current opioids abuse epidemic. Dr.
Agrawal, you mentioned in your testimony that the epidemic has
touched all parts of the Part D program. The spending for
opioids has increased substantially over the past decade, and
the number of prescription drugs overdose deaths is staggering,
to say the least. We need to use all of the tools at our
disposal to combat this problem.
Over the past several years, CMS has taken a number of
steps to strengthen Medicare program integrity including
measures to prevent overutilization of prescribed medications.
In January 2013, CMS implemented the Medicare Part D
Overutilization Monitoring System that requires plan sponsors
to have a drug utilization management program in place.
So Dr. Agrawal, how does that system work so as to reduce
potential opioid overutilization in the Part D program, and
would statutory authority from plan sponsors to put so-called
pharmacy lock-in programs in place complement that system?
Dr. Agrawal. Sure. The way the system works is, the agency
identifies for plan sponsors those beneficiaries that have very
high utilization of things like opioids using commonly accepted
standards of, you know, sort of safety threshold. We provide
those specific beneficiaries to the plan sponsors on a
quarterly basis and then require them to take downstream
utilization control steps including case management. What we
have seen from the time that we have been doing this and
working with plan sponsors in this way is a 30 percent
reduction in the prevalence of those beneficiaries. So clearly,
you know, impact is possible and we are looking to--and we
continue to do this to ensure that we get as much impact as we
can.
I think to the second question, you know, lock-in has been
discussed, I think, quite a bit. We, you know, do view it as
favorable and it does have, you know, good impact in the
private sector as well as in various State Medicaid programs.
It is part of the President's budget, and we look forward to
working with this committee on getting that passed.
Mr. Tonko. And what is the role of the plan sponsors in
identifying potential opioid overutilization?
Dr. Agrawal. Yes, the plan sponsors have a critical role,
you know, throughout Part D whether it is with opioids or other
schedule II drugs, other medications generally. You know, I
think that is why we have highlighted making sure that they
have robust compliance programs in place, robust utilization
programs in place so they can address a wide array of issues.
We also engage in a lot of data sharing with them, both about
abusive prescribers, abusive pharmacies, outlier beneficiaries.
You know, this is a partnership really to ensure the integrity
of the Part D program. The agency and Part D plan sponsors
really have to work very closely together.
Mr. Tonko. And the system has been in place about 2 years.
Is that correct?
Dr. Agrawal. The OMS system?
Mr. Tonko. Right
Dr. Agrawal. I think that is right, yes.
Mr. Tonko. OK. And the data that are returning are showing
great promise, I understand. Have you seen a reduction in the
number of overutilizers in Part D?
Dr. Agrawal. Yes, we have, so again, of the beneficiaries
that we have identified exceeding or meeting a certain safety
threshold and that we have shared with plan sponsors. We have
seen a 30 percent reduction or roughly 30 percent reduction in
the prevalence of those beneficiaries.
We have also exchanged information about acetaminophen
because it often is kind of coingested with opioids and is
liver-toxic in and of itself, and there we have seen a 91
percent reduction in the prevalence of those at-risk
beneficiaries.
Mr. Tonko. And you noted in your testimony that there are a
number of additional tools in the President's 2016 budget.
Those tools would prevent the inappropriate use of opioids. Can
you elaborate on those offerings that he is presenting to us?
Dr. Agrawal. Sure. I think the main one that I can
highlight we have discussed to some degree is the lock-in
approach that would essentially restrict certain beneficiaries
to, you know, based on kind of abusive utilization to select
pharmacies and select prescribers, and that is an approach that
has been utilized in the industry before. It is a way of trying
to balance access to appropriate care and medications against
that potentially abusive behavior. So that is something that we
view as potentially having significant positive impact, and we
hope this committee and others help to work with us on that.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
And Ms. Maxwell, the OIG Data Brief noted that there has
been substantial growth in spending in Part D drugs, especially
for commonly abused opioids. How can the OIG's recommendations
to combat fraud and abuse help combat this situation, this
problem?
Ms. Maxwell. Similar to the conversation that you have just
been having, we do recommend that a lock-in program be
instituted to help address this problem.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr. Mullin,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank both of
you all for being here.
Doctor, I was just going over some of our notes on this,
and I was disturbed because we have talked before, and we have
talked about the abuse of opioids--it is not going to come out.
Anyways, we know what we are talking about.
Mr. Murphy. Opioids.
Dr. Agrawal. With narcotics.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you, narcotics. And not enough coffee
today.
Anyways, as we were discussing, some statistics came up,
and we noticed that Part D spends on average, the
beneficiaries, around $105 per individual. In Oklahoma, we see
that at $165 per individual enrolled in Part D. And 43 percent
of those enrolled in that receive this drug that is commonly
abused. Doesn't that seem a little high to you?
Dr. Agrawal. I think Part D is like any other sector of
healthcare. We have seen the increasing use of opioid
medications throughout healthcare, whether that is in the
public sector or in the private, you know, and again, I think
we have to be careful. I sort of take this as a physician to
heart. There are people who have legitimate pain issues that
need to be addressed with these powerful medications.
Mr. Mullin. But 43 percent enrolled in it in the State of
Oklahoma alone? I mean, that seems awfully high to me.
Dr. Agrawal. Yes, I agree, you know, that number does seem
high. You know, I think the question that is very difficult for
anyone to answer is what portion of that is the totally
legitimate utilization that you would expect to see.
Mr. Mullin. Well, in our previous hearing about Medicaid
fraud and the addiction of these drugs, I asked you about the
number of beneficiaries being prescribed methadone as a first
line of defense, right? And then these numbers come out from
last year, and by CMS' own recommendation, it says it shouldn't
be used as a frontline defense. But yet, like I said, in
Oklahoma, 43 percent of those enrolled in Part D beneficiaries
are still receiving it. Abuse seems like it speaks for itself
through numbers. As a business owner, I look at financial
sheets all the time, especially when we would go in, we would
go to purchase a company, I could look at the financial sheets
and I could immediately tell you where the balances were messed
up at, and what we would do when we would see something like
that is, we would cut that part out to make the company
profitable again. If we are seeing numbers like this, isn't it
easy to say that until we get a hold of it, we should just cut
it out? There are other drugs on the market. We don't have to
be prescribing this stuff at the rate that we are. Until we
understand it more or can oversee it in a better capacity, we
should pull it. We do that all the time with drugs, don't we?
Dr. Agrawal. So, you know, I am not an addiction expert,
and you know, I think----
Mr. Mullin. You don't have to be.
Dr. Agrawal [continuing]. There clearly is a role----
Mr. Mullin. The numbers speak for themselves. I don't know
how many hearings we have had of this. We have even brought in
a detective from Oklahoma that talked about it.
Dr. Agrawal. I think there is clearly a role for
medication-assisted therapy in the substance abuse space. What
we focus on rather than just eliminating a benefit for an
entire group of people, some of whom might really actually need
that benefit, is to try to cut away the waste, abuse, and fraud
that may be occurring. So that is the role of things like the
Overutilization Monitoring System that look at bennies----
Mr. Mullin. I get that, but just last year we still had 43
percent in Oklahoma prescribed to it. I can't get that out of
my head. You can't convince me that nearly half of those on the
Part D need these type of prescribed drugs when it is not
supposed to be the first line of defense. It sounds like to me
it is an easy way for them to just prescribe it and move on.
There is not enough research being done to make sure that
it is not being abused. We are putting people on this and they
are blindly taking it because their physician prescribes it to
them and then they are becoming addicted to it. Is this not
throwing up red flags? Is there not something that we can do at
a more aggressive rate than just simply looking into it?
Dr. Agrawal. Well, Congressman, I think you are pointing
out what I think the agency has been saying is that this is a
multifaceted issue. So whether you are talking about the
patient or----
Mr. Mullin. I know, but saying----
Dr. Agrawal [continuing]. Prescriber----
Mr. Mullin [continuing]. Is two different things.
Dr. Agrawal. Correct, and that is why we are focused on
doing with all of these different programs that we have that
look at prescribers, that look at beneficiaries getting the
drugs. We have programs around data transparency to send
information to prescribers about their own prescribing habits
so they can see how it compares to others.
I think this is a complex problem. I am not sure that a
single number is something that the agency can respond to
because it really, you know, matters what is underneath that
number, what is the appropriate utilization that you would like
to see.
Mr. Mullin. And sir, I get that and I am out of time.
Thank you, Chairman, for indulging me there.
Mr. Murphy. The gentleman yields back.
I recognize Ms. Castor for 5 minutes.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for calling this
hearing. I think it is an important time for us to take a hard
look at Medicare Part D. We are about 10 years into the
existence of the program. We have 42 million Americans who rely
on the benefit. A lot of the consternation was how it was
constructed where you would get coverage and then you would
reach a certain level of coverage and then fall off a cliff
into a doughnut hole, and that made it very difficult for many
of our neighbors to get the care that they need.
But thankfully, the Affordable Care Act has brought some
significant reforms to Part D. Most important is closing the
doughnut hole. As a result of the ACA, 9.4 million seniors and
people with disabilities have saved over $15 billion on their
prescription drugs, an average of about $1,600 per beneficiary.
And I wanted to pull up the statistics for the State of
Florida and make sure they are on the record. Since 2010,
overall savings for Florida's seniors under the Affordable Care
Act now has been almost a billion dollars, $979 million, and in
2014, Florida's seniors saw savings of about $306 million. On
average, that is about $884 back into the pockets of our older
neighbors, so that has been very beneficial.
And just as important as the savings to our neighbors is
the overall savings to the program. OMB has deemed Medicare
Part D a high error program, meaning it has an improper payment
rate above a certain threshold, 3.3 percent, which amounts to
$1.9 billion in improper payments, and we have got to save
these dollars. So I really appreciate the work that the IG and
CMS has been doing.
Clearly, we have to do more, and I want to compliment the
Medicare Strike Force, especially for the June takedown. In
Florida, they arrested about 73 people. South Florida has been
a problem area, and I am going to get into that a little bit
more.
Ms. Maxwell, what is the explanation for the--I know you
have said it multifaceted but break it down a little bit more.
What is the explanation for the increasing cases of fraud
nationwide?
Ms. Maxwell. I think as we have been talking, there is a
lot of money at stake that is enticing, and we are continuing
to build the tools to protect the program. Our role in that is
multifaceted. As you had mentioned, we have investigations
where we actually go out to try and catch criminals who are
defrauding the program, but we also have a role to audit and
evaluate and make sure that there are systemic fixes. As I had
mentioned in my oral, enforcement is never going to be enough.
We need to look at the program as a whole and make sure that
the plan sponsors have compliance programs in place to protect
the program and that CMS also has strong resources to back
that.
Ms. Castor. So your OIG report emphasizes two areas of
opportunity to improve Part D program integrity, first, in the
use of data to identify vulnerabilities, and second, an
increased oversight by all parties responsible for protecting
Part D, and I know this has to include the new emerging
criminal networks, because what we saw in Florida, especially
Miami, of people that have been convicted of drug trafficking
had served their time, came out of prison and are now looking
at Medicare Part D fraud. What can--what else do we need to be
doing to combat these criminal networks, and explain to us what
some of their schemes are under Part D?
Ms. Maxwell. Absolutely. I think one of the things that we
are doing very successfully now and have continued to focus on
are the Medicare strike forces in which we partner with CMS and
other local and State law enforcement to stay on top of this
fraud and address these emerging issues as they hit the ground.
As you know, fraud is ever evolving, and so----
Ms. Castor. So one of the--I wish Mrs. Brooks was still
here. She is a former U.S. attorney. One of the weaknesses has
been the penalties, the criminal penalties. Do you agree?
Ms. Maxwell. We could always--yes, we could strengthen our
penalties.
Ms. Castor. OK. And Dr. Agrawal, does CMS need specific
direction to require all plan sponsors to report all fraud
information rather than keeping it strictly voluntary?
Dr. Agrawal. Sure. So as I mentioned earlier, we are
working to evolve the reporting that is both given to plan
sponsors as well as what they give back to us. We have started
by focusing on leads, investigative leads, for plan sponsors to
develop and then take any necessary administrative actions on.
We implemented an IT system called PLATO earlier this year for
them to be able to----
Ms. Castor. My time has run out. Could you just say yes,
that would be helpful if it was mandatory rather than
voluntary?
Dr. Agrawal. I think it could be helpful to help--you know,
to continue to evolve the program and evolve the relationship
between the agency and plan sponsors.
Ms. Castor. Thank you.
Mr. Murphy. The gentlelady yields back.
Now Mr. Collins of New York.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
my fellow committee members for the line of questioning we have
had today.
So we had an interesting discussion, Dr. Agrawal, last
time, if you remember, on Six Sigma Lean Six Sigma.
Dr. Agrawal. Yes, I don't totally remember it as a
discussion but we had that conversation, I guess.
Mr. Collins. So let me pick up. After that meeting, what
did you think, do or say when you went back to your office?
What did you think, do or say when you went home that night?
And did you take anything positive out of that discussion or
whatever you want to call it?
Dr. Agrawal. I think where there are ideas that benefit the
program that we can implement differently to improve the
integrity of Medicaid, of Part D and Medicare, whatever the
case may be, we take that input seriously, whether it comes
from the committee, the OIG, the GAO, or others. So again, we
take good ideas seriously and we work to implement them. It may
not be instantaneous or overnight but the work is constant.
Mr. Collins. So afterwards, did you give any more thought
to your 6.7 percent 5-star error rate that, if you were the
FAA, you would allow 10 airplanes a week to crash and give
yourself 5 gold stars, or did you understand the tone of any of
that and did you take any of that back to say, ``Oh, my God, a
6.7 fraud rate is not only not acceptable, it is certainly not
a bell ringer to say you did a good job''?
Dr. Agrawal. Yes. You know, again, as I think we had
communicated in that last discussion, you know, we are not tone
deaf and we understand that there is work to be done. I look at
that error rate and, you know, recognize that it needs to come
down. You know, nothing about that line of questioning sort of
augmented or changed the recognition.
Mr. Collins. Did you change your 6.7 to something lower or
is your error rate this year still 6.7?
Dr. Agrawal. Sir, that is measured on an annual basis. It
is not going to change day to day.
Mr. Collins. See, being a private-sector guy, well, if I
was your boss, how long do you think you would work for me?
Dr. Agrawal. Sir, I have certain misgivings about thinking
about working for you.
Mr. Collins. As you should. As you should.
Dr. Agrawal. Let me be clear about something perhaps. So I
came to this job just over----
Mr. Collins. That was funny, by the way.
Dr. Agrawal. Thank you. I appreciate it.
Look, I appreciate the message that you are trying to send,
and I appreciate the tone of the sort of last line of
questioning last time. I think what I should have said then in
response and what I say to you now is, I came to this job from
the private sector. I have been a clinician. I have taken care
of thousands of Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries. My purpose
is coming here was to help ameliorate, make progress on exactly
these kinds of issues. I think what would be helpful is a
collaborative approach. If we can do that, if we can work
together on devising solutions and getting them implemented,
nothing would make me happier. I think merely pointing out that
there is an error rate and kind of harping on it over and over
doesn't help necessarily make that progress.
Mr. Collins. So, I mean, if you looked into Six Sigma Lean
Six Sigma, as the county executive of the largest update county
in New York that was effectively bankrupt when I took over, we
took that county from number 62 to number one in 3 years. Three
years after, I had 500 certified yellow belts, green belts,
black belts, master black belts. My deputy county executive was
a master black belt. We had so much money in our county 3 years
in, we were paying cash for capital projects. We paid down $150
million of our county debt. We had $100 million county surplus
in 3 years. Lean Six Sigma works but it starts with somebody at
the top, in my case, the CEO of a county, but also it could be
the head of quality control, the head of manufacturing, who
comes in and says I don't want to accept 67,000 errors per
million opportunities; I want zero, and I am going to measure
that every day and I am going to chart that every day, and you
know what? I am going to send myself and I am going to send
others to schools, to training to find out how to process map
an error.
What Dr. Burgess pointed out, and I got one of these phone
calls the other day too, I got one from American Express. There
was a $25 innocuous charge. They said this looks like it could
be fraud, and it turns out it was. That was 15 minutes after
somebody put through that transaction. That is an organization
that gets it. That is an organization that says we won't accept
any errors, let alone 67,000.
So I guess as my time runs out, I would simply challenge
you to dig into Lean Six Sigma more. It does work. It can be
implemented in Government, but it starts with the person in
charge, someone like yourself saying I just categorically
reject the level of fraud or other errors and I am going to be
proactive in finding out how to do it better, and I would just
perhaps challenge you to look into this a little further.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize Ms. Clarke for 5 minutes.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank our
Ranking Member. I thank our witnesses. This is a very complex
issue. There is no doubt about that. But the stakes are very
high with respect to what is happening to the American people
and the illicit prescription drug proliferation that is taking
place in many parts of our Nation.
Ms. Maxwell, I think we all agree on the importance of
ensuring drugs are prescribed and dispensed appropriately and
legitimately. The Office of Inspector General's report suggests
several ways to strengthen Part D program integrity efforts.
The report recommends that CMS determine the effectiveness of
programs and take action to ensure that sponsors' compliance
plans meet CMS requirements.
So Ms. Maxwell, what more could be done to ensure that
sponsors' fraud detection efforts are effective?
Ms. Maxwell. Our recommendations point to mandating the
reporting of fraud and abuse that sponsors identify as well as
mandating the reporting of what sponsors do with that. We
believe that comprehensive reporting from all plans would allow
CMS the visibility and the tools to be able to assess the
effectiveness of what is happening at the sponsor level.
Ms. Clarke. So that sounds like a logistical challenge,
right? You have several sponsors. Right now they voluntarily
make that information available. Can you drill down a little
bit deeper in terms of systems that could be established that
either trigger some sort of an action on the part of CMS or
what would you suggest? Because if it is voluntary, you know,
they are operating businesses, they are sponsors. How do you
sort of hold them accountable in the course of the time that
they are spending doing all the other activities that they need
to do to run their companies?
Ms. Maxwell. Sure, and because they are required right now
to report voluntarily, I would assume--and I would defer to Dr.
Agrawal for the specifics--I would assume that there are
processes for that reporting to happen. So the systems are in
place. The question is, why isn't everyone using them. So when
we look for the voluntary reporting, we only see 35 percent. So
the other plans have the capacity; they have just opted not to
do the reporting.
Ms. Clarke. So Dr. Agrawal, is it an issue of at this stage
voluntary just does not work and that it has to be a mandate?
Dr. Agrawal. Well, to answer your question, we have been
working to enhance systems that allow plans to report data back
to us. We implemented a major enhancement earlier this year
that allows that data to not only be reported but also be kind
of searchable so it can be utilized. What we have been doing is
focusing on getting these plan sponsors better data about leads
that they should be investigating and potentially taking action
on. I think as we further that relationship, as we give them
more data, we will be very interested in hearing back from them
and perhaps in a mandate exactly what work that they have done.
But we find that just by improving the system and improving the
collaboration, we get better reporting.
Ms. Clarke. So baked into what you are saying is that there
was an assumption that there were some misgivings or
misunderstanding of what exactly the sponsors were to do to
report voluntarily? Is that sort of where the thinking is?
Dr. Agrawal. Well, I think that sponsors like many private
companies have concerns about reporting data back, especially
when it would be visible to other--you know, potentially
visible to other plan sponsors. So one way that we have worked
with them not just on the system enhancement side and making
the process easier is, we actually allow them to report certain
information deidentified of source. So they tell us a
problematic pharmacy or problematic prescriber what they have
done to take action against that entity or individual. But we
are not--it is not necessarily clear to us which sponsor--or it
can be sort of deidentified which sponsor put that in.
From a private-sector kind of competitive standpoint, that
input made sense to us, and so we have taken as a step allowing
them to input that kind of data so that we get better reporting
about the actual problem, which is the fraud and abuse in the
program.
Ms. Clarke. So that can be a double-edged sword, right?
They don't want the information attributed to them on the basis
of some sort of a proprietary disadvantage. Is that what you
are saying?
Dr. Agrawal. Well, I think, you know, there is a narrative
that, you know, fraud and abuse just doesn't occur in the
private sector. We have heard numerous committees kind of, you
know, suggest that that is the case. I think, you know, you
have programs like Part D which is conducted through the
private sector and yet we see these problems. So, you know, I
think what we have to do is get to a place where we are really
doing the best we can to get all the right information from
plans. As we develop that expertise, we can, you know,
implement more stringent guidance, perhaps getting to the kind
of mandate that OIG is requesting of us. But, you know, we are
taking steps along that kind of evolutionary pathway.
Ms. Clarke. Let me ask, Dr. Agrawal, there are some
troubling findings that the GAO reported in 2014. CMS conducted
audits of Part D plan sponsors in 2013. Of the plans the agency
audited, there were fraud, waste, and abuse findings in nearly
all of the audits, 94 percent. Specifically, CMS found
inadequacies in plan sponsors' compliance training, resolution
of fraud, waste, and abuse inquiries in a timely manner, and
corrective actions taken in response to potential fraud, waste,
and abuse. These are troubling findings, and I think it goes to
my previous question. How does CMS evaluate the effectiveness
of sponsors' compliance programs? Have these efforts changed
recently? And what is CMS doing to follow up with the audited
plans to ensure that these deficiencies are being remedied?
Dr. Agrawal. Thank you for the question. So we do conduct
audits of--compliance audits of plan sponsors to make sure that
they are compliant with our regulations, not only on the fraud,
waste, and abuse side but also, you know, obviously inclusive
of their program integrity work.
Recently, we have stepped up the amount of both the volume
of audits that we do as well as the focus in making sure that
program integrity is part of those audits. Where a deficiency
is identified, we work with them like we would any other
contractor, which is we can send letters of concern, we can
place them on corrective action plans. There is an array of
tools to get contractors into compliance with our expectations.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you. I didn't realize I was so far over
time. If you could send us something in writing----
Dr. Agrawal. Sure.
Ms. Clarke [continuing]. That outlines that, that would be
helpful.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
Mr. McKinley is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, I apologize.
I had to step out. We have a pipeline safety issue downstairs
in another committee, and we just had a fire in a pipeline last
week, and I needed to be there for that.
But back on this panel, a few months ago we had a
discussion here about one of the big problems here with opioids
was overprescription, and I don't know that we came up with a
solution how we are going to address that because I don't think
we want Congress to be practicing medicine. But then we got
into a discussion, I think it was with, Doc, and that was over
getting the prescription database in real time across the
country to be able to have that so that we might be able to
track the abuse that is happening that way. Are we making any
progress on that from either one of you? Can you address that
issue?
Ms. Maxwell. The Inspector General has not done any work--
you are talking about the prescription drug monitoring
databases in the States, I take it?
Mr. McKinley. In States they have--it is not in real time,
it is within a week they will file the information. But the
problem of abuse is because it is in real time. Someone goes
across the river into Ohio or West Virginia or Kentucky and
they are abusing the system. We have been talking about that,
my goodness, for at least 3 years. I am just curious what
progress we are making on that. We heard from the attorneys
general who were all suggesting that is one of the best ways we
could make progress in abuse within our Part D. I haven't heard
what progress we are making.
Dr. Agrawal. Yes, so the implementation of PDMP,
prescription drug monitoring programs, like the systems that
you are describing are, you know, as you know, State-level
initiatives. HHS has been involved in----
Mr. McKinley. They can only do it statewide. I am talking
about interstate, and that is where the catch comes into it
because so many of us are in border States that we can cross
easily over to where population is generally on a border. So
help me out a little bit about where we are going from the
Federal. Is there a role for us to play? Because you mentioned
earlier, Doc, you said we need a collaborative effort. I am
looking to see what do you need from us to help out, to make
this collaborative effort.
Dr. Agrawal. Yes, that is a good question. So I think I
would have to take that back in terms of, you know, the kind of
interoperability issue that you are identifying or getting more
States on board because as I mentioned, that is being done at
the HHS level. There is less of a direct kind of CMS role in
that set of activities. I am happy to take that back.
I will you from just sort of my experience as a clinician,
you know, one way that States, you know, try to remedy this
issue, and you see this sort of in the DC/Maryland/Virginia
area, is by encouraging providers to get access to numerous
different databases. Now, it is not a perfect approach but I
will tell you, I have utilized that approach in my own practice
just to make sure that, you know, a patient or a beneficiary is
not crossing State lines to kind of game the system and get
these medications.
Mr. McKinley. I have less than 2 minutes. Let me go back to
another statement you made to the Congressman from New York.
You said we need to have more collaborative effort. What
did you mean by that? Is there something we are not doing?
Because our whole role here is to try to be supportive. So are
we not being collaborative?
Dr. Agrawal. No, and, you know, I appreciate the question.
The comment wasn't really about the committee as a whole or
anything like that. I think it is, from my perspective, a
certain tone of questioning that I find to be less
constructive, but it was not about the committee in general. In
fact, I think there have been ideas exchanged in recent
hearings and certainly even today that I think do demonstrate
that kind of collaboration.
Mr. McKinley. In the last minute that I have, I remember
the issue was over the 6.7 percent, but where do we think--I am
just curious, where should it be? If not 6.7, should it be 3,
2? Where do you--and is that the goal? Are we making progress
or is it--have we plateaued at 6.7 or has it risen to 6.7? I
don't know the trends. I am just curious. What can you share
with us about the level of abuse?
Dr. Agrawal. Sure. So, if you look year on year, there is
variability in the number, and there are two things that I
think really have greatest impact on the number. One is, what
are the requirements that we are implementing that either might
be new requirements or that we are working to enforce more
closely. What we find from a program integrity standpoint is
that when there are new requirements or enforcement steps up,
inherently the error rate tends to rise because even legitimate
providers are not able to keep up with those changes. So it
takes a period of education to actually get everybody into
compliance. It then allows the trend to come back down.
Mr. McKinley. Is the trend rising or is the trend going
down?
Dr. Agrawal. I don't have the figures in front of me. I
mean, there is year-on-year change, but we can get that to you.
Mr. McKinley. Let us say over the 15 years, has the trend,
is it increasing or decreasing?
Dr. Agrawal. We can go back as far as the error rate has
been measured but we will share that with you.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you very much.
Dr. Agrawal. Absolutely.
Mr. McKinley. I yield back my time.
Mr. Murphy. I think we all as Members have spoken here.
There is a few things I want to just wrap up--oh, I am sorry.
Mr. Griffith is here.
Ms. DeGette. And Mr. Bilirakis came in.
Mr. Murphy. Mr. Bilirakis is here too. Then we will go with
Mr. Griffith for 5 minutes. I am sorry.
Mr. Griffith. That is all right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Murphy. You snuck in on me.
Mr. Griffith. Mr. Chairman, first I would ask unanimous
consent to insert into the record a statement from the National
Community Pharmacists Association.
Mr. Murphy. Without objection.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Griffith. Let me go to Mr. McKinley's question real
quick, and I understand that, you know, maybe Maryland, DC, and
Virginia, you can check that, but there are some real
difficulties from my district. If you count the Commonwealth of
Virginia, you can actually, if you work it out really well, you
could hit five States in a single day. So I do think we need to
be looking at some way that doctors can check because you get
down there in that little corner of Virginia and you are
touching West Virginia, Kentucky, Tennessee and North Carolina
all within a matter of, you know, 45 minutes to an hour. So you
could--you would have to work it. You would have to be at the
doorstep of somebody first thing in the morning but you could
hit five States in a single day. So I would ask you to take a
look at what Mr. McKinley raised.
Now, my question also is about the methodology used in the
OIG report on questionable billing practices. We all want to
stop these things. We want to stop folks from abusing the
opioids, et cetera. As the five factors you used seemed cut and
dried without much room for additional consideration, my
concern is that these results could present a broad
generalization about pharmacies which may not paint the whole
picture. For example, as I just described to you, I represent a
fairly rural area, and that area has a higher percentage of
senior citizens than the Nation as a whole. So a pharmacy might
dispense a higher percentage of pain relievers when compared to
other pharmacies in a different geographic or demographic area
simply because there are not as many pharmacies around and
perhaps the other pharmacies have a younger population that
they serve.
It also would not be unreasonable to expect them to have a
higher dispensation of controlled substances from a pharmacy
located near a hospital or a surgery center or an oncology
center. There are also pharmacies who are contracted providers
for long-term care facilities and hospices. So how does CMS
plan to address the results from the study that truly target
the bad actors that we all want to get to without hitting the
good guys who are just trying to serve their customers? And
this came up earlier as a part of a complaint because one of my
rural pharmacies has one supplier for their medicines, and at
one point they got cut off and so they were having to tell
their customers yes, I can't fill it today, come back at the
end of the week when we change months. Well, that is hard if
you are a senior citizen and you need that pain medication, and
in fact, a friend of mine's wife was told that who had just
gone through some surgery. She had to wait 3 days. They
managed, but that is really not the way it ought to work,
whether you would be in the urban areas in the northern part of
Virginia, Maryland, and DC or you are in southwest Virginia in
the rural areas. How do we fix it?
Dr. Agrawal. Yes, I think you make a good point. You know,
this kind of data analysis is a starting point and, you know, I
think as to the specific methodology, I will defer a bit to the
OIG. But you know, data analysis is always the beginning point
of our investigations. Now, I had shared earlier that on a
month--on a quarterly basis, we send lists of concerning or
high-risk pharmacies to Part D plan sponsors. Our methodology
takes 16 variables into account, and in order for a pharmacy to
make it onto the list, they have to be a statistical outlier in
at least four of the variables. So the purpose there is to do
exactly what you are describing, which is try to bring a little
more specificity to the methodology. But again, after that
follows the investigation. I think it is really challenging
unless the data is extremely cut and dry, which occurs in rare
situations, to take administrative action without the ensuing
investigation in between. That is where we really try to get to
the bottom of, is something really bad happening here or is
this just an outlier, but it is explained by certain geographic
factors that you have identified.
Mr. Griffith. I appreciate it very much. I appreciate you
all being here today. I apologize. I too have been--we have got
pipeline issues as well, as you might imagine, and I was in the
other hearing.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your time, and I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize Mr. Bilirakis from the full committee for 5
minutes.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
Thanks for holding the hearing. Thanks for allowing me to
participate today.
Medicare Part D has been an important addition to the
Medicare program, one of the most successful programs, I think,
in the history of the Congress. It is a program that my
constituents love and something that Congress should be proud
of.
However, I have been concerned about the growing
prescription drug problem in the United States and within the
Medicare program. That is why in 2013 myself and our colleague,
Ben Ray Lujan, first introduced the Medicare Part D Patient
Safety and Drug Abuse Prevention Act, which would create a drug
management program to prevent physician shopping and pharmacy
shopping within the Medicare program. I am proud that we were
able to include it in the 21st Century Cures bill that we
passed last week.
It is important to the Medicare program to bring a
commonsense provision that has been used in Medicaid, Tricare
and commercial insurance. It also makes reforms to the MEDIC
program in keeping with some of the OIG recommendations. That
is the 21st Century Cures bill that makes those reforms.
The first question is for Ms. Maxwell. In your testimony,
you talk about the need for a lock-in program in Medicare Part
D to deal with prescription drug abuse and the problem of drug
diversion. Do you have any estimate on the size of the problem?
How many people and how much money are being lost to
prescription drug abuse?
Ms. Maxwell. I don't have those specific figures but I do
have the figures in our Data Brief that the growth in
prescribing opioids has been significant. It has been a 156
percent increase since the beginning of the program, which
outpaces the growth in the general program. And so it is a
continuing concern. We also have seen a tremendous increase in
complaints against Part D so we have significant concerns about
this. We do as a result recommend the lock-in. As you mentioned
and as I think we have been talking about different ways to
deal with doctor shopping, which can result either in patient
harm or the diversion of opioids into the street. One way would
be the PDMP to provide access to data around this issue and
across State lines by the way is this lock-in, I mean
specifically directed at that issue.
Mr. Bilirakis. Very good. Thank you.
Dr. Agrawal, I am sorry if I mispronounced. I just got
here. In 2014, CMS issued rules for Part D and stated that they
had the authority to remove abusive prescribers from the
Medicare program. Can you give me an update on this? How many
abusive prescribers have been identified in the Medicare
program and how many prescribers have been removed from the
Medicare program?
Dr. Agrawal. Sure. So yes, you know, this is part of our
overall approach to extending our enrollment requirements into
Part D, so what we have been working on is getting prescribers
enrolled. I think I mentioned earlier that there are 400,000
prescribers that have written prescriptions in Part D that we
are working to enroll. We are also working to develop exactly
the kind of cases that you are identifying, so through
proactive data analysis, kind of starting to tee up these cases
for the first time. I am not sure that we have conducted a
specific revocation action using only that authority yet.
Usually we try to do them in combination, and we may have added
that authority to kind of another revocation action but I can
look into whether there is a case that we uniquely utilized
that authority.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you. One more question, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Maxwell and Dr. Agrawal, when the MEDICs investigate a
case and finish their investigation, I am assuming it is
automatically referred to DOJ. Is that the case?
Ms. Maxwell. I believe they do make referrals as part of
their requirements.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK. If DOJ chooses not to pursue the case,
maybe because of the view that the fraud is too small to be
worth their time, does the information get automatically
referred to State and local agencies or State licensing
authorities? Can you answer that question?
Ms. Maxwell. I am not aware of that specific mechanism. I
do know that we are concerned when law enforcement action
doesn't take place, that there are no mechanisms and processes
to refer it for recovery of the inappropriate payments.
Mr. Bilirakis. How about, are Part D plan sponsors provided
updates by the MEDICs? How does the MEDIC work with local
authorities and State licensing agencies?
Ms. Maxwell. Again, I am not familiar with the specifics.
Perhaps Dr. Agrawal is----
Dr. Agrawal. Sure. So the MEDIC--I think this was in the
testimony--MEDIC provided 2,300 referrals to law enforcement
over the last, I think it is 5 years. Obviously we try to refer
as much over to law enforcement as we can that we think kind of
meets the threshold for law enforcement activity and
investigation.
Where law enforcement doesn't accept a case, we have a few
options. We have shared information with State medical boards
to try to get action on their part. We regularly share
information with Part D plan sponsors. We do that on a routine
basis as well as an ad hoc basis if new issues come up or there
are new entities or individuals that become concerning.
I think the threshold of our authority currently, you know,
there is the, you know, OIG recommendation around recovery of
dollars that Ms. Maxwell discussed. I think there are certain
limits in our authority that prevent us from going directly to,
say, a pharmacy and requesting recovery of those dollars. We do
have to work through Part D plans, but there are a variety of
avenues to do just that.
Mr. Bilirakis. Very good. Thank you. Thank you, Doctor.
Thank you, Ms. Maxwell. I appreciate it, Mr. Chairman, and I
yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
I do want to follow up. The committee sent a letter to CMS
seeking information about the improper-payment rate and that
response is due tomorrow. Will the committee receive that
response tomorrow?
Dr. Agrawal. We have been working diligently on it. I think
you will get the response tomorrow.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. By the way, you seemed to suggest
something earlier that the ACA is causing an improper-payment
rate to rise. Is that--did we misunderstand that?
Dr. Agrawal. No. I don't know if this was perhaps your line
of questioning. No. What I had said is that, you know, in the
program integrity world, what we see often is that the
improper-payment rate rises when there are new, stringent
requirements that providers must meet, whether that is
documentation requirements, enrollment requirements or other.
So for example, the 6.7 rate that we discussed last time in
Medicaid is largely driven by providers needing to enroll in
Medicaid programs and States having adequate resources and
systems to conduct that enrollment activity. I don't think
anybody doubts the importance of enrollment. We talked about
that as one of the major levers that we are now implementing in
Part D that I think will be quite useful. We have already seen
its impact in the rest of Medicare. But like any other
requirement or standard, it can be hard for providers to keep
up and that can sometimes result in the improper-payment rate
going up.
Mr. Murphy. All right. Well, we want you to continue to
stay on that.
Ms. Maxwell, thank you so much. We do appreciate all that
your offices do. It means a lot to this committee.
The next time we see you, Dr. Agrawal, I hope you will give
me a report that all those have been put into place. As you
know, some have been sitting around for nearly 10 years, and
that is just not acceptable. So we thank you.
I thank all the witnesses and Members who participated in
today's hearing. I remind Members they have 10 business days to
submit questions for the record. We will have a number of those
and ask the witnesses to respond promptly to the questions.
And with that, this committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:15 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Medicare Part D is a critically important program for our
Nation's seniors. Unfortunately, similar to our other
entitlement programs, Medicare Part D remains vulnerable to
fraud and abuse. Just last month, the Medicare Task Force
conducted a nationwide Medicare fraud takedown. This joint law
enforcement operation led to charges against 243 individuals
for approximately $712 million in false billings. While this
was an important effort, much more needs to be done.
According to recent reports from the Department of Health
and Human Services Office of Inspector General, the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services needs to take additional actions
to strengthen the integrity of the Medicare Part D program. The
reports find CMS is either failing or refusing to implement
commonsense recommendations issued by its OIG. For example, CMS
needs to ensure excluded providers are not allowed to continue
to bill under Part D. Additionally, CMS should require plan
sponsors to report potential fraud and abuse. Implementing
these recommendations is especially important in light of the
startling increase in Medicare Part D spending on commonly
abused opioids.
Medicare Part D is an expansive program, requiring constant
vigilance. Just as bad actors will continue to try to find ways
to take advantage of the program, we must take proactive steps
to protect the program's integrity, taxpayers' dollars, and our
Nation's seniors. A good first step is CMS implementing the
OIG's recommendations.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Page 6 of the document is blank.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
