- EXAMINING THE ADMINISTRATION'S APPROVAL OF MEDICAID DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE ADMINISTRATION'S APPROVAL OF MEDICAID DEMONSTRATION
PROJECTS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 24, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-59

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

97-732 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 Massachusetts
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TONY CARDENAS, California7
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
BILL FLORES, Texas
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota

Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          KATHY CASTOR, Florida
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina         Massachusetts
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TONY CARDENAS, California
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
CHRIS COLLINS, New York                  officio)
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Gene Green, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Kathy Castor, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Florida, opening statement.....................................     9
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, prepared statement........................   113

Witnesses

Katherine M. Iritani, Director, Health Care, Government
Accountability Office..........................................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    13
Answers to submitted questions...............................   118
Haley Barbour, Former Governor of Mississippi and Founding
Partner, BGR Group.............................................    65
Prepared statement...........................................    68
Answers to submitted questions...............................   127
Matt Salo, Executive Director, National Association of Medicaid
Directors......................................................    77
Prepared statement...........................................    79
Answers to submitted questions...............................   129
Joan C. Alker, Executive Director, Georgetown University Center
for Children and Families......................................    89
Prepared statement...........................................    91
Answers to submitted questions...............................   135

Submitted Material

Letter of June 23, 2015, from Ken Paxton, Attorney General of
Texas, et al., to Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr. Burgess..........   115

EXAMINING THE ADMINISTRATION'S APPROVAL OF MEDICAID DEMONSTRATION
PROJECTS

----------

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 24, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:02 a.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joseph R.
Pitts (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Pitts, Guthrie, Shimkus,
Murphy, Burgess, Blackburn, Lance, Griffith, Bilirakis, Long,
Ellmers, Bucshon, Brooks, Collins, Upton (ex officio), Green,
Capps, Schakowsky, Butterfield, Castor, Schrader, Kennedy,
Cardenas, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Clay Alspach, Chief Counsel, Health;
Leighton Brown, Press Assistant; Noelle Clemente, Press
Secretary; Graham Pittman, Legislative Clerk; Michelle
Rosenberg, GAO Detailee, Health; Chris Sarley, Policy
Coordinator, Environment and the Economy; Traci Vitek,
Detailee, Health; Dylan Vorbach, Staff Assistant; Gregory
Watson, Staff Assistant; Tiffany Guarascio, Democratic Deputy
Staff Director and Chief Health Advisor; Rachel Pryor,
Democratic Health Policy Advisor; Samantha Satchell, Democratic
Policy Analyst; and Arielle Woronoff, Democratic Health
Counsel.
Mr. Pitts. The subcommittee will come to order. The
chairman will recognize himself for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Medicaid is a lifeline for some of our Nation's most
vulnerable patients. The administration and Congress have a
duty to ensure that taxpayer dollars used for Medicaid are
spent in a manner that promotes its core objectives and helps
our neediest citizens. Unfortunately, a recent report from the
nonpartisan Government watchdog agency, the Government
Accountability Office (GAO), again raises serious concerns
about the administration's management and oversight of Medicaid
funds.
Under Section 1115 of the Social Security Act, the
Secretary has the authority to approve Medicaid demonstration
projects that are likely to promote program objectives.
However, the GAO found that CMS did not have explicit criteria
for determining whether, and did not clearly articulate how,
demonstration projects met the statutory requirement to promote
Medicaid objectives. GAO also reported that several State
programs approved for Federal Medicaid funds appeared, on their
face, to be only tangentially related to improving health
coverage for low-income individuals.
This committee has a duty to ensure that taxpayer dollars
used for Medicaid are spent in a manner that promotes its core
objectives and helps the most vulnerable patients. Yet, GAO's
findings raise significant questions about the degree to which
the administration is consistently complying with its own
criteria. These criteria were not even articulated by CMS until
GAO asked. And these criteria do not exist anywhere in CMS'
regulations. They are not even listed on their Web site.
When CMS has a process that is not transparent nor
predictable, a process in which CMS often approves a
demonstration for one State but denies a similar demo for
another State, that process is, understandably, perceived by
States and other stakeholders as inconsistent, unfair, and
unaccountable. It is unfortunate that CMS declined to
participate in this important hearing, despite our best
efforts. We gave the agency 2 weeks' notice, offered 2
different potential hearing dates. Nevertheless, despite all
the people that work at CMS, the administration declined to
make anyone available to testify.
CMS' refusal to come today would be unfortunate under any
circumstance, but it is particularly concerning since roughly
one in three Medicaid dollars, nearly $150 billion in fiscal
year 2014, are spent on 1115 demonstrations. CMS has a
responsibility to Medicaid patients, to States, to taxpayers,
to be transparent with their criteria for approving or
disapproving State demonstrations. And yet, they declined to
come before a committee of jurisdiction to explain their
criteria or their process. The agency's absence from this
hearing is really striking. Accordingly, yesterday, we extended
another invitation to CMS to testify before this committee on
Medicaid on July the 8th, and we look forward to their
participation.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Joseph R. Pitts

Medicaid is a lifeline for some of our Nation's most
vulnerable patients. The administration and Congress have a
duty to ensure that taxpayer dollars used for Medicaid are
spent in a manner that promotes its core objectives and helps
our neediest citizens.
Unfortunately, a recent report from the nonpartisan
Government watchdog agency, the Government Accountability
Office (GAO), again raises serious concerns about the
administration's management and oversight of Medicaid funds.
Under Section 1115 of the Social Security Act, the Secretary
has the authority to approve Medicaid demonstration projects
that are likely to promote program objectives.
However, the GAO found that CMS did not have explicit
criteria for determining whether, and did not clearly
articulate how, demonstration projects met the statutory
requirement to promote Medicaid objectives. GAO also reported
that several State programs approved for Federal Medicaid funds
appeared, on their face, to be only tangentially related to
improving health coverage for low-income individuals.
This committee has a duty to ensure that taxpayer dollars
used for Medicaid are spent in a manner that promotes its core
objectives and helps the most vulnerable patients. Yet, GAO's
findings raise significant questions about the degree to which
the administration is consistently complying with its own
criteria. These criteria were not even articulated by CMS until
GAO asked. And these criteria do not exist anywhere in CMS'
regulations--they are not even listed on their Web site.
When CMS has a process that is not transparent nor
predictable, a process in which CMS often approves a
demonstration for one State but denies a similar demo for
another State-that process is, understandably, perceived by
States and other stakeholders as inconsistent, unfair, and
unaccountable.
It is unfortunate that CMS declined to participate in this
important hearing despite our best efforts. We gave the agency
two weeks' notice and offered two different potential hearing
dates. Nevertheless, despite all the people that work at CMS,
the administration declined to make anyone available to
testify.
CMS' refusal to come today would be unfortunate under any
circumstance, but it is particularly concerning since roughly
one in three Medicaid dollars--nearly $150 billion in fiscal
year 2014--are spent on 1115 demonstrations. CMS has a
responsibility to Medicaid patients, to States, and to
taxpayers, to be transparent with their criteria for approving
or disapproving State demonstrations.
And yet, they declined to come before a committee of
jurisdiction to explain their criteria or their process. The
agency's absence from this hearing is really striking.
Accordingly, yesterday we extended another invitation to CMS to
testify before this committee on Medicaid on July 8th--and we
look forward to their participation.
With that, I would like to welcome all of our witnesses for
being here today. I look forward to your testimony. I yield the
remainder of my time to the distinguished gentleman from
Indiana, Dr. Buchson.

Mr. Pitts. With that, I would like to welcome all of our
witnesses for being here today. I look forward to your
testimony, and I yield the remainder of my time to the
distinguished gentleman from Indiana, Dr. Bucshon.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to briefly highly that the State of Indiana
recently received an 1115 waiver for the Medicaid to implement
to help the Indiana Plan 2.0. As many of you know, the Healthy
Indiana Plan was a very successful program implemented under
former Governor Mitch Daniels, and rather than expand
traditional Medicaid, Governor Pence created HIP 2.0 to cover
our State's most vulnerable population, but not require that
they go on traditional Medicaid.
There are over 283,000 Hoosiers to this point enrolled in
the program, and actually 71 percent of those opt to pay in and
pay more to get dental and vision coverage. This program can be
a model used across the country on how to provide coverage to
our most vulnerable population.
However, this waiver almost didn't happen. We are going to
hear from our witnesses about how complicated this process can
be. It took the State of Indiana 2 years; that is one
congressional term, to get the waiver. This was not a new
program; this was an extension of an already successful
program. Not only did it take 2 years, but it took Governor
Pence directly reaching out to President Obama several times to
get an answer. We received the waiver for 3 years. Let me
repeat again, it took 2 years and several conversations
directly with the President to get the waiver in place.
Something needs to change in this process.
I hope that going forward, CMS is going to learn from the
hoops that they made Indiana jump through, and make it easier
for States like Indiana to do what is already working. I look
forward to ensuring Indiana can continue HIP 2.0 when this
waiver expires, and to hearing--I look forward to hearing the
testimony today.
I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognize the ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr.
Green, 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GENE GREEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning and thank
our witnesses for being here today. I would like to thank the
Chair for having this hearing on the topic of Medicaid
demonstration waivers, and I look forward to today's
discussion.
Medicaid provides healthcare coverage for more than 70
million Americans. It is our Nation's most vital healthcare
safety net program. Today, it covers more than one in three
children, and is a critical component of care for seniors. One
out of every seven Medicare beneficiaries is also a Medicaid
beneficiary. For millions of American families, the Medicaid
Program is the only way they can gain access to coverage for
appropriate healthcare services. It is a simple truth; our
State and Federal Government save money by investing in health
care, and Medicaid coverage is a key component of such
investment.
The joint State-Federal nature of Medicaid structure is the
defining feature of the program. Since its creation, States
have had the flexibility to design their own version of
Medicaid within the basic framework of broad Federal rules, in
order to receive matching funds. If a State wishes to change
its Medicaid Program in ways that depart from some Federal
requirements, it may seek to do so under the authority of
approved demonstration or a waiver. Section 1115 waivers are a
very broad type of Medicaid waiver.
In recent years, these waivers have become increasingly
utilized by the States. In fiscal year 2014, Section 1115
demonstration waivers accounted for almost \1/3\ of all
Medicaid spending. While each 1115 waiver is different in scope
and focus, they all must promote the objectives of the Medicaid
Program and be budget-neutral for the Federal Government.
Over the last 2 decades, the Government Accounting Office,
the GAO, has raised concerns about Medicaid waiver policy. Many
of the GAO's longstanding recommendations were included in the
Affordable Care Act, and I want to thank CMS for the agency's
commitment to improving transparency throughout the approval
process. Per a requirement of the Affordable Care Act, CMS has
issued a final rule to ensure meaningful public input in the
waiver process, and enhanced transparency. Today, we will hear
from GAO about its body of work on Medicaid waivers and
additional improvements that can be made.
While the Supreme Court made Medicaid expansion voluntary
for each State, expansion authority provides an explicit,
almost entirely federally funded pathway for States to offer
coverage for all nonelderly adults living below 138 percent of
the poverty line. Because of this, States have a clear option
and do not need to use 1115 waivers to expand eligibility for
this population. Waivers are still being used to make other
programmatic changes, especially as States continue to consider
expanding Medicaid. Some of these proposals have sought to
impose premiums, cost-sharing charges, and work requirements on
beneficiaries. Robust research does not support the arguments
for such provisions. Premiums have been shown to deter
participation in coverage, and lead to high administrative
costs. Work requirements have no place in a safety net
healthcare program, and ignore the fact that the vast majority
of new eligible adults--beneficiaries already work but do not
have access to affordable care through their employer. States
have flexibility--considerable flexibility under existing
Medicaid authority. Enacting punitive, unsubstantiated policies
like work requirements under the guise of flexibility does not
advance the conversation about improved transparency and
innovative care models. When people have access to regular
health examinations, immunizations, and preventative care, they
are dramatically more likely to be healthy and productive
adults. Coverage rather than uncompensated care pools is the
best way to promote the health of the American people, and the
viability of our healthcare system at large. CMS has maintained
that this will be one of the three guiding principles moving
forward.
That said, 1115 waivers retain the vital purpose of
affording States with a way to pursue innovative delivery
programs, expand eligibility to individuals not otherwise
eligible for Medicaid and CHIP, and pilot initiatives that
supports the objections of the Medicaid Program. Medicaid is a
safety net for everyone because we are all one medical crisis
away from financial ruin, and more people who have coverage and
access to necessary care, the better the system works.
I look forward to hearing today's panelists about the
important topic, and working with my colleagues on the
committee. We have a great opportunity to build on success, and
continue to strengthen the Medicaid Program for current and
future beneficiaries.
And I yield back my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Green follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Gene Green

Good morning, and thank you for being here today. I thank
the chairman for having this hearing on the topic of Medicaid
demonstration waivers, and look forward to today's discussion.
Medicaid provides health care coverage for more than 70
million Americans. It is our Nation's most vital health care
safety net program.
Today, it covers more than 1 in 3 children, and is a
critical component of care for seniors. One out of every 7
Medicare beneficiaries is also a Medicaid beneficiary.
For millions of American families, the Medicaid program is
the only way they can gain access to coverage for appropriate
health care services.
It is a simple truth: our Federal and State Governments
save money by investing in health care, and Medicaid coverage
is a key component of such investment.
The joint State-Federal nature of the Medicaid structure is
a defining feature of the program. Since its creation, States
have had flexibility to design their own version of Medicaid,
within the basic framework of broad Federal rules in order to
receive matching funds.
If a State wishes to change its Medicaid program in ways
that departs from certain Federal requirements, it may seek to
do so under the authority of an approved demonstration or
``waiver.'' Section 1115 waivers are a very broad type of
Medicaid waiver.
In recent years, these waivers have become increasingly
utilized by the States. In fiscal year 2014, Section 1115
demonstration waivers accounted for almost one-third of all
Medicaid spending.
While each 1115 waiver is different in scope and focus,
they all must promote the objectives of the Medicaid program
and be budget neutral for the Federal Government.
Over the last two decades, the Government and
Accountability Office (GAO) has raised concerns about Medicaid
waiver policy. Many of GAO's longstanding recommendations were
included in the Affordable Care Act, and I want to thank CMS
for the agency's commitment to improved transparency throughout
the approval process.
Per a requirement of the Affordable Care Act, CMS has
issued a final rule to ensure meaningful public input in the
waiver process and enhanced transparency. Today, we will hear
from GAO about their body of work on Medicaid waivers and
additional improvements that can be made.
While the Supreme Court made Medicaid expansion voluntary
for each State, expansion authority provides an explicit--
almost entirely Federal-funded--pathway for States to offer
coverage for all non-elderly adults living below 138 percent of
the poverty line. Because of this, States have a clear option
and do not need to use 1115 waivers to expand eligibility for
this population.
Waivers are still being used to make other programmatic
changes, especially as States continue to consider expanding
Medicaid. Some of these proposals have sought to impose
premiums, cost-sharing charges, and work requirements on
beneficiaries. Robust research does not support the arguments
for such provisions.
Premiums have been shown to deter participation in coverage
and lead to high administrative costs. Work requirements have
no place in a safety net health care program, and ignore the
fact that the vast majority of newly eligible adult
beneficiaries already work, but do not have access to
affordable coverage through their employer.
States have considerable flexibility under existing
Medicaid authority. Enacting punitive, unsubstantiated policies
like work requirements under the guise of ``flexibility'' does
not advance the conversation around improved transparency and
innovative care models.
When people have access to regular health examinations,
immunizations, and preventative care, they are dramatically
more likely to be healthy, productive adults.
Coverage, rather than uncompensated care pools, is the best
way to promote the health of the American people and the
viability of our health care system at large. CMS has
maintained that this will be one of three guiding principles
moving forward.
That said, Section 1115 waivers retain their vital purpose
of affording States with a way to pursue innovative delivery
systems, expand eligibility to individuals not otherwise
eligible for Medicaid and CHIP, and pilot initiatives that
support the objectives of the Medicaid program.
Medicaid is a safety net for everyone, because we are all
one medical crisis away from financial ruin, and the more
people who have coverage and access to necessary care, the
better the system works for us all.
I look forward to hearing from today's panelists about this
important topic, and to working with my colleagues on the
committee.
We have a great opportunity to build on past successes and
continue to strengthen the Medicaid program for current and
future beneficiaries.
Thank you, and I yield back.

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognize the chairman of the full committee, Mr.
Upton, 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This year, the Medicaid Program turns 50. Over that half a
century, Medicaid has provided critical health coverage for
some of our Nation's most vulnerable populations. Medicaid is
the world's largest health insurance program, with as many as
72 million people being covered by the program for at least
some period of the current year. And in the next fiscal year,
344 billion Federal dollars will be spent on Medicaid, and by
2024, Federal-State spending on Medicaid is expected to top $1
trillion.
Today, roughly one in three Medicaid dollars is spent
through an 1115 waiver approved by the Secretary of HHS.
Section 1115 of the Social Security Act authorizes the HHS
Secretary to waive certain Federal Medicaid requirements and
allow costs that would not otherwise be eligible for Federal
matching funds for demonstration projects that are likely to
assist in promoting Medicaid objectives. These are critical
tools for States to experiment and evolve their Medicaid
Programs as they seek to modernize and improve them to better
serve patients. For example, Michigan has used a waiver to
successfully provide HSA-like health accounts to encourage
participants to become more active health care consumers. Yet
today we will hear from the nonpartisan Government watchdog,
GAO, which has repeatedly raised questions about CMS' approval
process for those waivers.
Whether it is GAO's concerns about budget neutrality,
approval criteria, or the process for approvals and renewals,
these are indeed important and fair questions to ask. We need a
better understanding about how the billions of dollars CMS is
approving promote Medicaid's core objectives.
I want to thank the second panel, in particular, former
Governor Barbour, for being here to share his ideas about how
to improve CMS' management of the funds. I know that nearly
every member of this subcommittee has heard frustrations from
State officials at one point about the uncertainty and
timeframes surrounding the approval or renewal of an 1115
waiver. While State leaders are trying to balance their
budgets, pass legislation, it is essential that CMS' process is
transparent and certainly predictable.
Recent analysis and media coverage has raised questions
over the degree to which CMS is effectively picking winners and
losers in the waiver review process. CMS has a duty, both to
patients and taxpayers, to States, all stakeholders, to do more
to increase the transparency, accountability, and consistency
of their approval process. In fact, if CMS is doing a decent
job, increased oversight and scrutiny will only bring their
good efforts into the light. However, if there are
shortcomings, this subcommittee will play its role in making
the process more transparent, accountable, and fair for all
involved. At the end of the day, it is about ensuring our most
vulnerable receive the care that they deserve.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

This year, the Medicaid program turns 50 years old. Over
that half a century, Medicaid has provided critical health care
coverage for some of our Nation's most vulnerable populations.
Medicaid is currently the world's largest health insurance
program, with as many as 72 million people being covered by the
program for at least some period of the current year. In the
next fiscal year, 344.4 billion Federal dollars will be spent
on the Medicaid program. And by 2024, Federal-State spending on
Medicaid is expected to top $1 trillion annually.
Today, roughly one in three Medicaid dollars is spent
through an 1115 waiver approved by the Secretary of Health and
Human Services. Section 1115 of the Social Security Act
authorizes the HHS Secretary to waive certain Federal Medicaid
requirements and allow costs that would not otherwise be
eligible for Federal matching funds for demonstration projects
that are likely to assist in promoting Medicaid objectives.
These are critical tools for States to experiment and
evolve their Medicaid programs as they seek to modernize and
improve them to better serve patients. For example, Michigan
has used a waiver to successfully provide HSA-like Health
Accounts to encourage participants to become more active health
care consumers.
Yet today we will hear from the nonpartisan Government
watchdog, the Government Accountability Office, which has
repeatedly raised serious questions about CMS' approval process
for these waivers.
Whether it is GAO's concerns about budget neutrality,
approval criteria, or the process for approvals and renewals,
these are important and fair questions. Congress needs a better
understanding about how the billions of dollars CMS is
approving promote Medicaid's core objectives.
I also want to thank the second panel, in particular former
Governor Barbour, for being here to share their ideas about how
to improve CMS' management of these funds. I am confident that
nearly every member of this subcommittee has heard frustrations
from State officials at one point about the uncertainty and
timeframes surrounding the approval or renewal of an 1115
waiver. While State leaders are trying to balance their budgets
and pass legislation, it is essential that CMS' process is
transparent and predictable.
Recent analysis and media coverage has raised questions
over the degree to which CMS is effectively picking winners and
losers in the waiver review process. CMS has a duty--to
patients, to taxpayers, to States, to all stakeholders--to do
more to increase the transparency, accountability, and
consistency of their approval process. In fact, if CMS is doing
a decent job, increased oversight and scrutiny will only bring
their good efforts into the light. However, if there are
shortcomings, this subcommittee will play its role in making
the process more transparent, accountable, and fair for all
involved. At the end of the day--it's about ensuring our most
vulnerable receive the care they deserve.
I yield 1 minute to Dr. Burgess.

Mr. Upton. I yield the balance of my time to Dr. Burgess.
Mr. Burgess. I thank the chairman for yielding. And I just
want to underscore what he said. And, Governor Barbour, it is
going to be good to have you before our panel again. I know you
have been here before. And I think one of the failings when we
initiate discussions on healthcare policy is our failure to
include the Governors in the discussion because, after all, our
Governors are the ones who have the principle role in a shared
Federal-State program, like Medicaid. Our Governors are the
ones who actually have the responsibility of the deliverable
for their citizens, as well as they have to administer their
own healthcare programs for their State employees, and they
have great expertise in this area, and too often, we overlook
that expertise. So I am grateful you are here with us today.
The topic itself is one that holds a great deal of interest
for me, and I am, therefore, glad, Chairman Pitts, that we are
holding this hearing. Back home in Texas, we do have an 1115
waiver, had it for a number of years, and it has allowed a
positive transformation in care delivery.
Conserving State flexibility within Medicaid allows States
to structure their programs in a way that best meets their
population's needs. Every administration uses the 1115
negotiations to further their particular objectives, and thus,
maybe a discussion on more transparency is warranted. But for
this administration, Medicaid expansion has been the leading
factor, the number one factor, in negotiations. It has been
publicly noticed that even though the Supreme Court has ruled
that the administration may not coerce a State into expanding
its Medicaid under the ACA, that maybe, in fact, what is
happening when the State comes to talk about an 1115 waiver.
In April, the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services
explicitly linked funding for Florida's low-income pool to
Medicaid funding, although progress has been made recently.
Expansion is not a viable option in Texas, where it was
previously estimated that it would cost the State as much as
$27 billion over a decade.
Mr. Chairman, I am grateful we are holding the hearing
today, and look forward to the testimony of our witnesses and
their answering our questions.
I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
The ranking member of the full committee, Mr. Pallone, has
sent me a message. He said he would be late to get to the
hearing, would miss opening statements. He has asked to
designate Ms. Castor to have his opening statement time. So
without objection, Ms. Castor, you are recognized for 5 minutes
for your opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. KATHY CASTOR, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA

Ms. Castor. Well, thank you, Chairman Pitts and Ranking
Member Green, and thank you for calling this important hearing
on the Medicaid demonstration projects.
It was the Congress, through amendments to the Social
Security Act and laws relating to Medicaid, that granted States
new and broad flexibility to test what works. All States are
different. Through what are called the Section 1115 waivers, or
demonstration projects, States have great flexibility to
deliver care in more efficient ways. But each waiver has a time
limit, because demonstration projects are intended to be
analyzed to ensure they are working, and that they are using
taxpayer dollars wisely. And there are a couple of important
parameters. These are typically 5-year demonstration projects
with certain extensions, 3-year extensions. You negotiate with
CMS. And we say that the States, and these are some of the
principles, States and the Federal Government cannot spend more
than they would have spent without the waiver. And that is an
important safeguard on taxpayer dollars.
So I appreciate the GAO and your thoughtful analysis of
these waivers. It is very opaque to the average person. You
have advocated for more transparency and accountability.
Congress responded in the Affordable Care Act, and CMS has
followed through with that direction, but I think we can all
agree we still have more to do. So I will look forward to your
testimony today on how we can continue to work to make these
demonstration projects and waivers more transparent.
Now, many States have experimented with low-income pools,
these uncompensated pools of cash, where the local governments,
State Governments, Federal Government, pools money to pay for
uncompensated care. Now, the uncompensated care pools are
intended to support healthcare providers that provide
uncompensated care to uninsured and underinsured State
residents. They are not healthcare programs. They don't allow
people to get primary and preventative care, and they don't
protect people from financial harm resulting from medical debt,
and that is why they have come under great scrutiny. They were
very important before the adoption of the Affordable Care Act
because the uninsured levels across America were so high.
Hospitals, doctors, community health centers simply couldn't
cover the costs of uncompensated care without the help of the
low-income pool dollars. And these were especially vital to the
State of Florida as we transition from traditional Medicaid to
Medicaid managed care. And I was an advocate in past years for
very healthy, uncompensated care pools.
But now we are in a whole different world. With the broad
expansion of coverage under the Affordable Care Act, these
billions of dollars in pools of cash don't make financial sense
anymore. So CMS put States on notice some years ago. They put
Florida on notice in 2011 that the low-income pool would not
survive in its current form, because it doesn't make sense to
simply write a check to a hospital or a State that isn't as
financially responsible as providing coverage to your citizens.
After being on notice since 2011, Florida got a 1-year
extension of LIP until June 30, 2015, with the understanding
that it would conduct an independent review of its payment
system intended to allow for the development of a sustainable,
accountable, actuarially sound Medicaid payment system, and
that LIP would be different. Florida knew that it was expected
to change the way it pays providers, and provides health
services to its low-income residents. They got into trouble
this spring because the Governor, even though he was on notice,
included the full LIP uncompensated care pool number in his
budget, and the Republican-led State senate wanted a coverage
model, so they went into a budget impasse. And fortunately,
they have resolved it. Unfortunately, they did not adopt a
coverage model, and we are on notice that the LIP funds are
going to diminish over time. This will be an important lesson
for other States across the country. And we need to be--we need
to focus on coverage that is more financially secure for
States, the Federal Government, and eliminate this risk of
unnecessary expenditure of taxpayer dollars. So I will look
forward to the discussion on that today as well.
Thank you very much. I yield back my time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
That concludes the opening statements. As usual, the
written opening statements of the members will be included in
the record.
We have two panels today. And on our first panel we have
Ms. Katherine Iritani, Director of Health Care, the Government
Accountability Office. Thank you very much for coming. Your
written will be made a part of the record. You will have 5
minutes to summarize your testimony before questions. And so at
this point, you are recognized for 5 minutes for your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF KATHERINE M. IRITANI, DIRECTOR, HEALTH CARE,
GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Ms. Iritani. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Green, and
members of the subcommittee, I am pleased to be here to discuss
GAO's work on Medicaid demonstration spending. Demonstrations
comprise a significant and fast-growing component of the over-
$500 billion Medicaid Program. With the broad waiver and
spending authority conferred upon the Secretary of HHS under
Section 1115 comes responsibility for ensuring that
demonstrations further Medicaid objective and do not increase
Medicaid costs.
My testimony today is based on GAO's April report examining
HHS' approvals of new costs approved for 25 States'
demonstrations. I will also discuss a body of work from 2002 to
2014, examining HHS' review process for ensuring that
demonstrations do not raise Federal costs.
Based on this work, we have three main concerns with HHS
approvals. First, with transparency. HHS' bases for approvals
of new costs not otherwise eligible for Medicaid were not
always apparent in recent approvals. Nor have been the bases
for approved spending limits for the demonstrations which
govern total allowed spending. Second, accountability. HHS has
not issued specific criteria for how it determines that
approved spending is furthering Medicaid objectives, nor has
HHS issued specific criteria for how it reviews and approves
demonstration spending limits. Without criteria, stakeholders
and overseers may not share a common understanding of how major
decisions occur. The third concern, fiscal impact. Based on our
reviews and multiple demonstrations approvals, we have
longstanding concerns that the Secretaries approve spending
limits that could potentially increase Federal Medicaid costs
by tens of billions of dollars.
I will turn now to our report findings. In April, we
reported that HHS has approved States to obtain Federal
Medicaid funds for a broad range of purposes. Two prominent
types of new costs not otherwise eligible for Medicaid were
approved. The first was for State-operated programs. HHS
allowed five States to spend up to $9.5 billion for more than
150 State-operated programs that, prior to the demonstration,
were funded by the State and potentially other Federal sources.
The programs were wide-ranging in nature. They included
workforce education and training, insurance subsidy, housing,
licensing, loan repayment, and a broad array of public health
programs. The Federal Medicaid funds the States received could
replace some of the States' expenditures for the programs, and
free-up State funding for other purposes. HHS' approval
documents were not always clear about what the State programs
were for or how they related to Medicaid. Further, approvals
did not always provide assurances that new Medicaid funds for
these programs would be coordinated with other funding streams.
The second prominent type of spending approved was funding
pools to make new payments to hospitals and other providers for
broad purposes. HHS approved six States to spend up to $7.6
billion for funding pools for uncompensated care costs. Five
States were allowed to spend up to $18.8 billion for incentive
payments to providers to improve health care delivery and
infrastructure. Again, approval documents were not always clear
regarding how the spending would further Medicaid objectives,
and not duplicate other Federal funding streams.
Now let me to turn to our work on budget neutrality, which
examined the extent HHS has ensured that demonstrations will
not raise Federal costs. Our longstanding body of work
examining over 20 demonstrations found that HHS allowed most
States to use questionable assumptions and methods to project
how much their Medicaid program would cost without the
demonstration. Such projections, once approved, become the
basis for total spending allowed under the demonstration. In
our most recent reports in 2013 and '14, we estimated that HHS
approved spending for five States' demonstrations that was
about $33 billion higher than what the documentation supported.
In conclusion, Medicaid demonstrations provide HHS and
States a powerful tool for testing and evaluating new
approaches for improving the delivery of services to
beneficiaries. Medicaid demonstrations can also set precedents
that are adopted by other States, and raise potential for
overlap with other funding streams. Given the fast-growing and
significant amount of Federal spending governed by these
demonstrations, we believe there is an urgent need for improved
accountability and transparency in HHS' review and approval
process.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my statement, and I am happy
to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Iritani follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady. I will begin
the questioning and recognize myself 5 minutes for that
purpose.
Ms. Iritani, in your testimony you indicated that CMS has
four general criteria against which it reviews Section 1115
demonstrations to determine whether the Medicaid Program's
objectives are met. However, did anyone outside of CMS know
about these criteria until the GAO did its report?
Ms. Iritani. No. The first time we saw those criteria was
when CMS and HHS responded to a draft of our report.
Mr. Pitts. So to be clear, these criteria are not even in
regulation?
Ms. Iritani. Correct.
Mr. Pitts. So did CMS create them out of thin air, or where
did they come from?
Ms. Iritani. We asked for CMS' criteria during the course
of our review, and that criteria were not provided until they
reviewed a copy of the report.
Mr. Pitts. Now, you raised concerns that the criteria that
CMS enumerated for its review of the demonstration programs are
far too general. Can you please elaborate on these concerns,
explain the risk associated with the lack of more specific and
transparent criteria?
Ms. Iritani. The general criteria that CMS said that they
used included things like increasing and strengthening coverage
for low income and Medicaid, increasing access to and
stabilizing providers and provider networks available to
Medicaid and low income, improving health outcomes for Medicaid
and low income, increasing efficiency and quality care. We did
not believe that these criteria were sufficiently articulated
in terms of the link to Medicaid, and the documentation that we
reviewed regarding the approvals was not clear as to how they
made their decisions about what to approve.
Mr. Pitts. Now, the part of the Federal statute on 1115
waivers is very short; just four pages. So the Secretary of HHS
has tremendous latitude under the law to fund some
demonstration projects, while denying others. Are there any
statutory criteria requiring the Secretary to be consistent?
Ms. Iritani. There are not. The statute is quite broad with
regard to the Secretary's authority for approving purposes
that, in her or his judgment, further Medicaid objectives.
Mr. Pitts. What is to stop the agency from playing
favorites; picking winners and losers, via the waiver process?
Ms. Iritani. Well, we believe that more transparent
criteria and standards for approvals are needed, and more
oversight.
Mr. Pitts. Now, one of the worries that I and many of my
colleagues have is that the Medicaid Program too often promises
coverage, but effectively denies care. An NPR story this week
entitled, California's Medicaid Program Fails to Ensure Access
to Doctors, told the story of Terry Anderson. She signed up for
California's Medicaid Program earlier this year, hoping she
would finally get treatment for her high blood pressure, but
she faced challenges accessing care in a timely manner. Would
it make more sense for CMS to stop spending money on the low-
priority items, and free-up more Federal dollars for better
oversight and direct care for patients?
Ms. Iritani. We would agree that Medicaid funds should be
spent for Medicaid purposes. And the approval documentation
that we reviewed for the demonstrations did not articulate how
many of the approved expenditures were furthering Medicaid
objectives, which is why we have recommended that the Secretary
issue criteria as to how he or she assesses whether or not
approved spending is furthering Medicaid purposes.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady. My time has
expired.
The Chair recognizes the ranking member of the
subcommittee, Mr. Green, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you again for your testimony. We hear a lot of
criticism of the lack of flexibility of CMS for waivers, but
what I heard in your testimony and seen in multiple reports
going back decades is that many actually--maybe actually too
much flexibility in how the budget neutrality and other
features of waivers have been administered. My question is, GAO
is asking for clearer standards and more transparency, just
like CMS has recently taken steps to provide in its approach to
Florida and other States with uncompensated care pools. Is that
correct?
Ms. Iritani. That is correct.
Mr. Green. In reviewing the GAO's recommendation over the
last--recommendations over the last 20 years, it appears as
though your recommendations have remained the same until only
recently. Isn't it true that the majority of these
recommendations were not acted upon up until the Obama
administration and the Affordable Care Act, which placed many
of your recommendations into action?
Ms. Iritani. That is correct.
Mr. Green. OK. Given the large amount of Federal dollars at
stake in waivers, would you agree that it is important for CMS
to make it--to take its time in evaluating the proposals and
getting additional information from the States to ensure that
each State's proposal is for a project that is in line with the
objections--objectives of the statute?
Ms. Iritani. We would agree that there is more need for
transparency for criteria around how they make their decisions,
around better methods allowed for predicting how much the
Medicaid Program would cost without the demonstration, which
becomes the basis for the spending limits allowed.
Mr. Green. Well, and I don't think any up here would
disagree with we need more transparency in dealing from CMS
I want to clarify a point in your testimony that may be
misleading to some of my colleagues. GAO mentions that some of
the funds that go to the designated State health programs has
been supported by both political parties for more than a
decade, could have received funding from other Federal
sources--could that--the designated State health programs
receive funding from other Federal sources. As you may know or
may not know, it is very common for small programs to leverage
multiple funding streams to provide services. However, that is
concern--what is concerning is in this case, from my
understanding, the lack of documentations and potential,
therefore, for Medicaid Federal matching dollars to be given
based on other Federal funding not as a match for the State
dollars as is appropriate under the Medicaid Program. That
duplication of funds is the issue that GAO is concerned about.
Is that correct, Ms.----
Ms. Iritani. That is correct.
Mr. Green. OK. The GAO is not determining what is or is not
appropriate for Medicaid objective because that determination
lies with the Secretary of HHS. And our States--rather, the GAO
is recommending that better documentation reflect the tide of
Medicaid objectives for these funds, and that CMS ensure that
States are not drawing down Federal matching funds based on the
input of other sources of Federal funds. Is that pretty
accurate?
Ms. Iritani. Yes, that is correct. I think our concern with
the approval documentation around potential duplication was
that there was variation in the level of protections in the
approval documentation with regard to assuring that if programs
were receiving Federal funds from other sources, that they were
offsetting those against the Medicaid funds that they received.
Mr. Green. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back my
time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Ms.
Iritani, it is great to have you here.
And I have been focused on this budget waiver neutrality
debate, to the chagrin of some of some of my friends, and
actually I think my own State, because the concern has been,
since there is no transparency or clear answer, the premise is,
which I agree, properly done, that give States their authority
to meld their own program, you also get better outcomes and you
will get a savings. I mean that is what we are always told. And
if not a savings, there is an implied aspect in 1115 that says
at least it should be neutral, but for the past 10 years you
all have looked at this, and what have you found?
Ms. Iritani. Yes, we have found that the documentation did
not support that spending limits were budget neutral. We found
that it is likely that Federal Medicaid costs could be
increased significantly for Medicaid based on these
demonstration approvals.
Mr. Shimkus. So just using the facts of dollars, the
claims, they are not being substantiated by the facts. The
facts don't substantiate the claims that States have made that
we can build a better mousetrap, provide better care, and
actually have a savings to the Medicaid system.
Ms. Iritani. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. So--and again, to the chagrin of even my
State, because as--the State of Illinois, we are almost a
failed State these days. Our pension obligations far outstrip
per capita any in the union. Medicaid is also a big driver. So
there is sometimes an intent, I--so I am not being encouraged,
let me put it this way, to ask these questions on budget
neutrality because of, I think, a desire for the States to be
able to gain the system a little bit, based upon the vagueness
of what CMS is doing. And I hate to kind of tell--weave the
story this way, but it is--I think it is just a--it is a fact,
based upon the numbers.
So we have dropped a bill, H.R. 2119, I don't know if you
are familiar with it, and I know your position of not
commenting on legislation, but the intent of the bill is to do
at least an analysis and have the chief actuary of the CMS
certify that the proposed budget neutrality or implied savings
is actually there. I mean it is a guess, but at least it has
actuaries doing the number crunching to say, yes, we believe
the State, we think there is going to be a savings, at a
minimum there is going to be budget neutrality. If we brought
in and had that actuary analysis before a decision was
rendered, do you think that would be helpful?
Ms. Iritani. Yes, I think that what I can say is that, in a
recent--we have noted that the actuary isn't involved in the
process typically. In our most recent report in 2014, the--
which was looking at the budget neutrality of one State's
approval, we did note that the actuary was asked to review the
State's proposal, including the proposed spending limits and
the basis for it, and had raised questions with it, but was--
but--and asked for further documentation that was not provided
by the State. And the spending limit was approved, and we found
that it was likely going to raise Federal costs.
Mr. Shimkus. So, you know, that story kind of just supports
our concern and the reason why we dropped the bill, and it is a
very--it is very short. But what we require then is a
certification process by the actuaries which would then, I
think, empower them to make sure they get all the information
they need to be able to make a--to certify based upon the best
available information that this is going to be budget neutral
or, in essence, an implied savings.
So I appreciate you being here. It is a tough issue. Money
is always what you fight about. So thanks for coming.
I yield back my time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognize the gentlelady from California, Mrs. Capps, 5
minutes for questions.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing, and to our witness for your testimony. I am happy we
have this opportunity to come together to talk about these
important Medicaid waivers; something that has really, truly
helped my State respond creatively to its challenges and
provide healthcare coverage to many more than before.
Our Nation faces a significant challenge of caring for our
growing patient population with limited resources, and as was
mentioned, the challenge even with the number of providers
available to meet the needs. We must ensure that the Medicaid
Program has the flexibility through these waivers to address
these needs. As has been said, these waivers are negotiated
between the State and CMS, but especially as we have seen in
California, the agreement affects many more stakeholders once
it is in place. Recognizing this fact, the ACA included an
important provision to encourage broader stakeholder input
during the waiver process. Now there is a formulized process
for the broader coalition of stakeholders to contribute, and I
think that range of perspectives has created better and more
effective waiver programs. I think both sides of the aisle
agree that this aspect of transparency is so vitally important.
Ms. Iritani, can you talk more about how public comments
have helped and will help to increase transparency throughout
the Medicaid waiver process?
Ms. Iritani. Certainly. Yes, we raised concerns with the
lack of transparency in the approval process, dating back to
the early 2000s. In a report in 2002, we talked to a number of
different States and advocacy groups and others about
demonstrations that had been recently approved that
significantly affected beneficiaries, and found that there are
great concerns about groups even being able to see a copy of
the proposal prior to the approval. In some cases, I think that
there were FOIAs involved to try to get transparency over what
was being approved. And the Patient Protection Affordable Care
Act did require a public input process at the Federal level,
which we think greatly enhances transparency of what is being
proposed, and provides for input to the process prior to the
approval. So we would agree that that is an important reform.
Mrs. Capps. And so you have seen progress since this has
been initiated?
Ms. Iritani. We have not looked at public----
Mrs. Capps. You are not----
Ms. Iritani [continuing]. Input since----
Mrs. Capps [continuing]. Measuring it.
Ms. Iritani [continuing]. Since the law was passed. But----
Mrs. Capps. OK.
Ms. Iritani. But we----
Mrs. Capps. Do you intend to?
Ms. Iritani [continuing]. We agree that it has increased
transparency.
Mrs. Capps. I mean, how are States responding to these kind
of comments?
Ms. Iritani. We have looked at that. In terms of how are
States responding to the proposals?
Mrs. Capps. The proposals and the process of the whole
transparency issues.
Ms. Iritani. We have not looked at that, at how States are
responding to the process.
Mrs. Capps. Do you see this as part of your overall
objective, or is it up to somebody else to do this piece of it?
Ms. Iritani. Well, we would be happy to look at that. The
work that we have been requested to do in recent years has
focused on budget neutrality and the new costs that were
approved in the demonstrations.
Mrs. Capps. Which is a lot to be assigned to and be----
Ms. Iritani. Yes.
Mrs. Capps [continuing]. Grappling with in light
especially, in my view, of the total, I won't say overwhelm,
but increase in volume. I mean there has really been a sea
change. You want to explain--I have a few more seconds left,
and what are some of the issues that you have faced, or how has
this process been received?
Ms. Iritani. The public input process?
Mrs. Capps. Right.
Ms. Iritani. Well, you know, as I say, we haven't looked at
it since it was implemented, but we did look at the regulations
that implemented it and agree that it was responsive to our
recommendations that they provide for a Federal input process.
Mrs. Capps. Um-hum. So we are on the path, but it is early
yet to interpret any results, is that what I am hearing you
say?
Ms. Iritani. I would say it is an important step to
improving transparency, yes.
Mrs. Capps. Right, but we need to keep checking back and--
do you have the means by which you can accomplish some of these
goals?
Ms. Iritani. I would be happy to work with the subcommittee
on work----
Mrs. Capps. Thank you.
Ms. Iritani [continuing]. Looking at that.
Mrs. Capps. I thank you for the time. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
Now recognize the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Dr. Murphy,
5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. I am over. Good morning. It is good
to be with you, and thank you for your work.
I want to ask about one demonstration project that was
authorized in the Affordable Care Act that relates to the
Institution for Mental Disease exclusion, IMD exclusions, for
emergency care for people with psychiatric conditions. As part
of comprehensive mental health reform, this committee will be
deciding and considering modifications in these IMD exclusions
to increase access to timely and cost-effect short-term
psychiatric care as opposed to boarding in emergency rooms, and
that is what I understand is the demonstration report that is--
was worked on for that study.
Can you tell the committee, if you are aware of this, what
CMS has learned from current Medicaid emergency psychiatric
demonstrations, and which created an exception for this IMD
exclusion for adult Medicaid enrollees who have been determined
to have emergency psychiatric conditions? Are you aware of any
of this?
Ms. Iritani. I am not. That demonstration was not within
the scope of our work.
Mr. Murphy. Is that something that you would be able to
look at, because it is--was one of the demonstration programs?
Is it totally excluded from your work to review that?
Ms. Iritani. I believe that that is a separately
authorized--not under the 1115----
Mr. Murphy. Well, let me ask a little bit more about this
because I mean I value your input on this----
Ms. Iritani. Um-hum.
Mr. Murphy [continuing]. But I understand the final
evaluation though for the demonstration will be completed in
the fall of 2016, so it is still ongoing. Do you have any
advice or suggestions you could make to this committee to help
us shape how we review these to make the most effective
policies, for example, on these IMD exclusions? Is that
something you would be able to advise us on?
Ms. Iritani. Well, I need to see more specific information,
but yes, we would be happy to talk to the subcommittee about
new work on this----
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
Ms. Iritani [continuing]. Issue.
Mr. Murphy. And also with CMS support, extending the
current Medicaid emergency psychiatric demonstration until at
least the final evaluation is available. The--because we have
an initial 2013 report, but we don't have--I mean the rest is
going to take some more time. And what we see is in the States
involved, because we limit hospitals to have less than 17 beds
because it seems to only cover people who are suicide or the
most severe cases, it still leaves us in a position where we
are having problems putting these pieces together. We want to
provide effective care for people, we want to do it in the most
cost-effective way, but also recognizing that you can be cost-
effective--you can do cost care without providing anything. We
don't want to do that. We want to make sure we are providing
effective services. And believe that the Government
Accountability Office is a record of really helping us look at
and analyze those numbers, so I would be grateful if that is
something you could help us with. It is a key issue that this
committee has got to deal with, because otherwise what happens
with Medicaid, for people ages 22 to 64, is they have nowhere
to go. We had a recent hearing in this subcommittee where
Senator Creigh Deeds of Virginia was here. His case was one
where he took his son to a hospital in Virginia, and the
hospital said we don't have any beds. And what happens so often
is these men and women are--they may be boarded in an emergency
room, they may be tied to a bed, if they are assaultive they
may be given chemical sedatives, and they say there is just no
room, and it is this Medicaid rule which was based upon closing
down those old institutions and hopefully having some other
support services. If we close the institutions down, we don't
have enough hospitals because Medicaid has said you can't have
them. And so in his case, he took his son home. His son took a
knife and tried to kill his father. Slashed him up pretty bad.
Father escaped. Luckily, some driver picked him up as he was
running up, but unfortunately, his son killed himself.
Now, I know that these aren't the cost-effective measures
that GAO looks at, but it is something we all care deeply
about. How do you put a number on that? How does he put a
number on his son's life? And given the 40,000 suicides that
occurred in this country last year, given the 43,000 drug
overdose deaths that occurred in this country last year, those
numbers are staggering and they are getting worse every year,
so we have to effect this.
So your input, GAO's input, I would value greatly as we
help address this to find--to look at these numbers and costs
and saying this is not acceptable to this committee, it is not
acceptable to this country. Quite frankly, it is not acceptable
to the human race that we have done this, and the outcomes too
often are death.
I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
And now recognize the gentleman from Oregon, Mr. Schrader,
5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Iritani, what is the rate of Medicaid reimbursement
compared to private insurance coverage in general?
Ms. Iritani. That is going to vary by service and State.
Oftentimes, fee-for-service Medicaid rates may be lower, but
again, it is going to vary.
Mr. Schrader. They are pretty--they are always lower, and
significantly lower. I know in my State it is very dramatic. It
is hard to get providers sometimes to see Medicaid patients
unless they are a mix because the rate is, you know, almost \1/
2\, and sometimes not even covering the cost of these services.
What is the rate of--well, is there a general rate of
medical inflation that GAO uses to estimate savings when they
are evaluating these different programs and----
Ms. Iritani. We apply HHS' own criteria for how States
should develop spending limits, and that criteria is that
States should project what Medicaid will cost, which becomes
the basis for the spending limit, based on the lower of either
the State's historical spending trends in recent years, or the
President's budget projections of Medicaid growth for the
Nation as used in the President's budget.
Mr. Schrader. But wouldn't you say it is always more than
the general rate of inflation?
Ms. Iritani. I----
Mr. Schrader. Medical inflation is generally higher than
regular inflation.
Ms. Iritani. I cannot----
Mr. Schrader. Well, the answer is yes.
Ms. Iritani. OK.
Mr. Schrader. I mean there is not a State in this country
that----
Ms. Iritani. Um-hum.
Mr. Schrader [continuing]. Doesn't budget for a higher rate
of medical inflation for its healthcare programs compared to
services and supplies----
Ms. Iritani. Uh-huh.
Mr. Schrader [continuing]. You know. My State was easily 3,
4, or sometimes 5 times, historically----
Ms. Iritani. Um-hum.
Mr. Schrader [continuing]. Prior to the advent of the ACA,
which has now driven down healthcare expenditure increases
dramatically. A little shocked that GAO doesn't have this
information, actually.
Isn't it correct that, for these designated State health
programs, that these have been around a long time? Not recent--
--
Ms. Iritani. Some of the approvals----
Mr. Schrader [continuing]. Figment of this--
Ms. Iritani. Some of the original approvals of the
demonstrations we reported on in our recent report had been
approved years ago, yes.
Mr. Schrader. So prior to this administration?
Ms. Iritani. Yes.
Mr. Schrader. OK. Good. Good. And isn't it accurate that
CMS, with your latest report, has agreed with most all of your
recommendations and is inclined to supposedly work to improve
them?
Ms. Iritani. Yes, we had three recommendations around
issuing criteria about how to further Medicaid demonstration
objectives around improving the documentation about how they
apply that criteria, and about making sure that they
consistently provided assurances and approvals that there
wouldn't be duplication of funding.
Mr. Schrader. Good.
Ms. Iritani. And they agreed with two of those,
documentation-related recommendations. They partially agreed
with the first one, indicating that they had general criteria
that they used. They did not commit to issuing criteria.
Mr. Schrader. And I guess I have a concern as I listened to
your testimony and some of the queries by some of my
colleagues. I am a little concerned we are--you are encouraging
CMS to actually get into the micromanagement of these State
waivers, and I think that is a big concern. Criteria defining
how States have to have, or have to have certain procedures in
place, and--shouldn't we be outcome-based, shouldn't we be
outcome-focused, don't we just want to see more coverage for
more people, better healthcare outcomes? I mean that is
something that my colleagues and I can evaluate. Some of my
medical physician colleagues, they perhaps have the greater
degree of understanding, but for those of us in the lay field,
I feel more comfortable evaluating the outcomes, not defining
criteria by which these States, who we are trying to give more
flexibility to give better coverage to more people over the
long-haul. That really should be the goal. I am concerned that
CMS may interpret, or my colleagues may interpret, your queries
as to wanting to micromanage these States, and I think that is
the wrong way to go. I think that is really the wrong way to
go. Don't you feel that outcomes are the most important
criteria by which we should judge success in these programs?
Ms. Iritani. I would agree that improved outcomes for
Federal spending is important. Healthcare costs are increasing
and we are concerned about the long-term sustainability of the
Medicaid Program. The--our work has really focused on the
spending aspect and the approvals of the spending. And
certainly, I think the goal of many demonstrations is to
improve outcomes, but given the longstanding policy that they
not raise Federal costs, I think that has been the focus of our
work, and that is where we think reforms are needed because it
is the long-term sustainability of the program that is--could
be at risk.
Mr. Schrader. I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognizes Dr. Burgess 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And just picking up on Representative Schrader's questions,
and the observation of outcomes versus micromanagement at CMS,
we as physicians are always held to the standard we are going
to pay for performance, and we are going to pay for value not
volume. Do you ever provide or look to a pay-for-performance
standard for CMS when evaluating these programs?
Ms. Iritani. We have not looked at that, but I know some of
the demonstrations I think are evaluating that.
Mr. Burgess. Well, it just seems like, again, we are all
too willing to burden every physician across the land with new
requirements, and yet never ask the same of the bureaucracy,
and really, we ought to be for patients before we are for the
bureaucracy.
I do have a question, it may require an answer in writing,
but let me pose it to you. And I will get it to you in writing
because the answer may be longer than time will permit us to do
here. But we have heard several times this morning that
applying for one of these waivers, an 1115 waiver, can be
burdensome, time-consuming. I know it happened in Texas. Mr.
Bucshon referenced Indiana. Can you discuss ways in which the
Department of Health and Human Services could streamline the
approval process for the 1115 waiver?
Ms. Iritani. Our work is really focused on the approval
processes for the spending, and we have examined the approval
times, which vary greatly among demonstrations. There are many
factors that we have been told contribute to that.
Mr. Burgess. Well--but I would like, if you would, and I
apologize for interrupting because--but time is short, I would
like your evaluation of why that variability exists. Again, we
in health care, if we had that degree, or when we have that
degree of variability, people are always willing to ask
questions and point fingers at us, just like that same standard
applied to CMS when issuing these waivers. Just very briefly,
according to your report, the Department of Health and Human
Services actually did not have specific criteria for these 1115
waivers. Now they do, but do you have a sense of what the
criteria was before you issued your report?
Ms. Iritani. They did not have any written criteria
regarding how they made these approvals.
Mr. Burgess. So it was flip a coin, draw straws, just how I
feel that morning when I get up? No criteria at all?
Ms. Iritani. Officials told us that it wasn't within the
Secretary's interests to specify criteria.
Mr. Burgess. Well, that brings up the point, because we
kind of watched what is happening down in Florida, and now that
expansion of Medicaid is the number 1 issue for the Obama
administration going forward, this is the sine qua non of
President Obama's legacy is the expansion of Medicaid. It
really does seem like that power is being brought to bear on a
State that had a functional 1115 waiver for their low-income
pool, now it needs to be re-upped but the pressure is coming
that you have to do something different that you haven't been
doing before. Am I wrong to get that impression?
Ms. Iritani. Well, we would agree that transparency is
needed in the approvals and approval process, and the criteria
that is used, and our concerns have been longstanding based on
reviews of many, many States' demonstrations.
Mr. Burgess. Well, the good news for both of us is that
this is the most transparent administration in the history of
the country, so we, I guess, can take some degree of solace on
that.
The question about the neutrality, and you brought that up
a couple of times, when approaching and approving these 1115
waivers, but GAO has had some concerns about this, actually
going back into 2008, into the Bush administration. Center for
Medicare and Medicaid Services has consistently asserted the
policies are adequate and applied consistently, but really, to
me, they are not. Could you share with us, and again, this may
be an answer in writing because of time, but can you share with
us ways that you think Congress could use to remedy this issue?
Ms. Iritani. Yes, we believe congressional intervention
would be helpful in this case. As I mentioned in my statement,
our concerns about the approvals are longstanding. I think we
have a report dating back to the mid-'90s on the budget
neutrality process raising concerns, and the Secretary has
consistently disagreed with our recommendations to reform the
criteria and process around approving the spending limits. So
we have elevated the recommendations that we made to the
Secretary about improving the process as a matter for
congressional consideration.
Mr. Burgess. Well, I thank the gentlelady for her
testimony. I will submit those questions in writing.
And, Mr. Chairman, if I could, if you would yield to me for
a unanimous consent request?
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman may proceed.
Mr. Burgess. Chairman, I request unanimous consent to enter
into the record a letter by my attorney general in Texas, Ken
Paxton, several other attorneys general, about the issue of the
1115 waivers. And I would ask----
Ms. Castor. And, Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Burgess [continuing]. For its inclusion in the record.
Ms. Castor [continuing]. I reserve the right to object.
Mr. Pitts. All right. The----
Mr. Burgess. Again, I make the unanimous consent request--
--
Mr. Pitts. He has made----
Mr. Burgess [continuing]. As a matter of----
Mr. Pitts [continuing]. The unanimous consent request. Do
you object?
Ms. Castor. I would just like to make a short statement,
and then I would----
Mr. Pitts. All right, the Chair recognizes the gentlelady.
Ms. Castor. I just want to point out that part of that
letter is inaccurate when it comes to the State of Florida and
what transpired there, since the State of Florida was on notice
since 2011 that it was unlikely that the low-income pool was
likely to survive in its current form, and due to the fact that
CMS and the State of Florida have, in fact, negotiated the
matter. The State did not expand Medicaid, and the LIP does
survive. This simply points to the fact that we have all got to
work harder to make sure we are working on behalf of the
taxpayers. GAO has been critical of not allowing Federal
waivers to spend extra money, and we have all got to be mindful
of that. And if we take this tact that States have coverage,
but they get these uncompensated care pools that don't have
much accountability and transparency, that is not going to
serve Medicaid patients very well, and the congressional intent
to be strict and wise with taxpayer dollars.
But at this time, I will remove my objection. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you.
Without objection, the letter is entered into the record.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognizes the gentlelady, Ms. Castor, 5 minutes for
her questions.
Ms. Castor. Yes, I just have a quick question. The
transparency regulations also require States to be more
transparent; have hearings, have comment periods, but this is
so difficult for folks who rely on Medicaid services back home,
because remember, Medicaid really it serves primarily children,
the disabled population, elderly in nursing homes, especially
for States that have an expanded Medicaid. They have
transitioned now, many States, to Medicaid managed care. And
what I hear from folks at home is it is very difficult to have
any real idea on where accountability lies, where they can go
for recourse when they have an issue. For example, I had a
woman in my office from Florida last week who has a severely
autistic son, and she--under managed care, they have changed
providers and she hasn't had the ability to weigh-in with
policymakers on how care is going to be delivered to her son
and other families.
Here is another example, doctors are extremely frustrated.
I had a pediatric dentist in my office just a few weeks ago
from Florida. He does the Lord's work in taking care of
hundreds and hundreds of children across my State and their
dental health care needs. And that is smart because you take
care of dental health needs and you save the State and Federal
Government money down the road. But they do not have any
recourse into inquiring at the State level what is happening
with changes in demonstration projects and waivers. Can the GAO
take a closer look at how States can do a better job? Have you
done that and what recommendations do you have to help these
families, patients and providers, have more access to what is
happening?
Ms. Iritani. We haven't looked at the public input process
since the year 2000s. We haven't been asked to, but we would be
happy to work with your staff regarding re-examining how things
are working.
As I said earlier, we thought that the Federal input
process that was provided for in recent legislation was a very
good step because, before, it was really just up to the States
to get input, and that was often difficult for beneficiaries
and others to weigh-in.
Ms. Castor. I will look forward to doing that with you.
Thank you. I yield back my time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
Now recognize the gentlelady from North Carolina, Mrs.
Ellmers, 5 minutes for questions.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Ms.
Iritani, for being here today with us.
You know, based on your testimony and some of the questions
and discussion today, it looks like CMS is creating overlap and
duplication through its funding of State health programs. Under
Section 1115, basically CMS is authorizing Federal matching
funds for State programs, despite the fact that other Federal
agencies already provide funding for these causes. It would
seem that we are duplicating billions of dollars.
With that, could you discuss the steps that CMS is taking
to ensure that the funding of these State-based programs does
not result in overlap of duplication of Federal funding?
Ms. Iritani. We found really mixed results in what CMS was
doing in the documentation around--providing for assurances
that the new spending that they were approving for the
demonstrations would not duplicate other Federal funding
sources. There were some States where the documentation would
actually provide for a specific weighing-out of the different
funding streams----
Mrs. Ellmers. Um-hum.
Ms. Iritani [continuing]. And requirements on how to
offset----
Mrs. Ellmers. Um-hum.
Ms. Iritani [continuing]. The Medicaid funds with other
Federal funding streams, but in many cases, there wasn't such a
requirement, which raised concerns to us.
Mrs. Ellmers. In your report, it lists 150 State programs
for which CMS authorized Federal Medicaid funding, and many of
the programs, based on their name, appear to be worthwhile and
for good causes. I would like you to expand on how some of
these programs promote Medicaid's objectives. And I want to
give you three examples, and if you can just help us understand
how this fits into the Medicaid space and should be approved
for funding. How about licensing fees in Oregon?
Ms. Iritani. Yes, you know, the point of our report is that
we could not tell how that and other examples of the State
programs that were approved actually related to Medicaid
objectives.
Mrs. Ellmers. So the other two now: one example I have,
healthcare workforce retaining in New York. Now, certainly, we
need a good, strong health workforce. Do you feel that that
fits into the Medicaid space as well?
Ms. Iritani. We felt like many of the approvals that CMS
had approved were on their face only tangentially related to
Medicaid.
Mrs. Ellmers. Um-hum. Um-hum.
Ms. Iritani. And without any criteria about how the
Secretary was making these decisions----
Mrs. Ellmers. Um-hum.
Ms. Iritani [continuing]. We could not----
Mrs. Ellmers. Determine.
Ms. Iritani [continuing]. Make an assessment.
Mrs. Ellmers. Yes. And then the last one I have is
Fisherman's Partnership in Massachusetts. I am like you, I am
just going to assume that you are going to say that also fits
into that same characterization.
Ms. Iritani. Yes.
Mrs. Ellmers. And lastly, I just want to ask a little bit
about the broad authority of the 1115 statute. What are the
outer boundaries that the Secretary has to approve Medicaid
funding?
Ms. Iritani. The 1115 authority is very broad, and gives
the Secretary discretion to waive certain Medicaid requirements
in 1902, i.e., the Social Security Act, and approve new costs
that are not otherwise eligible for Medicaid that, in the
Secretary's judgment, are likely to promote Medicaid
objectives. It is a broad authority.
Mrs. Ellmers. I think that probably is about the best
characterization. It is quite a broad authority, and gives
quite an incredible amount of discretion.
Well, thank you, Ms. Iritani.
That is all I have, Mr. Chairman. Thank you. I yield back
the remainder of my time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
Now recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. Cardenas,
for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Appreciate
this opportunity to go through these issues, Ms. Iritani.
I hear of some of the concerns about budget neutrality, but
I also understand that CMS has taken new steps to make their
approach to budget neutrality more transparent and enhance
understanding between CMS and the States. On October 5, 2012,
the released a Section 1115 template for States to use in order
to clarify the requirements and simplify the application
process. This template includes instructions and an
accompanying budget worksheet that provides guidance on some of
the most commonly used data elements for demonstrating budget
neutrality.
That being the case, is this a step in the right direction?
Ms. Iritani. We would still maintain that much more is
needed. That template that was issued provides guidance, but it
is a voluntary--States do not need to use it. And CMS' written
policy is quite outdated in terms of their typical practices
for what they review and how they review things and what data
they require, and we believe that more reforms to those things
are needed to ensure that there is more consistency and
approvals.
Mr. Cardenas. Is it the case that, prior to October 2012,
that HHS had not issued anything like this?
Ms. Iritani. As far as I know, yes.
Mr. Cardenas. OK. Well--so hopefully, what that means is
HHS recognizes the--that they need to have a better
transparency and understanding, and--with everybody involved
when it comes to their responsibilities in giving the States
this flexibility, correct?
Ms. Iritani. I--the Secretary has consistently disagreed
with our recommendations that any sort of reforms to their
process for reviewing are needed, and this dates back to the
early 2000s when we first made recommendations to the Secretary
around transparency. And we have multiple reports, there is a
list attached to my testimony statement, dating back to the
mid-'90s. And regarding our recommendations to the Secretary on
transparency and accountability in the review and approval of
spending limits, the Secretary has consistently disagreed that
anything is needed.
Mr. Cardenas. Can you give us an example of one of those
statements of disagreement, based on your reports?
Ms. Iritani. We have recommended that the Secretary issue
criteria for how they review and approve the spending limits,
and provide for better documentation regarding the basis for
approvals of the spending limits and make that publicly
available, as well as ensure that States are required to use
appropriate methods for projecting Medicaid costs.
Mr. Cardenas. Um-hum.
Ms. Iritani. And the Secretary has indicated that--
generally has disagreed with--that any of those reforms are
needed to the process. And that is why we have elevated our
recommendations to the Congress as a matter for consideration
to require the Secretary to do these things.
Mr. Cardenas. So those objections on behalf of the
Secretary based on those recommendations, are--was there any
indication that it is something that they couldn't do, or just
something that they disagree with? Because one of the problems
that I have experienced being a policymaker for 18-plus years
now is that it is one thing to make recommendations to a
department or a Government entity, and it is another thing for
them to admit that if we had the resources, maybe we would do
so, but we don't have the people power or the resources to
actually implement those recommendations. Is there any
indication whatsoever that resources are an issue as well, on
behalf of the department?
Ms. Iritani. That has not been something that the Secretary
has said. I think that their response has generally been that
they are--they use consistent criteria, and that they have
treated States consistently, and that they believe that their
current policy and practices do not need reform.
Mr. Cardenas. And overall, are you aware of States overall
on balance not appreciating that flexibility, or that they do,
in fact, want to continue that flexibility relationship with
HHS and the individual States?
Ms. Iritani. We have not, you know, discussed with States
the spending limit process particularly but, you know, given
that the Secretary has authority to approve new costs not
otherwise matchable, and to approve spending limits that may be
much higher than what, you know, the State has justified, I
would think States would actually embrace it. But our concern,
again, is with the long-term fiscal sustainability of Medicaid
and, you know, how this affects the Federal budget and Federal
taxpayers.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you. I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognize the gentleman from Indiana, Dr. Bucshon, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As a physician who has taken care of Medicaid patients for,
you know, a couple of decades, this hearing is very valuable to
me today. I want to point out that, you know, Medicaid is a
critical program that we need to--that our citizens need and--
but clearly, we need more oversight. I do want to point out
that, in my view though, the traditional Medicaid is not good
insurance coverage, and that has been shown already with the
Medicaid expansion, under the Affordable Care Act where
emergency room visits are actually up, not down, across the
country. That is not my opinion, that is factual. And when I
was a practicing physician, when I first came to Evansville,
Indiana, there wasn't a single fellowship trained OB/GYN that
would take a Medicaid patient in our community. Now, that has
changed some now that physicians have been essentially kind of
forced into being employed by hospitals, especially in that
area. In one of the surrounding States surrounding Indiana,
some of the anesthesiologists in my hospital didn't even both
to bill Medicaid for the care that they provided for those
patients because the State ran out of money before the end of
the year, and the reimbursement was so low it didn't even make
sense to spend the administrative costs to bill them.
So that said, some of the things you pointed out about
where waivers are using--it appears to be given with no
specific approval criteria. It is not in a rule, it is not in a
statute, it is not in a law, and that has resulted in some
money, billions of dollars, being spent on non-Medicaid really
type spending that should be associated with that program.
Further, spending money that could be used for direct patient
care, as has been pointed out by a number of members. So it
seems to me that specifically legislation likely is needed.
Would you agree or disagree with that?
Ms. Iritani. Well, we would agree that congressional
intervention would--and oversight is--would be important to
addressing these issues.
Mr. Bucshon. Yes. And some States, as you probably know,
have been operating under an 1115 waiver for decades, and some
have suggested that as part of that process, Congress create a
process where longstanding core elements of an 1115 waiver can
effective be grandfathered into the State's State plan
amendment, which directs the operation of the program. Do you
have any thoughts on that?
Ms. Iritani. I do not have a comment. Our work has not
looked at that kind of process.
Mr. Bucshon. Because it seems to me, I mean if you have a
program in your State that is working, and you have been
getting waivers for decades sometimes, that--during the, you
know, how we utilize the Medicaid Program, we should just
change it so that we don't have to continue to ask for these
waivers. And, you know, Healthy Indian Plan 2.0, which was put
into place after the original Healthy Indiana Plan was
successful, and has data to prove so, you know, we had to fight
for 2 years to get a waiver for something that has been shown
to be effective, and also that the patients, over 90 percent,
approve of. And it actually saved probably 2 or 3 percent in
our Medicaid budget in our State, and has allowed us to cover
individuals with a--low-income individuals with a program not--
that is not traditional Medicaid, that actually reimburses
providers at a level that they can accept. And so it actually
is increasing access to patient care.
So I don't have a specific question, other than those
comments. I think that many of the questions I have asked--I
were--was going to ask have been answered, but just to say
that, you know, it really is hard to believe that after decades
of recommendations from you all, that we are still wasting
money in the--it seems, in the Medicaid Program, at the same
time where the reimbursement rates to providers is limiting
access to direct care for patient. And it seems to me, Mr.
Chairman, that we are going to need legislative action.
I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognize the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Griffith, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for being
here this morning.
Despite the fact that CBO has indicated that under
ObamaCare, ACA's Medicaid expansion would, on balance, reduce
incentives to work, and that a work requirement component for
the able-bodied would increase available resources for
Americans. To date, CMS has refused to approve work
requirements as a part of Republican State demonstration
waivers. Is there anything in the Section 1115 statute that
would prevent CMS from approving work-related requirements?
Ms. Iritani. We have not encountered that kind of proposal
in the work that we have done, so I can't comment on the
Secretary's authority in that case. But as I mentioned, the
1115 does provide the Secretary with quite broad authority.
Mr. Griffith. So a cursory view would not be unreasonable
for some of us to think that that broad authority would not
preclude a work component requirement for the able-bodied?
Ms. Iritani. As I said, we haven't encountered that kind of
requirement in our work, so I can't comment on that.
Mr. Griffith. I appreciate that.
Since 1115 demonstration programs are intended to be
experimental or pilot projects to test new ways of providing
services, it is my understanding that each demonstration is to
be evaluated. Has GAO reviewed the evaluations of demonstration
programs, and if so, what have those evaluations taught about
the ways to reform the Medicaid Program to provide better
access and services to beneficiaries?
Ms. Iritani. We have not been asked to look at that
component of the demonstration, but you are correct, these
demonstrations are supposed to be evaluations and have an
evaluation component. We did, in the mid-'90s, in a report,
discuss the major impact that some of these demonstrations had
on beneficiaries and other things, and looked at the progress
reports that States were submitting to CMS and also the
planning for the evaluations, and found both were lacking. We
made recommendations to the Secretary to improve both those
things, and we have not since been asked to look at that.
Mr. Griffith. Did they ever get back to you and say that
they had implemented your recommendations that you made back in
the mid-'90s?
Ms. Iritani. They agreed with the recommendations at the
time, and then at some point, and this is years ago, I think
they said they were no longer--reform was no longer needed.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you. I know that as a part of waiver
renewal, some States send CMS evaluation reports that may be
posted on the CMS Web site. Do you know if CMS also conducts
its own analysis?
Ms. Iritani. We haven't look at evaluations for years, so I
can't comment on that.
Mr. Griffith. All right. So you don't know if they are
doing their own evaluations----
Ms. Iritani. Well, what I do----
Mr. Griffith [continuing]. Because of what the State says?
Ms. Iritani. What I do know from our work from the----
Mr. Griffith. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Iritani [continuing]. Mid-2000s is that, you know, the
demonstration terms are typically 5 years, but they can be
less, and that, you know, CMS required at the time that the
State plan an evaluation and that they also, because they
wanted to understand how the demonstrations were working and if
information was being collected to actually do the evaluation,
they required progress reports. But, you know, that is, again,
where we found that the progress reports weren't always, you
know, complete or being turned in timely, et cetera. So we feel
like the evaluation component of the, you know, the
demonstration is--already is an important one.
Mr. Griffith. And, of course, if CMS doesn't do their own
evaluation of those demonstrations, it is kind of hard for them
to really assess it if they are just relying on the States.
I do appreciate you being here today. Appreciate your
testimony. Thank you so much for answering my questions.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognize the vice chairman of the subcommittee, Mr.
Guthrie, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
for yielding. And thank you for being here today and answering
the questions.
I want to talk about the budget neutrality policy. In your
testimony, you indicated that one of the problems with CMS'
implementation of its budget neutrality is that it allowed some
States to include hypothetical costs. Can you provide--define
hypothetical costs that CMS has implemented and some examples
of that?
Ms. Iritani. Sure. There are two main components to
basically the budget neutrality process and projecting the cost
of Medicaid without the demonstration, which becomes a basis
for the spending limit that would be allowed. One is a spending
base, which is by the policy supposed to be based on actual
historical expenditures for Medicaid in the State for the
recent year. The other is the growth rates that project costs
over the course of the demonstration.
CMS has, since we first started looking at this issue in
the mid-'90s, allowed hypothetical costs that is in the
spending base, so they would allow States to project or use
baselines based on not what they were actually covering,
historical costs, in their Medicaid Program, but what they
could potentially cover, for example, populations, hypothetical
populations that they could cover under the flexibility under
the Medicaid Program, but were not covering, or payment rates.
In more recent demonstrations we found that CMS has allowed
States to assume that they would be paying providers more than
they were actually paying, as part of their baseline for
developing the spending limits.
Mr. Guthrie. And then so is there anything that stops CMS
from applying budget neutrality to one State but not another
State? Could they favor one State over another in the way they
apply budget neutrality? Anything to stop them from doing that?
And could this cost--you know, this seems to cost--could cost
billions by allowing hypothetical costs.
Ms. Iritani. There are tens of billions of dollars being
approved in these demonstrations, and a lack of transparency
over the basis.
Mr. Guthrie. So they could favor one State over--there is
nothing to prevent them from favoring one State over another in
that--they make the decision on a State-by-State basis I guess
is--and so they could----
Ms. Iritani. I think oversight----
Mr. Guthrie. Needs to be----
Ms. Iritani. Oversight.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. So what would GAO say to the charge that
some have made that budget neutrality would prevent CMS from
making an important investment in State innovations?
Ms. Iritani. Could you repeat the question?
Mr. Guthrie. So what would GAO say to the charge that some
have made that budget neutrality prevents CMS from making
important investments in some State innovations?
Ms. Iritani. Well, the whole concept of budget neutrality
is that States would figure out how to innovate and get
flexibility from traditional Medicaid rules, but within their
current constraints of what they have been spending for
Medicaid. I think it is one thing to innovate when you are
getting a lot more money to do so.
Mr. Guthrie. Um-hum.
Ms. Iritani. It is another thing to innovate with, you
know, with flexibility around Medicaid's traditional
requirements, but creating efficiencies in doing so and not
raising costs for the program. And we think that is a very
important concept again----
Mr. Guthrie. Um-hum.
Ms. Iritani [continuing]. Getting back to the long-term
sustainability of the program.
Mr. Guthrie. But if one State is receiving X amount of
dollars and they want to innovate, and they say you can
innovate within that X amount of dollars, but if one State is
receiving X amount of dollars and CMS says you get X amount of
dollars plus hypothetical cost dollars, that could be applied
on a State-by-State and not consistent, correct? So that
essentially, a State is getting more money to innovate, is
that--am I reading that wrong----
Ms. Iritani. Well----
Mr. Guthrie [continuing]. Or understanding that wrong?
Ms. Iritani. Yes, different States ask--develop their
spending limits different ways.
Mr. Guthrie. Well, thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
And now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Bilirakis, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Appreciate it very
much. Thank you for your testimony.
In Florida, we recently finished getting an 1115 waiver
with CMS. I am sure you are aware. It was a long hard process
that included a State lawsuit against the Federal Government
over the process. Florida has had an uncompensated care fund
which we call the LIP, the Low-Income Pool, for our Medicaid
Program for almost a decade now. What should have been a simple
process, in my opinion, to renew that fund turned into a long,
drawn-out affair by CMS who decided to change the rules this
year.
Ms. Iritani, when HHS reviews and issues 1115 waivers, do
they follow precedent established with other approvals, or is
every application reviewed from the beginning?
Ms. Iritani. If I understand the question, is it when HHS
approves a demonstration, does that set precedent for others?
Mr. Bilirakis. Yes, for others and maybe previous
applications for that particular State as well. Or is that--do
we have to start from the beginning?
Ms. Iritani. Well, we have----
Mr. Bilirakis. First with others. Yes.
Ms. Iritani. Well, we haven't look at differences in, you
know, how HHS approves new approvals versus extensions versus
amendments, which are all different ways that HHS can approve
things. That said, you know, I think HHS, with every new
approval, does set precedents for other States to follow. And
there are many demonstrations that have been operating for many
years----
Mr. Bilirakis. Right.
Ms. Iritani [continuing]. As someone mentioned.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK, next question. HHS provides GAO with
four general criteria--you stated that--that State programs
must meet to receive the funding through the 1115 Medicaid
waiver. However, the criteria are so broad that they can be
interpreted in many different ways. The question: Is such
activity fair to States and stakeholders, and does GAO think
that HHS needs to issue regulatory guidance explaining these
criteria?
Ms. Iritani. Well, we believe that more specific criteria--
written criteria are needed and--otherwise we believe that many
questions about the basis for the decisions, as well as the
consistency of approvals, will continue to rise.
Mr. Bilirakis. And I understand that GAO was not even aware
of these criteria, is that correct?
Ms. Iritani. Yes, correct.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK, next question. GAO's work suggests that
there is likely significant duplicative Federal funding streams
for State programs and the waivers and other HHS programs. Do
we know if HHS reviews for duplicative payments prior to or
after approval? If not, is there a mechanism for HHS to prevent
duplication or at a minimum recoup duplicative funding, save
billions of dollars for us?
Ms. Iritani. We have not looked at how HHS monitors
spending post-approval. We have looked at, you know, what
protections they provided in the terms and--of the
demonstrations regarding preventing duplication and found
variation and, in some cases, no assurances that the new
spending for Medicaid would not duplicate other purposes.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK, next question. In my estimation, there
is a clear lack of uniformity in CMS decision-making. I think
it is pretty obvious from the testimony. Are there criteria
that could explain why 2 States of a similar nature get
uncompensated care pools approved for different lengths of
time? And I know my friend, Mr. Guthrie, touched on this as
well.
Ms. Iritani. There are no criteria that would explain that,
and that is part of why we are recommending that there be
criteria. We feel like that is important for transparency and
for a common understanding of why the Secretary is making
certain approvals.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you. One last question, if you don't
mind. I have a few more seconds. Have you ever encountered an
instance when CMS would force a State to take an action that
their Governor and the legislature did not want to take in
order to renew the 1115 waiver that was already in existence?
Ms. Iritani. I am not aware of that kind of circumstance,
but we typically haven't--have looked really at the approvals
at the Federal level.
Mr. Bilirakis. All right, very good. I yield back. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognize the gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Long, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Doctor, we--if we are facing serious budgetary challenges,
wouldn't it be better for us to prioritize medical care for
patients in Medicaid rather than some of the questionable
projects being approved for Federal spending in these 1115
waivers?
Ms. Iritani. We would agree that many of the approved new
costs in the recent demonstrations, that documentation was
lacking as to how they related to Medicaid purposes. And our
position has always been that Medicaid funds should be for,
ideally, covered Medicaid services for Medicaid beneficiaries.
You know, the demonstrations give authority to the Secretary to
approve new costs for purposes of the demonstration, but they
should be furthering Medicaid objectives, and that is why we
think there needs to be more articulation on the Secretary's
part of how she makes the decisions.
Mr. Long. So you do agree that it would be better to
prioritize medical care for patients in Medicaid?
Ms. Iritani. We would agree that, yes, Medicaid objectives
should be the driving--is within--the 1115 is--should be the
driving factor for decisions, and it is just not clear how the
Secretary defines those.
Mr. Long. OK. One of my big concerns about the growth of
the Medicaid Program is there is the temptation to just cover
more people. Everybody always wants to be philanthropic and,
oh, let's cover more, cover more people, without ensuring that
the access is timely and meaningful for these patients that
they are wanting to cover. But from what I understand of GAO's
work, CMS said they define low-income patients as 250 percent
of the Federal poverty level. 250 percent, that is a fairly
decent income in several districts around the country. And do
you think it is appropriate for CMS to approve spending
Medicaid dollars on what would be middle-class income in a lot
of areas?
Ms. Iritani. One of the things we were looking for when we
looked at what new costs that CMS was approving was whether or
not those costs, for example, with the State programs in the
low-income pools, were for providers that were serving low
income and Medicaid individuals. And didn't--found that some of
the programs were for the general public and--or not clearly
linked to low-income populations, and we find that
questionable.
Mr. Long. But do you think--so you do find it questionable,
the 250 percent mark?
Ms. Iritani. We have--you know, States have great
flexibility to define how they define low income. You know, the
poverty level--levels that they cover under Medicaid vary
greatly. So we don't--we feel like it is the Secretary's
decision and discretion to define what she considers to be
Medicaid purposes----
Mr. Long. Which apparently----
Ms. Iritani [continuing]. We just don't know what they are.
Mr. Long. --is 250 percent.
Ms. Iritani. It is, you know, within the authority of the
Secretary to define how she defines low income and Medicaid----
Mr. Long. OK, I have about a minute left here. So 1115
waivers are supposed to further Medicaid's objectives. Medicaid
is a program which exists to provide access to medical care for
vulnerable populations, so how does the administration get away
with justifying some of these spending approvals?
Ms. Iritani. The Secretary--and it is--and the response to
our draft report, said that they had general criteria that we
discussed earlier that they applied, and that they apply
criteria consistently and treat States consistently. And that
is the general response they had.
Mr. Long. OK, thank you, Dr. Iritani.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognize the gentlelady from Indiana, Mrs. Brooks, 5
minutes for questions.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think you have already heard a little bit about the
Healthy Indiana Plan, and at the beginning of 2015, Indiana was
fortunate enough to have its demonstration approved by CMS.
Now, the Healthy Indiana Plan 2.0, or what we call HIP 2.0 as
we call it, is really an extension, an expansion, and some
changes made to a very successful Healthy Indiana Plan. Started
under Governor Daniels, and then expanded and changed slightly
under Governor Pence. It provides 350,000 uninsured Hoosiers
with access to healthcare services, but what was very different
about it, and I thought what was really so effective, started
under the first HIP plan, was that individuals would pay small
contributions, and this was a huge sticking point for CMS,
ranging from $1 up to $27 a month based on their income level,
into power accounts. And POWER accounts stand for personal
wellness and responsibility--responsible accounts. Now, this
allows people to create a sense of personal responsibility for
their own health care, put in $1 a month, up to $27. And it
took our State years, as the gentleman from my delegation has
already stated, to get this type of plan approved. And it has
had--demonstrated tremendous success. So after it was finally
approved, after our Governor had to speak with the President
personally about a very successful program in order to get it
approved, the Governor sent--Governor Pence sent out entire
delegation a letter suggesting that the manner--celebrating the
success of finally getting it approved, but also the delay in
the approval process itself caused so much stress and anxiety
among the Hoosiers who were on the plan that it is just
completely unnecessary. And it was all about the timing, quite
frankly, that I am complaining about, and the manner in which
the approval process took place.
It is my understanding CMS has no set time period, is that
right, Ms. Iritani, about how to approve these requests for
waivers. Is that true that there is no time period in which the
CMS director has to provide their decision on these requests,
even of programs that are already in place?
Ms. Iritani. I believe there is a time limit on extensions,
but otherwise, no.
Mrs. Brooks. And so if any changes or improvements want to
be made to--really speaking of the fact that we haven't
evaluated or delved into the evaluations, the evaluations, as I
understand, of our HIP program were outstanding----
Ms. Iritani. Um-hum.
Mrs. Brooks [continuing]. And that is why we chose to
expand it for more Hoosiers, and to change it to try to bring
more Hoosiers into the program. The Upton-Hatch, Making
Medicaid Work Blueprint included a proposal for a waiver clock.
Would it make sense for a timeframe to be implemented related
to these Section 1115 waivers, and what kind of guidance should
we have from you and from your study of the waiver process,
what should Congress be taking into consideration as we try and
tighten the timeframe for these waivers for CMS to approve or
to not approve these programs, because they keep our State
legislators in knots, those who are receiving the benefits of
these programs, what kind of factors should we consider in
trying to put a timeframe around these decisions?
Ms. Iritani. Yes, other than the 2013 report that I
mentioned where we looked at the variation in the timeframes
and the factors that CMS told us contributed, including the
complexity and comprehensiveness of the proposals, we haven't
addressed timeframes in our work. We have really focused on the
spending limits and new spending approved, that has been the
scope of our work.
Mrs. Brooks. Do you agree though that the timeframe issue
is a significant issue for the States?
Ms. Iritani. Some of the factors that CMS said contributed
to the more lengthy approval times included things like how
comprehensive the proposal was. You know, some States operate
their entire Medicaid demonstrations--or Medicaid Programs
under the demonstrations, so it effectively changes the entire
program. It could be the States need to go back to the
legislatures to get new legislation, and when they do, then
there may be changes to the proposal that CMS has to review. It
is very complicated to sort out why things take so long.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you. Thank you for your work.
I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
Now recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr. Collins, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Ms.
Iritani. Is that correct?
Ms. Iritani. Yes.
Mr. Collins. Yes.
Ms. Iritani. Thank you.
Mr. Collins. For all your testimony. This is an area, I
guess you could say, of overall concern when, as I understand
it, the CBO recently issued their 2015 long-term budget
outlook, and in that, said that in just a little more than a
decade our entitlement spending will consume, along with
service on our debt, 100 percent of the inflow of monies into
the U.S. Government. If we look back 40-some-odd years ago, it
was $1 in $3; today, these same programs are $2 in $3, and it
is truly a major concern when it would hit $3 in $3.
So something is going to have to give, and unfortunately in
Congress, all too long the kick-the-can mindset of let me get
past my next election is very much alive. And so here we have
the CBO which should be--send a chilling effect to all of us
that we have to make some changes. And Medicaid is certainly a
major contributor on the expense side of those entitlement
programs.
So my question really comes down to maybe asking you do you
have some suggestions for Congress, and as we are looking at
these 1115 waivers, and in particular I think your testimony
indicated that some of these waivers really didn't go to the
core proposition of what Medicaid is there for, but very
tangentially associated with it, and it is even hard to get
your arms around how some of these waivers are benefitting or
could benefit us in the long-term. Do you have any idea how
much--how many dollars are in that kind of bucket, and do you
have any recommendations for anything Congress could do,
however small that might be, to at least try to stem some of
these expenses that we wouldn't have to have?
Ms. Iritani. Yes, we share your concerns about the impact
of these waivers. The spending trends of the funds that are
governed by the terms of demonstrations are rising
significantly. In 2011, we reported that about \1/5\ of
Medicaid spending was governed by the terms and conditions of
demonstrations. In 2013, we said it was about \1/4\. In our
most recent report it is almost \1/3\ of Medicaid spending,
the--over $500 billion program. So we believe that, given that
the Secretary has disagreed with the need for reforms, that the
Congress should consider requiring the Secretary to take
certain steps to reform the process.
Mr. Collins. Well, I think we agree, and I certainly
appreciate you being very forthright in that observation, and I
really do thank you for your testimony.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognize the vice chair of the full committee, Mrs.
Blackburn, 5 minutes for questions.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And in the spirit
of the College World Series, I am here to bat cleanup, and I am
going to be fast so we can move to our second panel.
I am going to pick right up where Mr. Collins left off.
$344 billion program, and \1/3\ of that is now in the 1115
waivers, correct?
Ms. Iritani. Well, total spending including Federal and
State, is actually over $500 billion.
Mrs. Blackburn. So in total, over $500 billion, with that
once they do the State match to the Federal.
Ms. Iritani. Yes, $304 billion----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Ms. Iritani [continuing]. Federal, correct.
Mrs. Blackburn. All right. And one of the things that we
are looking at with this, if I have my notes right, and I want
to be sure that we have it right for the record, is that you
have a lot of gray area here on how decisions are being made--
--
Ms. Iritani. Um-hum.
Mrs. Blackburn [continuing]. That meeting the objectives
has become very subjective, and that you have not gone in, if I
understood your response to Mr. Bilirakis, you said that you
all have not looked at spending post-approval, or looked at the
outcomes, you have just looked at that process of pushing the
money forward. Am I correct on that?
Ms. Iritani. Yes.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Ms. Iritani. We have only looked at the approvals of the
spending limits and the basis for them.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Ms. Iritani. And----
Mrs. Blackburn. But not the outcomes----
Ms. Iritani. Correct.
Mrs. Blackburn [continuing]. Of the delivery. All right,
and so that is something that we definitely need to circle back
and do some oversight on. Let me go back to Ms. Castor's
question. Did I understand you to say you have looked and
reviewed the Federal end, but you have not looked at the public
input process----
Ms. Iritani. Not----
Mrs. Blackburn [continuing]. On the 1115 waivers?
Ms. Iritani. Not since the mid-2000s.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Ms. Iritani.. That is when we raised concerns about the
lack of a Federal public input process that was then addressed
in the recent House reform legislation.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK, and I think that gets to part of Mrs.
Brooks' question also. There have been mixed results, and you
have mentioned that. You have States as diverse as what Indiana
has done, you have Arizona which was one of your first 1115s. I
am from Tennessee. We have a very mixed result history, if you
will, with the 1115 waiver process. So I--it concerns me that
you all have not done a deep dive, if you will, on looking at
the outcomes, reviewing these results, looking at that public
input process, going through that, because if I am following
what you are saying, a conclusion would be that when you set up
a demonstration project, and there are four criteria that have
to be met for this to move forward, and with the subjective
nature of the decisionmaking process, a State can meet one of
four criteria and be approved and be considered a success. Is
that correct?
Ms. Iritani. I believe so. That is the----
Mrs. Blackburn. So they could have a failing grade, if you
will. If you are on a grading scale of 100, and you meet one of
four criteria, you are at 25 percent effectiveness, but CMS
would consider that a success.
Ms. Iritani. The criteria--the first time we saw them again
was just in CMS' response to our report. They were not issued,
you know, in any written guidance. And we have not since
circled back to CMS to see how they apply it, but the way that
they stated it in their response was that, basically, one of
these criteria is----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK, and----
Ms. Iritani [continuing]. You know, basically what we
apply.
Mrs. Blackburn. And then setting the spending limits, they
pretty much make it up as they go along, and are subjective in
that approach, if I understood you correct in your response to
Mr. Bucshon.
Ms. Iritani. There is a lack of transparency, definitely--
--
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Ms. Iritani [continuing]. How they are set.
Mrs. Blackburn. With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back. And
I thank you, Madam Director, for your time today.
Ms. Iritani. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
And now recognize the ranking member of the full committee,
Mr. Pallone, to bat cleanup, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I apologize that
I wasn't able to be here until now.
And, you know, I may be repeating some things that already
have been said or have been asked, and so, you know, forgive me
for that. I just wanted to say that after close to 20 years of
recommendations for more transparency into the Medicaid waiver
process, the Affordable Care Act included a bipartisan
provision to improve the transparency of Medicaid waivers in
line with longstanding recommendations from GAO. Today, because
of this provision, the public has meaningful opportunities to
provide input into the waiver process of both the State and
Federal level, and waivers are now evaluated on a periodic
basis, and States submit reports on implementation, and this is
a huge step in the right direction, in my opinion.
I am further encouraged by CMS' concurrence with GAO
recommendations, specifically in their April 2015 report for
better ongoing and transparent documentation of how States
spend Medicaid dollars. This is a recommendation that prior
administrations had refused to correct, and I continue to
believe it is the right thing to do, ensure dollars are
following our Medicaid beneficiaries.
But let me ask a couple of questions, if I can. In
reviewing the GAO recommendations over the last 20 years, it
appears as though your recommendations have remained the same
until only recently. Isn't it true that the majority of these
recommendations were not acted upon until Obama administration
initiatives and the Affordable Care Act, which placed many of
your recommendations into action?
Ms. Iritani. Well, we have made many--over a dozen
recommendations over the course of this time, and only a couple
have been implemented, including the public input process that
you mentioned that was implemented in 2012.
Mr. Pallone. OK. And, of course, that was under the--under
President Obama, 2012. Based on the GAO reports, it appears
that GAO recommendations on the budget neutrality accounting
principles have remained unchanged since as far back as the
1990s. So is it true to say that this fundamental disagreement
between HHS and GAO has remained the same, regardless of which
political party has controlled the presidency?
Ms. Iritani. Yes.
Mr. Pallone. OK. And then the last thing I wanted to ask,
and to follow up on that, isn't it true that GAO went so far as
to issue a letter to HHS from GAO's chief legal counsel
regarding budget neutrality issues in the prior
administration--I mean under the last President Bush?
Ms. Iritani. It is true in 2007, our legal counsel did
issue a letter to the Secretary at the time, raising concerns
with two States' approvals, yes.
Mr. Pallone. And have you had to take such action under the
current administration, under the Obama administration?
Ms. Iritani. We have not.
Mr. Pallone. OK. All right, thanks a lot.
Again, Mr. Chairman, I am not going to take up too much
time because I came in at the end here, but thank you for the
opportunity here.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
That concludes the questions of members present. We will
have follow-up questions in writing. I know some of the members
not here have questions. We will send those to you in writing.
We ask that you please respond promptly. Thank you very much--
--
Ms. Iritani. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts [continuing]. For your testimony this morning.
Now, as our staff sets up the table for the second panel,
we will take a 3-minute recess.
The committee stands in recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Pitts. OK, the time for recess having expired, we will
reconvene the subcommittee. And I will introduce our second
panel in the order of their presentations.
We are delighted to have today the Honorable Haley Barbour,
former Governor of Mississippi, and Founding Partner of BGR
Group, with us this morning. Mr. Matt Salo, Executive Director,
National Association of Medicaid Directors. And Ms. Joan Alker,
Executive Director, Georgetown University Center for Children
and Families. Thank you each for coming today. Your written
testimony will be made a part of the record. You will each be
given 5 minutes to summarize your testimony. There is a series
of lights on--so when the yellow light goes on, that is 1
minute left, and red light means you can wrap up at your
convenience.
And at this point, the Chair recognizes Governor Barbour, 5
minutes for your summary.

STATEMENTS OF HALEY BARBOUR, FORMER GOVERNOR OF MISSISSIPPI AND
FOUNDING PARTNER, BGR GROUP; MATT SALO, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF MEDICAID DIRECTORS; AND JOAN C. ALKER,
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY CENTER FOR CHILDREN
AND FAMILIES

STATEMENT OF HALEY BARBOUR

Mr. Barbour. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. When I last testified
before the committee, I was actually Governor. I want to make
plain that I am not Governor anymore. I don't speak for the
Governors or the Republican Governors, or even the Governor of
Mississippi. This is what I think.
You know, States are trying to juggle demands of increasing
health care costs while trying to balance their budget. Most of
our States actually literally balance the budget every year,
and this is a huge part of it. In 2014, the Federal Government
spent $300 billion on Medicaid; $344 billion this year as I
understand it, but also the States spend a ton of money on
Medicaid. Medicaid expects in the next 10 years that that
budget for the Federal Government is going to go to $575
billion. And when you put in what the States do, it will be
about $1 trillion. About $1 trillion. So this is a big burden
on the States' budgets and on the Federal budget. I think we
all ought to remember that about \2/3\ of all Federal spending
is mandated for entitlements or payments on the national debt.
That is--and that percentage is growing. Any discussion of
Medicaid and our healthcare programs must include some mention
of our ability to pay the bills that we are accumulating,
because what we do today affects future generations' ability to
pay the debt that we burden them with, and affects their chance
to experience the American dream that we have been blessed to
experience.
Since January of 2009, the Federal debt has gone up 73
percent, and that can't continue. We have to provide quality
health care for the truly needy in a cost-effective manner, and
one way to help do that is to give each State the flexibility
to run its Medicaid Program in the manner that best meets the
needs of its population. I personally believe Congress should
give States authority to adjust their programs without any CMS
waiver, as long as it is within the law. But at a minimum, the
waiver process needs to be improved.
For instance, should States be able to ask some nondisabled
adults if they prefer to pay a small copay if it better ensured
their being able to see a doctor. Not really a problem in
Mississippi. Eighty-three percent of our doctors take new
Medicaid patients. But you all have already cited a story in
California where somebody got on Medicaid and then couldn't see
a doctor. In New Jersey, about 38 percent of doctors take new
Medicaid patients. Wouldn't our patients be better off if they
really did have a way to get care, even if it meant paying
voluntarily, on their own choice, a small copay? I believe
copays really help make the system work. When people miss an
appointment, there ought to be a copay because they have cost
somebody else an appointment, they have cost another Medicaid
person or some other patient. I believe States should be
allowed to do work requirements, or job training and
retraining, for able-bodied adults who are on Medicaid. CMS is
standing in the way of a lot of State innovation by not
approving commonsense waivers, and taking long, long periods of
time to improve--to approve the ones they do.
It has been talked about already about the opacity that
this is not transparent, inconsistent standards, and the
concerns about favoritism or about using waivers as a way to
coerce States. CMS has reached an agreement principle with
Florida on the Florida LIP program. The bottom line though is
Massachusetts got theirs last year in October, about the same
time that Florida was applying. The Medicaid Program in Florida
asked CMS in the fall, and just now there is an agreement in
principle. By the way, that agreement in principle cuts the
contribution to the program by more than \1/2\ in the first
year, and by \2/3\ in the second year for what Florida will
receive.
We do need transparency so that the States understand the
process, how to get things approved, and I would say to you,
not only should there not be different rules for different
States, I believe when a State like Indiana institutes a
program and it works well, and we test whether it is working
well and find that the results are good, it ought to be an
easier process for another State to adopt that. Things that
work, we ought to encourage. If Oregon has something that works
and we think it fits Mississippi, it ought to be easier to get
a waiver for that than starting at scratch. So I would
encourage the committee to go to block grants, but I would
certainly encourage you to adopt a waiver clock, to adopt some
rules about transparency, and remember, a successful program
under a 1115 also ought to be allowed to become permanent if we
see that the results are such, why should they have to go back
every couple of years?
Sorry, I ran 14 seconds over. Pretty good with my accent.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Barbour follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. You are pretty good. Thank you.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Salo, 5 minutes for your summary.

STATEMENT OF MATT SALO

Mr. Salo. All right, thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Member Green, members of the committee.
I represent the 56 State and territorial Medicaid agency
directors. We have talked a lot about how big Medicaid is. I
don't want to belabor that, but I do want to underscore how
complex it is, and I think a lot of people don't fully
appreciate that.
We cover, yes, a lot of children, lot of pregnant women,
lot of low-income families, but we also cover a lot of
individuals with disabilities; intellectual, developmental,
physical, as well as a lot of people who need long-term
services and supports. In fact, we are the largest payer in the
healthcare system of long-term care, of mental health, of HIV/
AIDS care, et cetera. It is a complex, it is a difficult
program.
Our members are responsible and accountable for the
program. They are striving to provide the best possible health
care to the citizens we serve, and also be wise stewards of the
taxpayer dollar. They are also hard at work actively driving
program reform.
Now, less people think that driving program reform means
that the underlying program is broken. I would say
unequivocally, no. And, in fact, I would posit to you the
challenges of the broader U.S. healthcare system, which is
failing us. Take a look at this. Costs--health care cost
inflation has exceeded CPI for decades. Health care is now 18
percent of the Nation's GDP. We have suboptimal outcomes to
show for that. We also have profound political division about
what the future is--of health care is. But I think an important
piece here is that we have also had decades of either proactive
or passive policies in this country of either ignoring or
actively shifting responsibility for many of these difficult
populations directly to Medicaid, and that is why we are the
largest payer for the most complex, the most expensive, and the
most difficult to serve populations in this country.
So what are we doing about it? We are actively trying to
reform a healthcare system, a fee-for-service system that does
not serve these populations well. As Dennis Smith once said,
fee-for-service, FFS, ought to stand for fend for self, because
that is what we are requiring of the sickest, the frailest, and
the most complex patients.
This--but this is hard, and part of the challenge is that
the statute at 50 does not allow us to do what we need to do,
so we rely on waivers. And we have been relying on waivers for
decades to drive program improvement. In Arizona in 1982, in a
number of States in the mid-'90s, with the private option in
Arkansas and other States who have done the expansion recently.
With Indiana, as we have heard, and with many other States that
are doing DSRIP or other types of programs. We have a long
history of success with this, and accountability does exist.
There are evaluations, there is reporting, and even though GAO
may not particularly like it, there are budget neutrality
calculations. And finally, there is significant public input.
Which is not to say we think the system is working
perfectly. We think there are a number of changes that can and
should be made. We have been fairly vocal in what these kinds
of things should be. Our short--is the system should be more of
an HOV program, and the HOV for us stands for healthy patients,
outcomes, and value to the taxpayer and value to the healthcare
system. These principles ought to drive what we are doing and
how we are able to do it.
We have a number of ideas that we--I am more than happy to
talk about; ways that we can get there. Some are incremental,
some are bigger, some of them will require congressional input.
One of those, as Governor Barbour referenced, is sort of a
pathway to permanency, and we can talk more about how that
might play out. But I do also think there is a--we need more--
we do need more timely approvals and renewals. We can talk
about what that might look like, but I think a big challenge,
in all honesty, is capacity; capacity at CMS to be able to do
the reviews in a timely manner. And I think we need to keep in
mind that there needs to be a balance between transparency and
flexibility. The flexibility--we do need transparency, but we
do need the flexibility to innovate, and I think we need to be
careful about proscribed definitive checklists of what can or
what cannot be done because that sets a ceiling for what can be
innovated, not a floor. And I think we need to be very mindful
about how do we spread the innovation once we know that it
works.
So let me close on this and just say that I think a lot of
States spend a lot of time, energy, resources, on chasing paper
trails, on trying to, you know, prove to everyone's
satisfaction budget neutrality or other types of process
requirements, too much time arguing about the cost per unit of
widgets that do not contribute to the overall value of the
healthcare experience, and that we need to start investing more
in State capacity to actually drive the changes that we seek.
And I would be happy to talk about some solutions to that as
well. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Salo follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognizes Ms. Alker, 5 minutes for her opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF JOAN C. ALKER

Ms. Alker. Thank you so much, Chairman Pitts, Ranking
Member Green, and members of the committee.
I really appreciate the opportunity to be here today
because I have been studying Medicaid waiver policy for many,
many years now, and while I find it fascinating, many think it
is sort of boring. So I am thrilled that you are interested in
this issue.
I would also like to commend the GAO for their long history
of excellent work on this issue. It has been 20 years now that
GAO has been writing reports that I have been reading, raising
questions and concerns about Medicaid waiver policy, and these
issues have arisen regardless of which party; Democrats or
Republicans, have controlled the Executive Branch.
And today, I am going to focus on two areas of concern
raised by the GAO; the need for transparency and robust public
input, as well as the question of budget neutrality. And the
good news from my perspective is that after 20 years of
scrutiny by GAO and others on these issues, I think we are
finally making significant progress on both of these issues,
but there is still some work that needs to be done.
So first on the issue of transparency, I do believe it is
vitally important to have a very strong and robust process for
public comment at both the State and the Federal levels. This
is an idea that has long bipartisan support. Senators Grassley
and Baucus worked on this on the Senate side. And language was
included, as you heard, in the Affordable Care Act, and that
was implemented through regulations in 2012 by the Obama
administration.
So these changes have led to dramatic improvements in the
public comment process, but I would like to make a few
suggestions to the committee for you to consider that might
lead to greater transparency and better public input in the
waiver process.
The first suggestion is that current public input
requirements only apply to new Section 1115 applications or
renewals, but not to amendments to existing Section 1115
waivers. Since so many States already have Section 1115
waivers, there are many important changes that occur through
the amendment process. So I believe it would be a valuable
amendment to the law to ensure that amendments were also
subject to the public input requirements.
Second, while significant progress has been made with
respect to having waiver applications and approvals online at
Medicaid.gov, there is more work to be done here. Many
important documents such as operational protocols, quarterly
and annual reports, and other significant deliverables often
required in terms and conditions that come with Section 1115
waivers are not always publicly available on Medicaid.gov, and
I would urge you to urge CMS to make sure those are publicly
available as soon as possible.
And then finally I will just say, I think the suggestion
came up from a number of committee members earlier in the day,
I think it would be terrific to have GAO do a report that looks
specifically at how the public comment process is working,
particularly at the State level.
Now, let's turn to budget neutrality. Again, GAO has found
that administrations of both parties have approved budget
neutrality, Section 1115 agreements, which in GAO's judgment
were not adequately supported by sound documentation and
adequate methodology.
So budget neutrality is very complex and, of course, when
the Secretary makes decisions about what State programs to
include or how to assess budget neutrality, the Secretary is
responding to State requests. CMS is not just making these
things up; CMS is always responding to a State's request. And
so by definition, every State's request is different. But I
think in the past few months we have seen some encouraging
signs from the Obama administration with respect to how
Secretary Burwell plans to approach budget neutrality
agreements going forward. In particular, on April 14, 2015, CMS
Director, Vikki Wachino, sent a letter to the State of Florida
indicating three principles by which they would approach their
review of Florida's low-income pool, which has been discussed
here today. In addition to sending this letter to Florida,
press reports indicated that CMS also made calls to eight other
States that currently have some kind of uncompensated care pool
through a Section 1115 waiver agreement. These were both States
that have done Medicaid expansion and States that have not done
Medicaid expansion, and they have shared the same principles to
signal their intent to apply these criteria across States. Even
more recently, I understand CMS has started including specific
ways in which expenditures authority, and I believe this is
part of the Oregon health plan extension that was just
approved, where they tie, in the Secretary's judgment, how
those expenditure authorities are linked to the objectives of
these programs.
So both of these actions that I have just described,
something that I have never seen before in the last 20 years,
so that is encouraging to me, but I do think we will need to
continue to monitor this issue very closely.
So thank you very much for the opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Alker follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady, and thanks all
of you for your testimony.
We will begin questioning now. I will recognize myself 5
minutes for that purpose.
Governor Barbour, yesterday, 10 Republican attorneys
general wrote Chairman Upton expressing their concern over CMS'
coercion to try and get Florida to expand Medicaid under the
Affordable Care Act. As you know well, the Supreme Court's NFIB
v. Sebelius ruling made such an expansion voluntary for States.
Do you believe the administration's actions here are legally
problematic?
Mr. Barbour. I do. These attorneys general are there
because of something we have been talking about; the lack of
transparency, the lack of real hard rules so you don't--you
have so much discretion. And certainly, States see it as
coercion because they did not choose to expand Medicaid under
the ACA. So that appears to be the case. We will see what the
court decides. But I will say this, for a lot of States, this
idea of 1115 waivers would affect them tremendously, and they
think they are not getting their waivers treated the same, and
there is some evidence of that. If you look at the low-income
pool program in Massachusetts and the one in Florida, both of
them have been in effect for a long time, yet Massachusetts was
approved last year, well before the time needed so that they
could plan for their budget. Florida got really hung up, ended
up going through a special session because they didn't get
approved the same time as Massachusetts. So I think that is why
these people are thinking that.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Governor. And I will let each of the
others also respond to this. It is my understanding that CMS
has no set period of time for reviewing and responding to a
request for an 1115 waiver, but CMS has to review and respond
to other waivers for managed care and home and committee-based
services within a certain timeframe. So my question is, would
it make sense for a timeframe to be implemented related to the
Section 1115 waivers?
Mr. Barbour. Yes, sir.
Mr. Pitts. Mr. Salo?
Mr. Sale. I think conceptually that makes sense because I
do think the challenge is that you are correct, there is a lot
of frustration that sometimes approvals and--or renewals can
take a very long time to get. I would caution though that in
practice, I would worry that a definitive clock might just--if
we don't have the rules in--if we don't have the structure in
place to ensure that CMS has the capacity to look through
these, that a short clock might just get them to know faster--
--
Mr. Pitts. Ms. Alker?
Mr. Salo [continuing]. Which is not what we want. We want
to be able to get to yes faster, and I think we need to focus
on that. But certainly, to speed the process up.
Mr. Pitts. Ms. Alker?
Ms. Alker. So I would say a few things. First of all, I
think many of the recent substantial waiver approvals, like
Arkansas and Iowa, happened pretty darned quickly. And we have
to balance the committee's interest and the need for
transparency and public input with this desire to have quick
approvals, and I think we have to find kind of the sweet spot
where you allow sufficient time for public input and comment
with adequate time for CMS to review this very complex policy
and make decisions. And I will just give one example. The GAO
in, I believe, 2007 did a report criticizing approvals at that
time by the Bush administration of the Florida waiver and the
Vermont waivers, and underscored the lack of public input. And
I believe the world record approval for Section 1115 went from
Governor Bush to President Bush, and it was 8 business days. So
that wasn't great because, clearly, a lot of that was sort of
wired out of the public eye. So again, I think we need to
balance the need for timely and efficient Government action
with the need for appropriate public comment and oversight by
yourselves, as well as the public.
Mr. Pitts. Mr. Salo, you mentioned in your testimony the
length of waiver process. You indicate it took nearly a year on
average from the time a waiver application is submitted until
it is approved. My understanding is that there are often months
of negotiations that occur even before the application is
submitted. Can you please discuss a little bit more the
difficulty that such a lengthy process, nearly \1/4\ of a
Governor's term, nearly \1/2\ of a term of a Member of the
House, like myself, creates for States and for Medicaid Program
beneficiaries?
Mr. Salo. Sure. And I think, you know, I do want to be
careful to acknowledge the--and respect the dialogue that has
to go on between the States and their Federal partners on this.
That dialogue is important. And, you know, and there is a
certain amount of deference that we should allow the
administration, any administration, as the payers of \1/2\ this
program. But as you pointed out, when you drag out these
negotiations, oftentimes what you will have is amendments that
need to follow, and other things that are related get backed
up, and that can bring the effective, you know, functioning of
good Government to a slow crawl. And that is not going to be in
the best interests of the patients, it is not going to be in
the best interests of the healthcare system.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
And now recognize the ranking member, Mr. Green, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Alker, my home State of Texas is next in line for
renewal of their waiver, and I want to be clear I am proud of
what my State has accomplished through the delivery system,
reform efforts have dramatically improved the quality of care
for the Medicaid beneficiaries, and look forward to working
with CMS and Texas to start the process. But I also want to
make sure that, as a former State legislator, I think it is
almost medical malpractice not to expand Medicaid in--for the
States based purely on politics, which is what we are doing.
And in Texas, I know every hospital executive I know has asked
the legislature expanded, just like they have in other States,
because people are not being served. And so--but that is,
again, the States' decision by the Supreme Court.
And I want to correct the record here because there is a
lot of misinformation flying around about Texas is just like
Florida. Isn't it true that some undeniable similarities that
both of our States have so-called uncompensated care pools, but
that part of their respective Medicaid waivers and that Florida
seems to have a tough time with. Ms. Alker, isn't it true that
no one State has the same type of so-called uncompensated care
pool?
Ms. Alker. That is definitely true, and Texas' waiver, I
would say, is a lot more complicated than Florida's.
Mr. Green. OK. And wasn't there a fact that the longer term
issues at play with the structure of Florida's pool?
Ms. Alker. Yes, in 2008 actually, GAO issued a report that
criticized the budget neutrality assumptions underlying
Florida's low-income pool.
Mr. Green. Is it true that Florida actually would have been
able to get more Federal dollars from the expansion plan that
was under--than that that was under consideration by the
legislature?
Ms. Alker. That is definitely true, and of course, those
matching dollars would come in at 100 percent match currently,
as opposed to their regular match rate which is about 60/40, so
they would get a lot better return on investments by taking up
the expansion dollars.
Mr. Green. Ms. Alker, Governor Barbour's written testimony
is very critical in that--cost sharing in Medicaid, however, in
2013, CMS issued a final rule that revised Medicaid's cost
sharing policies. The rule increased in the maximum allowable
cost sharing amounts that the States can impose on Medicare
beneficiaries, including individuals below the poverty line
without a waiver. Ms. Alker, would you say that States have
considerable flexibility to whether we agree or not with it--
not here today implement cost-sharing policies for Medicaid?
Ms. Alker. That is true, and I think one of the common
misconceptions about Medicaid is that you have to get a waiver
to do any--everything, and that is just not true. We see that
time and time again. As you mentioned, States are allowed to
impose nominal copays on the adult population, and they don't
need a waiver to do so.
Mr. Green. OK. And again, in Governor Barbour's written
testimony he noted that Medicaid providers should be able to
charge beneficiaries a fine if they miss their appointments
without notifying their doctors. And I am concerned that we are
pushing ineffective policy we know don't work because, while
CMS actually approved Arizona's request to impose a $3 missed
provider fine back in 2011, the State ultimately let the
authority expire because there was so little provider
participation. Is that correct?
Ms. Alker. Yes, I think that speaks to the issue that came
up earlier, that we need really robust evaluations of waiver
demonstrations that have happened in the past, some of which we
already know that are not--simply not good policy.
Mr. Green. One of the issues I know with Arizona findings,
but also like Georgia's emergency room demonstration, goes
unnoticed. Do you think it is--or it might be worthwhile to
explore how we can evaluate and make publicly available the
results of these demonstrations so that we might learn what
strategies work to actually improve care and lower cost?
Ms. Alker. Absolutely. I am certain, obviously, as a public
policy professor, very much a fan of evidence and research base
to inform our public policy decisions. I would say a couple of
things about the evaluation process. I do believe that it would
be a great question to ask CMS that they have commissioned an
overall evaluation of some of these new Section 1115 waiver
approvals--recent approvals, that that is in process. It would
be great to learn more about that, because one thing I have
observed is that sometimes in the evaluation process,
particularly at the State level, that if you have the State
paying the evaluator, that the researchers may not always be
objective. So we need to ensure that we have independent
evaluations to assess these policy choices going forward.
Mr. Green. OK. Mr. Salo, in balancing transparent
flexibility, you noted that you fear strict guidelines for
wavier approval might quickly become obsolete as our medical
system advances. Would you agree that a set of broad principles
should be--such as those put forth by the administration is, in
fact, the best balance to achieve these program goals?
Mr. Salo. In short, I would say yes. I think it is more
important to have broad guidelines than clearly delineated
checklists because, let's face it, what is approvable today
would not have been conceived of or approvable 15 years ago.
Mr. Green. Yes.
Mr. Salo. And it is in all likelihood the innovations that
are going to be driving real healthcare system improvement 10
years from now, many of which we probably haven't thought of
today. So we are going to need the ability to think about
things very different. This is an iterative process. Innovation
is a dynamic and fluid process.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognize the gentleman from Indiana, Dr. Bucshon, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think, again, it
just strikes me the mere fact that we are talking about waivers
shows you that maybe the program itself needs to be changed so
we don't have to have so many waivers. Same thing is probably
true in education with No Child Left Behind, it needs
reauthorized in a different way. We are giving waivers to
States because of poor policy that needs to be changed by
Congress, and it seems like this may be an area that needs to
be addressed. We are continuing to address today, and as a
healthcare provider, I can say it is, you know, coverage and
not really delving into cost. And I think some of you in your
testimony have pointed out that, you know, the rising cost of
health care and the inflation in health care is something that
has to be addressed. I mean we are not going to keep up with
the cost of the system going up, like the Governor pointed out,
if you don't start to address that as an issue and not just
address coverage.
And if you are going to address coverage, you should
address good coverage. And as I pointed out in the previous
panel, I can tell you from experience that the Medicaid
Program, although critical, is financially strapped and doesn't
necessarily guarantee access to physicians. Again, Governor
Barbour pointed out that in New Jersey, only 38 percent of
physicians are taking new Medicaid patients.
So that said, and the other thing I--someone mentioned
earlier that hospitals in certain States are asking for
Medicaid expansion. I would too because it means a huge
financial gain for the hospitals, and the implication that that
means that it is, you know, for all truism of covering people
is not necessarily the case. And I just wanted to point that
out.
So with that, Mr. Salo, some have mentioned today that in
recent years there has been greater transparency in the waiver
process, such as through the adoption of requirements for
public input both at the State and Federal level. The ability
for the public to provide input on proposed Section 1115
waivers is very important, of course, but it sounds like there
has been still a lack of transparency and consistency regarding
CMS' criteria for assessing 1115 demonstration applications.
How does this lack of transparency affect State Medicaid
Programs, and what recommendations do you have for improving
the demonstration application and approval process?
Mr. Salo. So I think a couple of things probably need to be
done. Again, we--several of us have referred to this pathway to
permanency. Because, as we have heard from GAO, \1/3\ of all
program spending is now incorporated into an 1115 waiver,
pretty much--pretty soon that is going to become the norm,
rather than the--than a different example. So--and a lot of the
things that we have been doing, Arizona has been doing this for
30 years. Tennessee and other States have been doing it for
decades. There are certain things we just shouldn't need to get
a waiver for anymore, you know. Thoughtful managed care,
coordinated care is one of them. Home and community-based
alternatives to nursing home care is another example. If we can
make the waiver process less necessary, if we can build some of
those commonsense developments into the underlying program, we
can free-up resources that can really be focused on real
innovation, but I think it does still need to exist because as
we are seeing with States like Massachusetts and New York and
Texas and others where the delivery system incentive payments
are being implemented, there are different things we need to
try, and the system has to be accommodating to thinking outside
of the box. And so I would say let's make the 1115 waiver
process less necessary, but still nimble and fluid enough to be
able to accommodate the innovations that need to happen, not
just today, but tomorrow.
Mr. Bucshon. Governor Barbour, you have some comments on
that?
Mr. Barbour. Yes, Doctor, I agree with that. That is very
in line with what I have said earlier. I would think for many
things there shouldn't be any necessity for coming and seeking
a waiver, particularly something that has already been proven
to work well in other States. But one of the things that
strikes me is, we ought to base this on results, and yet GAO's
witness here told us that CMS doesn't even test the results,
that they don't look at the outcomes, and that is news to me. I
hope it is really--that that is not quite accurate. But
certainly, that ought to be part of the test. Did it achieve
what you said it was going to achieve, and budget neutrality
wasn't within the money. I testified, Mr. Chairman, 4 years ago
that if you would give us a block grant, we would take \1/2\
the annual increase in Medicaid that our State would be
entitled to because I thought we could save way, way more than
that. I think if you have a budget--if you have a waiver, and
you don't meet budget neutrality, the State ought to have to
pay it. You will get very good programs if the State knows they
are on the line. And most States, I believe, most States
wouldn't prefer that, but if that was the difference, they
would take it.
Mr. Bucshon. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognizes the gentleman from Oregon, Mr. Schrader, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
A couple of comments, I guess. The course of the hearing, I
find it astonishing that some States, some Governors find it a
burden to take care of the most disadvantaged people in our
society, that Medicaid is not something--especially when the
Federal Government is kicking in 90 percent of the cost. I
mean, I am a little budgeteer from Oregon, a small business
person, if someone is going to pay 90 percent of the cost of
something, I am going to find 10 percent of the money to get it
done, especially for this population. And who are these people?
Who are these shiftless people on Medicaid? They are children,
they are seniors, they are disabled people. Eighty percent of
the Medicaid population is that group. I don't consider that
shiftless. Seventy percent of the people that are able to
actually work, they are all on Medicaid, that little 20--70
percent of them working, and they can't afford health care. I
mean Medicaid, 138 percent of poverty level, that is like,
what, 14, $15,000 a year? I challenge any of us to try and live
on something like that. Afford health care? You can't do that.
Oregon had a small demonstration project that at the time I
thought was very good. Yes, everyone should pay something for
their health care. Let's see, we sort of do that under the ACA
that is being demagogued on a regular basis. Yes, people that
are lower income but can afford some--yes, we make them pay on
a graduated basis, based on their income and their
socioeconomic level, but somehow what we are hearing today, you
know, we don't like that because it is Medicaid? Medicaid is
tougher though. We had this demonstration project in our State
and we found that those people that are on Medicaid, they have
lots of issues, they have multiple risk factors, folks. It is
not like you and I that just decide not to work. There may be a
few of those but most have multiple issues. And, frankly, they
are not going to pay $5, you know. And enlightened self-
interest ought to dictate to every one of us, even if we don't
care about children, seniors, disabled, or the people that have
multiple risk factors, that if we don't take care of these
folks, their diabetes cost is going to go into our health
insurance premium. And that has been proven. That is one of the
predicates over healthcare reform. Whether you like the ACA or
not, that is one of the predicates of why healthcare reform is
so important; to get the costs aligned like they should.
And there are some good projects out there though. I agree
with the general sense of this panel that the whole waiver
system, the whole Medicaid system itself seems to be
antiquated, and we should update it to be, I believe, outcome
and results-based. I agree with that 100 percent. That is the
future; not micromanaging. Very concerned when I heard GAO
talking about, well, we have more criteria here and a little
more definition there, and count more waits that are being
processed on--that is not the goal. The goal is to have higher
quality health care at, frankly, less cost. And the way to do
that, and it is in the ACA, and like it or not, even without
the ACA, it is coordinated care. Aligning things so you don't
have the duplication that GAO talks about.
Oregon has a great demonstration project that they are
doing right now that I think is very accountable. It is pretty
gutsy. They say they got a bunch of money from CMS to develop
this coordinated care organizations for Medicaid patients. That
means that there are primary care docs, specialists, dentists,
mental health professionals, coordinating the care for Medicaid
patients so that they will know what each other is doing, they
will have an accountability in there, and they get--they are--
in return for this money, the goal was to keep--not only get
better outcomes, but get better value, not just for the
individual but for the taxpayer. Limit healthcare inflation to
2 percent through the duration of it.
And I--you know, as a health care--well, as a budget guy, I
got--ran--helped run the budget back in Oregon back in the day.
You know, healthcare costs for healthcare inflation, 6, 7, 8, 9
percent annually. It was a big deal. We always budgeted more
than annual inflation on a regular basis, which was anywhere
from, you know, 1 \1/2\ to 2 \1/2\ percent. So Oregon is going
to keep it at 2 percent. That is impossible. Well, the results
so far are pretty amazing. We are under 2 percent. Under 2
percent inflation because of the coordinated care system.
Emergency visits, I don't know about other States, emergency
visits are down 21 percent from a couple of years ago. That is
substantial. Complications from diabetes down 10 percent
already. This is the early stages of coordinated care. And
chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases, you know, hospital
stays, down 50 percent. That is what we are talking about. That
should be the outcome-based type of information that every
waiver should be judged by, and hopefully, ultimately, Medicaid
reimbursement in general.
I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Bilirakis, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, I
appreciate it.
And good to see you, Governor.
Mr. Barbour. I remember your dad, Congressman.
Mr. Bilirakis. Good. Yes, thank you. Governor, some States
have been operating under an 1115 waiver. You mentioned Arizona
has been operating, I believe, since 1982, well, at least 30
years. Some have suggested Congress create a process where
longstanding core elements of an 1115 waiver can be effectively
grandfathered into the State Plan Amendment. Do you have any
thoughts on that? And I know that the Doctor had mentioned that
too. I am just following up on his question.
Mr. Barbour. Yes, sir. I think that is absolutely a step in
the right direction. If you have a demonstration project that
has demonstrated that it works, that you are able to do it in a
budget neutral or better way, and that the outcomes are what
you were expecting and what you told was going to happen, if
that is the case, at some point--it shouldn't be years and
years and years later, at some point, you ought to just be able
to make that permanent. And I think importantly to your sister
States, if we are the laboratories of democracy, and if Florida
has got something that really works, it ought to be easier for
us to go adopt what Florida is doing, make it--make some
adjustments for us, but generally adopt what is proven to work
in another State if we choose to, and not have to go through a
big long process that takes 337 days.
Mr. Bilirakis. Sounds good. Thank you.
Mr. Salo, one of the things that the many Republican
Governors have been interested in, they are interested in using
1115 waivers to test consumer-directed accounts with modest
copay structures to encourage health literacy and individuals
participating in their own health care. I agree with that. CMS
has approved a few demonstration programs for this but they
have been stringent on the copays under the waiver program, I
understand. How do you think that fact squares with the reality
that consumers who make a few dollars more are suddenly
expected to be shoppers on the exchanges, for example, at 133
percent of the Federal poverty level you could be on Medicaid
with no copay, but at 134 percent of the Federal poverty level,
you would be on the exchange with no copays?
Mr. Salo. Yes, I think the issue there is--and again with
deference to the administration's priorities, every
administration is going to have priorities about what it wants
to see done with its share of the Medicaid dollars. The current
administration is not a huge fan of copays in the Medicaid
Program, but I think it is clear that a key point of what we
need to do in the overall system to make health care better for
people is that we have to have greater accountability, but for
everyone. Yes, we need better consumer engagement, but we need
to give--we need to make sure that consumers have the tools to
be able to do that effectively. And we need to also make sure
that providers; primary care physicians or what have you, are
accountable. We have to give them the tools to be able to do
that. And ultimately, whether it is a health plan or whether it
is the State, we have to have the tools to create an
environment where all of those other pieces can succeed. You
know, we don't want to just leave anyone out there with, you
know, ``Here is a ticket, good luck out there.'' We have to
create, you know, with--it is not the Peter Principle, it is
the Peter Parker Principle: With great power comes great
responsibility. We have a responsibility to be able to ensure
that everybody within the system is going to succeed as we
change it from a dysfunctional fee-for-service model to a
better integrated, coordinated managed care model. And that is
going to involve consumer engagement, provider engagement, and
State engagement as well.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you. Last question. Governor, CBO has
indicated Obamacare's Medicaid expansion would, on balance,
reduce incentives to work, yet CMS has refused to approve work
requirements as part of the Republican Governors' State
demonstration waivers. Are you aware of anything in Section
1115 that would prevent CMS from approving work-related
requirements?
Mr. Barbour. No, sir, I am not. And clearly, having a plan
where more people work in our economy--today, only 48 \1/2\
percent of adult Americans have a full-time job. The labor
participation rates are about 62.9 percent; the lowest since
the '70s, before women had really come into the workforce in
the numbers that they have in the last 40-some years. So yes,
it is absolutely--now that we allow able-bodied childless
people to be on Medicaid, there is absolutely no reason we
shouldn't look back at Bill Clinton's welfare reform law, which
had work or retraining requirements.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you very much.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognize the gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Castor, 5
minutes for questions.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome, panel.
I would like to read from a Miami Herald article from about
6 months ago relating to Florida's Medicaid Program. It says,
in a sweeping decision, the judge says Florida systematically
has shortchanged poor and disabled children by providing
inadequate money for their health care. A Federal judge
Wednesday declared Florida's healthcare system for needy and
disabled children to be in violation of several Federal laws,
handing a stunning victory to doctors and children's advocates
who have fought for almost a decade to force the State to pay
pediatricians enough money to ensure impoverished children can
receive adequate care. In his 153-page ruling, U.S. Circuit
Judge Adalberto Jordan said lawmakers had for years set the
State's Medicaid budget at an all--artificially low level,
causing pediatricians and other specialists for children to opt
out of the insurance program for the needy. In some areas of
the State, parents had to travel long distances to see
specialists. The low spending plans which forced Medicaid
providers for needy children to be paid far below what private
insurers would spend, and well below what doctors were paid in
the Medicare Program for a more powerful group; elders,
amounted to rationing of care, the order said. And here are a
few examples of what the judge found. Almost 80 percent of
children enrolled in the Medicaid Program are getting no dental
services at all. By squeezing doctor payments, Florida health
regulators left \1/3\ of the State's children on Medicaid with
no preventative medical care, despite the Federal legal
requirements. And this was true for both children paying fee-
for-service or under managed care. In addition, the judge
wrote, an unacceptable percentage of infants do not received a
single well child visit in the first 18 months of their lives.
Florida health regulators sometimes switch needy children from
one Medicaid provider to another without their parents'
knowledge or consent. So these sweeping violations of Federal
law within a demonstration project, and Medicare--Medicaid
waiver raised a lot of questions.
And, Governor, I heard you said, well, for Florida--for all
States, if it is working, maybe we should keep it. But clearly
here, if something is not working, they need to take a look at
it. I think everyone would agree.
So, Ms. Alker, you are fairly familiar with what has been
happening in Florida. This is part of the reason that the low-
income pool and these multibillion-dollar--in Florida, these
large uncompensated care pools have gotten a lot of attention
over past years. A lack of transparency in the way the funds
are distributed by the State. They are distributed not by--they
don't follow beneficiaries, they go--depending on--the pool of
money goes to--depending on what counties have contributed. And
they have raised serious questions about provider rates that
have been cut over the years. What is to be done in a waiver
situation when you have these uncompensated care pools, and yet
providers, doctors are not being paid adequately, and children
aren't getting the care they need?
Ms. Alker. So I think you raised a number of issues, and
one of the really important questions is having, I think,
strong oversight of Medicaid managed care, particularly in
Florida; there has been serious problems over the years with
your managed care companies. And so part of what, you know, if
you build it into the waiver process or through the new
Medicaid managed care regs that CMS has just issued, that we
really are going to need accountability for the taxpayer dollar
with respect to these managed care companies. And I worry
because I think that States have lost personnel, their
departments are often underfunded, and they don't have the
ability to oversee these managed care companies, ensure that we
really are paying for care for very vulnerable children and
others.
And I guess with respect to the uncompensated care pool, I
think it is also important to emphasize, as you mentioned
earlier, Representative Castor, that the low-income pool in
Florida doesn't cover a single person, and uncompensated care
pools don't cover people. They came out of a time when
particularly States had very high uninsured rates, but coverage
is really a better way to approach the healthcare needs of
citizens of your State and others, because the low-income pool
doesn't protect families from bankruptcy, it doesn't ensure
that folks get primary and preventative care, and to my mind,
it is a smarter use of taxpayer dollars to make sure that
people get coverage so they get the primary and preventative
care they need so they don't get sicker and have to wind up
taking uncompensated care from your State's hospitals.
Ms. Castor. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
And now recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Collins, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank
all of the witnesses today for your testimony on what we know
is a major concern for all of us. And I may direct this to
Governor Barbour. As the CEO of Mississippi, I can just tell
you, in my past life, I was the county executive of the largest
upstate county in New York, where Medicaid actually was 115
percent of our budget, of our property taxes. So every single
dollar that we collected in property taxes, every single dollar
we collected was not enough to cover our Medicaid burden,
because in New York, the counties pay a portion of the fee.
That is not true in a lot of States. I don't know what it was
in Mississippi, but in New York our Medicaid costs are so
outrageous that we pass a--you know, a big chunk of it down to
the 62 counties, to the point in Erie County, one of the
poorest counties in the State of New York, home to Buffalo, it
was 115 percent of our property tax levy. So we lived on only
sales tax. The entire--everything we did with highways and
roads and supports of our culturals, our prisons, our holding
center, 100 percent of everything we did outside of Medicaid
was sales tax revenue, which is not a predictable source.
So I will get back to commonsense. When commonsense meets
good Government, I think that is a good day for all of us. And
I want to talk about how nominal copays can make a big
difference. I mean we teach our kids, you know, you raise 50
cents, I will give you 50 cents. You want a new bike, you go
raise this, I will do that. A fundamental part of America is
teaching people at a young age the value of $1, but in
Medicaid, when there is no copay--let me tell you another
story. I mean I can get pretty animated on this. We had in Erie
County what we called the frequent fliers that use ambulances
as a taxi service. They call 911, they climb in an ambulance,
it takes them to the Erie County Medical Center, they get out
and they start walking somewhere else. It was an--a free taxi
cab, that is what it was, because we don't have a copay. I
suggested why not a $50 copay. Fifty dollars to get into an
ambulance and take you to the hospital, and we would even have
a way to potentially, for some of those, waive that, but that
would be more expensive than a taxi cab. So if you are looking
for a taxi ride, call a taxi, don't call an ambulance. And I
was told absolutely not, this isn't going to go that way. I
chaired a commission, County Executives for Medicaid Reform,
asking that we would have the ability at the county level to
set up our own programs, and I was turned down on that one. So
I just have a fundamental belief that having some level of pay,
however little it is, invests a person in what it is they are
getting, and that nothing in life should be free.
So, you know, do you have any comments, Governor?
Mr. Barbour. We try very hard to get CMS to agree to let us
make copayments enforceable, and could not--we were not allowed
to do that. Governor Daniels is quoted in some of the material,
when they started the HIP program he--you know, everybody is
going to have to pay something, and I think the lady from
Indiana said it starts at $1 a month, but I remember him saying
if you can afford a Big Mac you can afford the copayment. And
for people to be--for patients to be participating in their
health care, making decisions because of copays, the decision
may be generic versus brand name, the decision may be something
else, but as an old Scotch-Irish descendent, if it is a cash
bar or a free bar, I know who drinks more. And if you--if it
costs you something, if you have to be part of it, you are
going to be a better healthcare receiver because you are going
to be conscious about that. And the copays don't have to be
very large, as you say, or as Governor Daniels says, where they
have $1, a $1 copay. There is not anybody that can't afford $1
a month.
But anyway, I agree with you. My legislature we had
Democratic majorities in both the House and Senate when I was
Governor. They were for copays and enforceable copays. It is
just commonsense.
Mr. Collins. Well, and that is what I would say. It is
commonsense meets Government. We should do something like this.
In fact, to me, it should be part of the basic Medicaid Program
because if we teach our 6-year-old kids the value of $1, and
let's go out and do some work in the garage and clean up the
house, and then you earn--and I will buy the--pay the rest of
your bicycle, we fundamentally know that anything that is free
has less value than something you even pay a nominal part for.
So certainly within the 1115 program there should, in my
opinion, definitely be a place for something for very small
copays, and anyone who would debate otherwise I think is kind
of leaving commonsense at the door, unfortunately.
Well, thank you again for your testimony. My time has
expired. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognize the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr.
Kennedy, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
witnesses for coming today, and for your testimony on an
extraordinarily important topic.
I apologize, I was bouncing around a little bit and so I
think I missed some comments earlier about the Massachusetts
low-income pool. So, Ms. Alker, I was hoping you might be able
to clarify--I know my colleague, Ms. Castor, brought up the
Florida low-income pool, and I think there were some
comparisons that were made earlier. In your assessment, ma'am,
are there any noticeable differences between the way that the--
Massachusetts has set up its low-income pool and that of
Florida?
Ms. Alker. I think there are. I am not as familiar with
Massachusetts. I think though when you look at the nine States
that CMS has identified with these kinds of uncompensated care
pools, they are all different from each other. And as I
mentioned before, one important step forward is that CMS,
earlier this year, sent a letter to Florida about the
principles they are going to use to apply to all States, excuse
me, going forward as they consider their uncompensated care
pool, and they are applying those principles both to States who
have expanded Medicaid, like Massachusetts, and States who have
not, like Florida.
Mr. Kennedy. Excuse me. Right. So thank you for pointing
out at least one important distinction. I also wanted to talk
about--this has come up a couple of times today, but the work
requirements, and with regards specifically to an issue that
has come up also a couple of times today, mental health. One
group that is particularly hit hard by unemployment are
individuals that are suffering with mental illness. Committee
had a hearing just a couple of days ago on improving our mental
healthcare system in this country, and it is an issue that I
know a lot of us care an awful lot about.
In 2012, 17.8 percent of the seriously mentally ill were
unemployed. This group of individuals could succeed at work if
given the right opportunity for--excuse me, the right
employment supports, which is why Medicaid coverage is so
important. Medicaid--States to provide supportive improvements
like skills assessments, assistance with job search, and
completing job applications, job development and placement, job
training, negotiations with prospective employers. And Medicaid
dollars can be leveraged to support State training programs for
mental health providers who, in turn, serve low-income
beneficiaries. In fact, Mississippi and Massachusetts have
something in common. Both States are taking advantage of these
types of opportunities. Mississippi is, I think, a great
example of using Medicaid support to help State health
programs. And, Governor, your State goes so far as to provide
services to help individuals start their own businesses, such
as helping the with a business plan, finding potential
financing, and ongoing guidance once the business has been
launched. Massachusetts is doing some pretty outstanding work
as well when it comes to treating mental illness and substance
abuse. Flexibility in that waiver process allows Massachusetts
to leverage State dollars to conduct community support
programs, psychiatric day treatment, and acute treatment for
children and adolescents.
So, Ms. Alker, to start with you, do you agree that
flexibility the States have today leverages Medicaid dollars to
serve communities through the designated State health programs,
and the--it is a hallmark of the Medicaid Program that should
be protected?
Ms. Alker. Well, so let me say two things, and then if it
is oK, I would like to go back to the work requirement issue as
well.
So the kinds of programs that you are mentioning, I mean
this has been a hallmark of Section 1115 waivers for many
decades now. This is not something new that the Obama
administration has started doing, and also it is not something
which the Obama administration just simply says we are going to
give you money for. The States come to them with ideas and, you
know, I think we would all agree, if it is a good idea that
supports the objectives of the Medicaid Program, that then that
is the kind of thing exactly the Section 1115 waiver should
test. And so I think again, if we look at it from that long-
term perspective, it is exactly what Mr. Salo was saying is
that, over time, there are more innovative ideas that emanate
from States, and that is a hallmark of Section 1115 waivers.
With respect to the work requirement question, because I
think there is an intersection between the mental health issue
and the work requirement that I would like to point out, work
requirements strike me as a bad idea both from a policy
perspective and they are possibly outside the purview of the
Secretary's legal authority to approve, although I am not a
lawyer so I am going to leave that to others to comment on it,
but I think they are a bad idea for the following reasons. I
think we all share the same objective here, which is we would
like to see people work. We would like to maximize employment.
But it seems to me that imposing the arbitrary work requirement
may, in fact, have the precise opposite effect because you have
folks perhaps who have a mental health condition that needs to
be treated, and the health care--providing them with the health
care will allow them to work in greater--there will be a
greater chance of them becoming employed. So I worry very much
that a work requirement would have precisely the opposite
effect of what is intended.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you. And I am, unfortunately, over time,
so I yield back 5 seconds.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognize the vice chair of the full committee, Mrs.
Blackburn, 5 minutes for questions.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to
thank each of you for your patience as we worked through the
first panel, and then for staying with us. This makes for a
long morning, we understand that, but as we look at the
demonstration projects, we do want to come back in and review
this, and maybe as the director said earlier in the first
panel, be able to put some guidelines in place, and some more
components for oversight and also for conduct, put these in the
statute. So today is important for us.
Mr. Salo, I want to come with--to you. In your testimony,
you had said that simple accounting for Medicaid is extremely
difficult, if not impossible. And we are talking about a
program that is probably the world's largest health insurance
program, and the spending is pretty much on autopilot at the
Federal level. Lot of problems with how this is playing out.
And as a former State senator in Tennessee, and the experiment
we had with TennCare, I fully understand the challenging nature
of Medicaid and of working through these waivers in the 1115
program, but I want to give you a chance to explain this
because surely, you are not suggesting that benefits cannot be
quantified, and that dollars cannot be tracked effectively, or
that accountability is not needed. So would you like to respond
to that?
Mr. Salo. I would love to, thank you.
Mrs. Blackburn. Good.
Mr. Salo. So I guess what I am saying is I think what the
GAO is searching for here is akin to--there is an old joke
where there is a policeman walking down the street and he sees
a guy on his hands and knees, looking for something in the
street under the streetlight, and it is dark. And policeman
comes over, says, you know, what are you doing? He says, I am
looking for my keys. I lost my keys. So the policeman helps
him. And he is there for like 5 or 10 minutes. He says, I can't
find them, are you sure you dropped them here? He says, oh, no,
I dropped them down the block, just the light is better over
here. I think that is what is going on. I think the GAO is
struggling for something that is really simple and really easy,
that for the green eyeshade approach of, well, I can put this
in a checklist, this is simple, this is simple, check, check,
check. And I am here to argue that Medicaid is much more
complex than that. I am not saying it doesn't need
accountability. It does. It has. And I am not saying that we
cannot--we should not track the dollars, track the benefits.
You should, and we do. What I am saying is, I think what the
GAO is pushing for may not actually be good for the ultimate
value and health care--health of the program itself. That as we
start getting into very narrow definitions----
Mrs. Blackburn. Well, sir, I am----
Mr. Salo [continuing]. Of what budget neutrality is----
Mrs. Blackburn [continuing]. Going to interrupt you right
there. If the program is too expensive to afford, it is not
good for anybody. And what we need to make certain is that we
are looking at this from access to affordable health care, and
to approach it from a viewpoint that, well, this is too
challenging, the problem is too big to solve so let's leave it
on autopilot, that is not a responsible course of action, and
that is something that we ought not to do, and it is exactly
the reason we need to pull this back in and look at these 1115
waiver situations, and look at the subjectivity with which
these waivers are being given.
Governor Barbour, I want to come to you. Talking about the
subjective nature of this, and looking back through these
uncompensated care pools, and you look at what happened with
Massachusetts and Hawaii, and they are being given a much
longer period of time for their extension on their pool as
opposed to Florida, and I--what I don't like where this--you
look at how this is playing out, and it seems like you have CMS
treating States differently if they are friendly to the
administration as opposed to those that are not friendly to the
administration. And that is troubling to me. I think it is
troubling to a lot of people that are looking at Medicaid and
Medicaid delivery.
Mr. Barbour. Certainly, that is the contention of the
attorneys general law suit, that because their States did not
expand Medicaid, they are being coerced or they are being
punished in doing this. GAO did not say different States get
different treatment, but they did publish a list of who got
their waivers redone, and it is pretty politically consistent.
If you look down the list, they all voted for the same
candidate for President. They got two senators in the same
party. They all expanded Medicaid. Now, I can't look into
anybody's heart and say they are--that is why they made the
decision, but that is why we need more transparency, not just
in a Democratic administrations, but in Republican
administrations, of why did the decision get made.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I have one other
question for Governor Barbour. I will submit it--it has to do
with eligibility-- get an answer from him relative to that.
I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
That concludes the questions of the members present. We
will have follow-up questions. We will send those to you in
writing. We ask that you please respond promptly.
I remind members that they have 10 business days to submit
questions for the record. Members should submit their questions
by the close of business on Wednesday, July the 8th.
Another very important, interesting hearing. A critical
program needs attention of Congress. This has been very
informative. We thank you for coming.
And without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:11 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Mr. Chairman, thank you for calling today's hearing on
Medicaid demonstration projects, and thank you to all of our
witnesses for coming to testify.
Section 1115 waivers were established for the express
purpose of allowing States to dream big in their Medicaid
programs-to design and pilot new ways of delivering care that
support the overarching objectives of the Medicaid program: to
strengthen coverage, expand access to providers, improve health
outcomes, and increase the quality of care for beneficiaries.
States already have extremely broad flexibility under an
1115 waiver, and that flexibility is a good thing. But in
exchange, it's important that there remains strong public
transparency and evaluation.
That's why I am pleased that after close to 20 years of
recommendations for more transparency into the Medicaid waiver
process, the Affordable Care Act included a bipartisan
provision to improve the transparency of Medicaid waivers, in
line with longstanding recommendations from GAO. Today, because
of this provision, the public has meaningful opportunities to
provide input into the waiver process at both the State and
Federal level, waivers are now evaluated on a periodic basis,
and States submit reports on implementation. This was a huge
step in the right direction.
I am further encouraged by CMS' concurrence with GAO
recommendations specifically in their April 2015 report for
better ongoing and transparent documentation of how States
spend Medicaid dollars. This is a recommendation that prior
administrations had refused to correct, and I continue to
believe it is the right thing to do to ensure dollars are
following our Medicaid beneficiaries.
I was also encouraged by the administration's clear and
public articulation over the past year with States regarding
the specific criteria that it would use for approval of waivers
for States with so-called ``uncompensated care pools.'' In many
past reports, GAO has expressed concerns with the structure and
distribution mechanisms for uncompensated-care dollars that
some States have used. This is another step in the right
direction.
Despite these advancements, I believe there is still more
to be done. A real conversation about improving transparency of
Medicaid waivers, while carefully balancing the need to
preserve State flexibility, is a conversation worth having.
To be clear, however, States already have broad
flexibility. Disguising punitive, ideological philosophies like
work requirements and increased cost-sharing as vital
``flexibility'' needed by States has no place in this
conversation. Those are policies that undermine the foundation
of our safety net.
There is a real opportunity today to evaluate and learn how
to improve the Medicaid waiver process so we can provide better
care to millions of people that count on Medicaid. I look
forward to that discussion.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
