- THE 2010 ELECTION: A LOOK BACK AT WHAT WENT RIGHT AND WRONG

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE 2010 ELECTION: A LOOK BACK AT WHAT WENT RIGHT AND WRONG

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ELECTIONS

of the

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Held in Washington, DC, March 31, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on House Administration

Available on the Internet:
http://www.gpoaccess.gov/congress/house/administration/index.html

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
67-298                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION

DANIEL E. LUNGREN, California, Chairman
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania,
PHIL GINGREY, M.D., Georgia            Ranking Minority Member
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               ZOE LOFGREN, California
TODD ROKITA, Indiana                 CHARLES GONZALEZ, Texas
RICHARD NUGENT, Florida

Professional Staff

Philip Kiko, Staff Director
Jamie Fleet, Minority Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Elections

GREGG HARPER, Mississippi, Chairman
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
RICHARD B. NUGENT, Florida           ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania
TODD ROKITA, Indiana

THE 2010 ELECTION: A LOOK BACK AT WHAT WENT RIGHT AND WRONG

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Elections,
Committee on House Administration,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:35 a.m., in
Room 1310, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Gregg Harper
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Harper, Nugent, Lungren, and
Gonzalez.
Staff Present: Peter Schalestock, Deputy General Counsel;
Kimani Little, Parliamentarian; Joe Wallace, Legislative Clerk;
Yael Barash, Assistant Legislative Clerk; Salley Wood,
Communications Director; Bob Sensenbrenner, Elections Counsel;
Karin Moore, Elections Counsel; Kyle Andersen, Minority Press
Secretary; Matt Defreitas, Minority Professional Staff; Khalil
Abboud, Minority Elections Staff; Thomas Hicks, Minority
Elections Counsel; and Gregg Abbott, Minority Professional
Staff.
Mr. Harper. I now call to order the Committee on House
Administration's Subcommittee on Elections' oversight hearing
evaluating the 2010 midterm elections. The hearing record will
remain open for 5 legislative days so that members may submit
any material that they wish to be included therein.
A quorum is present, so we may proceed.
The Subcommittee on Elections has the important task of
overseeing Federal elections and considering legislative means
to improve and protect the integrity of our electoral system.
This committee previously explored the issue of military and
overseas voting as well as the operations and budget requests
of the Election Assistance Commission. Today, I look forward to
hearing about what we can further learn from the 2010
elections.
According to the United States Elections Project, 40.9
percent of the Voting Eligible Population turned out in 2010.
That is slightly higher than in the last two mid-term
elections. Nonetheless, we need to remain constantly vigilant
in ensuring that all eligible voters have proper access to the
polls and that they are not disenfranchised by illegal voting
or equipment malfunctions.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses regarding
recent reports of noncitizen voting in their States and about
the measures we can take to stop such activity. We will also
hear about technological issues in the 2010 elections, which is
vitally important as we seek to ensure no vote is lost or
disenfranchised from lax oversight of our voting equipment.
Through the Help America Vote Act, the Federal Government
spent several billion dollars helping States purchase new
voting equipment. HAVA also established a new Federal system to
test and certify voting machines. These are important
investments, and we need to monitor how they translate into the
actual voting experience.
My colleagues and I are committed to ensuring the integrity
of elections, of protecting the hard-fought right to vote, and
in learning from the past as we evaluate proposals for the
future of our electoral system. I thank each of them for being
here, and all of you for taking the time to be here and would
like now to recognize my colleague, Mr. Gonzalez, who is now
the ranking member of this subcommittee, for the purpose of
providing an opening statement.
Mr. Gonzalez.
[The statement of Mr. Harper follows:]

Mr. Gonzalez. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
And of course, I appreciate all of your hard work, and I do
want to acknowledge the hard work of our staffs.
And I welcome the witnesses. I am going to be brief. Mr.
Brady may be here a little later, but I am not sure at what
time. But, again, this is obviously an issue dear to all of us.
I think we all share the same goal, and that is to,
basically, accommodate the voter, make sure that the voting
experience is one that is easy, of course, to exercise. And if
that is our goal, the differences we may have is, How we use
limited resources, What are perceived problems as opposed to
actual problems, and What can we do?
So I am hoping that today we can identify common ground.
Again, I am not real sure that we are going to agree what needs
more attention. That may be another issue or another matter
and, as the testimony may develop, maybe it won't.
I am hoping that today we all leave here today still united
in that single purpose and goal in trying to find the best
solutions, as I said, with the limited resources that you have
at the local and State level--and I know you may be looking to
the Federal Government for assistance--and we are also limited
by the economics of our time and budgetary constraints.
But, when it is all said and done, if we don't have an open
process and a process that accommodates the voting experience,
then what are we all doing in the respective positions that we
hold?
And, with that, I would yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you.
[The statement of Mr. Gonzalez follows:]
Mr. Harper. I would like now to introduce our witnesses.

STATEMENTS OF THE HONORABLE SCOTT GESSLER, COLORADO SECRETARY
OF STATE; THE HONORABLE MARK RITCHIE, MINNESOTA SECRETARY OF
STATE; SUSAN GILL, SUPERVISOR OF ELECTIONS, CITRUS COUNTY,
FLORIDA; KEN CARBULLIDO, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT OF VOTING
SYSTEMS, ELECTION SYSTEMS & SOFTWARE, INC.; LAWRENCE NORDEN,
DEPUTY DIRECTOR, DEMOCRACY PROGRAM, BRENNAN CENTER FOR JUSTICE
AT NYU SCHOOL OF LAW

Mr. Harper. The Honorable Scott Gessler is the 37th
Secretary of State of Colorado, elected this past November. Mr.
Gessler was previously a partner at Hackstaff and Gessler,
where he focused on election law, constitutional law, and
campaign finance. He has also served at the Department of
Justice as a trial attorney focusing on international criminal
law and terrorism, and I know has made many recommendations to
the Colorado General Assembly following the 2008 elections.
The Honorable Mark Ritchie is the 21st Secretary of State
of Minnesota. Prior to his election as Secretary in 2006, Mr.
Ritchie served for many years in Minnesota's Department of
Agriculture. He served as president of the Institute for
Agriculture and Trade Policy from 1988 to 2006, and currently
is the President of the National Association of Secretaries of
State.
Ms. Susan Gill is the Citrus County Supervisor of
Elections, elected in 1996. She was reelected--something we all
envy--without opposition in 2000, 2004 and 2008.
Congratulations.
Ms. Gill is a member of the Florida State Association of
Supervisors of Elections, serving as president in 2005 and
2006, and has held, I believe, every office position in that
organization and has been very, very active on our voting
process. She served as the chair of the Rules and Legislative
Committees, and is currently the cochair of the association's
Vote Center Task Force and has great expertise in this area.
Mr. Ken Carbullido--I hope I said that right.
Mr. Carbullido. Exactly right.
Mr. Harper. Mr. Carbullido is senior vice president of
Voting Systems, Election Systems & Software, one of the
country's most successful election management companies. He has
over 30 years of experience in a variety of technology
development and management roles.
Prior to joining Election Systems & Software, he was the
Chief Information Officer for First Data Resources. Over his
career, Mr. Carbullido has been active in application software
development, systems software development, hardware
engineering--many items, including quality assurance. And we
look forward to hearing your testimony also.
Mr. Lawrence Norden is the Deputy Director of the Democracy
program at the Brennan Center for Justice at the NYU School of
Law. He is also the Director of the Brennan Center's Voting
Technology Project. He has authored several nationally
recognized reports related to voting rights, voting systems,
and election administration. He also served as chair of the
Ohio Secretary of State's bipartisan election summit and
conference.
We appreciate all of you taking the time to be here today.
The committee has received written testimony from each of you.
At the appropriate time, I will recognize each of you for 5
minutes to present a summary of the submission. To help you
keep that time, we have a timing device that you will see there
in front of you. The device will have a green light for the
first 4 minutes and will turn yellow when 1 minute remains, and
when the light turns red, your time would be up.
Secretary Gessler, we will begin with you for your remarks.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE SCOTT GESSLER

Mr. Gessler. Thank you, Chairman Harper and Congressman
Gonzalez, and other members of the committee.
I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today to
discuss the results of a study that my office conducted
regarding the citizenship of registered voters in Colorado.
What we did is we compared our driver's license database to
the registered voter database. And Colorado requires legal
presence in order to issue a license to someone, a driver's
license, and starting in 2006, our State began collecting data
on what type of evidence was presented to receive a driver's
license, whether it was a citizenship document or an
immigration document, in order to receive that. And so what we
did was we compared that information against the registered
voter database.
What we found was that there were 11,805 individuals who
had registered to vote in Colorado and also had provided sort
of self-affirmed--provided evidence that they were not citizens
starting in 2006--or going back to 2006, that they were not
citizens when they got their driver's license. Of those 11,805
individuals, 106 first registered to vote, and then when they
got their driver's license later, showed that they were
noncitizens when they got their driver's license. Of the 11,805
individuals, about 5,000, almost 5,000, voted in the last
election. So that was sort of the basic contours of the study
we did.
What we think this study shows is that Colorado has a
problem with noncitizens who are registered to vote and may be
voting as well. We don't quite know the size or the magnitude
of that problem. So the analysis is in some ways preliminary.
What we do know is that there is some problem here. We know the
106, we are reasonably certain that when people register to
vote and then later show that they are a noncitizen, that they
are improperly registered to vote.
Our data only goes back to 2006, and for many immigrants,
it takes at least 5 years before they can become a U.S. citizen
after they first get their green card. So some people may have
gotten a driver's license when they were a noncitizen, become a
citizen, and then registered to vote. And some did not, some
registered to vote improperly and remain that way.
And we also have some anecdotal information. Within the
last 2 or 3 years, we have had about 150 people in the State of
Colorado who registered as noncitizens and then later withdrew
their registration, so they sort of self-identified themselves
and withdrew their own registration. So we know we have a
problem here. We don't know the size of it.
One of the things that we are looking at in Colorado--and
that I would suggest to the committee members as well--is that
we need additional tools to be able to measure the size of this
issue and resolve it as well. Issues regarding immigration and
regarding registrations of noncitizens to vote draw a lot of
attention and intense debate. Unfortunately, oftentimes there
is not very thorough analysis that goes on there, so that is
one of the things that we need to do.
What we are trying to do in Colorado is create a system
where the Secretary of State can reach out to these folks, send
letters to them asking them to provide proof of citizenship,
and if they don't respond, we will put them in a suspended
status. It is a crime to register to vote or to vote as a
noncitizen in the State of Colorado. We don't think criminal
prosecution or investigation is the right way to go. It is a
very cumbersome approach here, and our goal is just to maintain
accurate databases.
One of the things we have also done is reached out to
Federal authorities to identify information. Now the SAVE
program has been very--we are working with them, with
immigration authorities to get lists of noncitizens who reside
in Colorado.
The other thing we tried to do is we contacted the United
States District Court for the District of Colorado and we asked
them for noncitizen juror recusals, so when someone goes into a
jury panel and those are drawn from voting rolls and they
recuse themselves because they are noncitizen, we asked for
that information so we can check it against the voting rolls.
GAO published a study several years back that stated that was a
possibility to maintain clean voting rolls. Unfortunately, our
district court has denied us access to that information, and
that is certainly one area that would be helpful.
So, overall, I think what we have been able to learn is
that there is an issue with noncitizens registered to vote and
voting in Colorado. We know there is a problem. We don't know
the size of it. We are looking to get the tools to better be
able to measure this and to resolve this in an administrative
fashion. And we certainly hope that we will receive assistance
from the Federal Government with those sources of information
as well. So thank you very much for your time.
[The statement of Mr. Gessler follows:]

Mr. Harper. Thank you very much, Mr. Gessler.
Now we will hear from Mark Ritchie and look forward to your
remarks.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MARK RITCHIE

Mr. Ritchie. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
To all members, I want to first thank you very much for
your willingness to come over to our NASS national meeting. It
was a great honor for us. We want to really continue that
relationship, so thank you again; we look forward to continuing
that conversation.
I am testifying today on behalf of my great State, but I do
also serve as the current President of NASS. In that position,
I follow fairly closely upon your colleague, now Congressman
Rokita, who was our former President.
Minnesota has the habit, or the culture, of going back
after each election and talking about what went right, what
went wrong, what can we do better? So we were very appreciative
to hear this hearing was going to be happening here today. And
after the last two election cycles, I have traveled statewide--
typically to 30 or 40 places, so that all 87 counties can
participate--gathering up their impressions. I have three main
impressions from the 2010 election:
First, we were thrilled that even though we didn't have a
presidential race, a Senate race, an issue on the ballot, a
constitutional amendment, we still had a very high turnout.
Again, Minnesota was number one in the Nation. We know that is
because our citizens very much trust our system, and they have
always had that experience. We vote on paper ballots. We are a
local-based system, and people trust the system. But we also
are aware that at a national level, turnout was 40 percent, as
you cited; so just as a longer-term issue, there is the
question of very low voter participation.
Some States that have typically been higher were down in
the 30 percent range and a couple States down in the 20 percent
range. This is a very serious issue for our Nation, and I think
it is something we all need to think about and imagine what we
could do. And some of the work that you have done, especially
making sure our overseas voters, the military voters, can vote
will help with that.
The second thing is that we were strongly affirmed in the
progress we made, thanks to the MOVE Act, in being able to
change the date of our primary to extend the time for our
overseas voters.
When I was elected in 2006, sitting on my chair when I was
sworn in--actually, the day I was sworn in--I found this letter
from the Federal Voting Assistance Project. It said, Dear
Secretary of the State--it was addressed to the prior Secretary
of State--and it essentially said, very politely, Minnesota
does great in elections, but terribly when it comes to military
and overseas voters, and it had 10 suggestions. I did not know
they had been sending that letter for 10 years and that it had
been ignored, but in any case, we picked up the letter. We
worked with the legislature. We passed much of that agenda. We
implemented it. We had a lot of success from that, but we were
not able to get the Governor's agreement to change the date of
the primary. That bill was vetoed. Thanks to the MOVE Act, we
were able to overcome the veto.
The 46 days--our State implemented the MOVE Act with
absentee ballots sent 46 days before the elections--we have had
the effect of reducing the late returns. That was the most
common thing. The unanticipated but very important secondary
effect was that that length of time allowed many people to be
able to correct a small error that they had made, either
forgetting a signature or forgetting a date on an absentee
ballot envelope. I think ultimately we had, in 2008, 540 late
ballots; in 2010, approximately 130 or 140. But we also reduced
the error rate from 2 percent in 2008 to less than half of a
percent in 2010, and that is much lower than our domestic rate
as well. So the extra time had several different positive
benefits, and that was terrific.
The third thing we implemented was the use of newly
available electronic databases that really lowered the cost and
increased the efficiency and the integrity at the local level.
We used our ``change of address'' files from the postal service
and reduced our post-election data entry by about 100,000--a
very great savings to local officials. We use Social Security
databases now to take people who die in other States off our
list. If you die inside of Minnesota, we know very soon. If you
die in Florida--some Minnesotans go to Florida in the winter--
it is very complicated. I am sure anyone who has run for office
who has done any phoning knows what it means to have that pause
at the other end when you ask for somebody and you know. I get
these calls in my own home, and that little touch of grief
happens when somebody calls and asks for my daughter. So I am
very positive about that use of electronic databases improve
our list.
So we also use electronic databases effectively to
challenge voters before election day--similar to what was
mentioned about Colorado, we use the system of challenging
before election day, and we use the system afterwards to
identify if anyone has potentially voted illegally and then
turn those names over to our county attorney, who is the
prosecuting authority in Minnesota.
Thank you again for putting attention on this topic. I look
forward to your questions.
[The statement of Mr. Ritchie follows:]

Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Ritchie. I appreciate you being
here and hearing your testimony.
Ms. Gill, we ask to hear from you now. Thank you very much.
And again, you are now my idol. So go ahead.

STATEMENT OF SUSAN GILL

Ms. Gill. Well, it is a good start anyway.
Chairman Harper and Mr. Gonzalez, members of the
committee--and a special hello to my Congressman, Richard
Nugent--I want to thank you for the opportunity to participate
in this hearing.
First, I would like to thank Congress for the Help America
Vote Act. I have been in this job for more than 14 years now
and I can tell you we were able to use the HAVA funds to
provide equipment for people with disabilities, to enhance our
voter education programs, and to provide additional poll worker
training tools. All the grants were greatly appreciated.
A major concern at every level of government, whether it is
local, State, or Federal, is the budget. Shrinking budgets can
cause serious problems for elections. A March 22nd article in
the Fresno Bee entitled, ``Report: Blame Budget Cuts on
November Election Snags,'' it reports on a November 2010
election and the problems that were caused by the slashed
budget. The grand jury recommended that the country supervisors
should ``provide adequate funding to ensure the ability of the
county clerk to maintain credible elections.'' The article
continues on saying that the funding could get worse, and that
the county officials have asked their department heads to
reduce their budget another 14 percent.
The article also reported that the county records indicated
that the funding for the elections office is down 40 percent
from what it was 5 years ago. If you take the 40 percent and
the 14, this Fresno election official is asked to conduct
elections with 54 percent less funding than 5 years ago.
I am not singling out Fresno. The problems Fresno
encountered will be played out in many other jurisdictions in
the Nation. We are charged with conserving tax dollars. We must
ask the public to understand that there will be reductions in
conveniences and services, or there will have to be tax
increases, which nobody wants.
The fear of every election professional in America is how
to assure that we serve voters well when the funds to conduct
elections have been significantly reduced. I cannot overstate
our concern. Cuts have consequences that have to affect
expectations and potentially affect performance.
Florida had a smooth 2010 election, I am happy to report.
As you know, Florida has had perhaps more election changes in
the last 10 years than any other State, and so we know
something about adapting quickly. I will say that the issue
that captured attention was the late reporting of results in
one county. Our election for the Governor was very close, 1
percent, and the results were not available until the next day.
This caused a lot of criticism because nobody wants to wait for
election results. So we have to remember that the accuracy of
the votes is more important than the timeliness. Timeliness is
very important. However, it can't outweigh accurate results.
On the plus side, voter confidence and voter satisfaction
has greatly increased. Voters can now vote early, vote by mail,
or go to their polling place. This means if they vote by mail,
they don't have to go to their polling place. If they vote at
an early vote site, they are never at the wrong precinct. We
are looking at vote centers in Florida as a result of this, as
they do in Minnesota and Indiana; we think that might be the
answer.
Redistricting takes place in 2012, as we all know. That is
going to put additional pressure on the election process. We
need to know what districts to put candidates on the ballot,
and you need to know what district you are running in, so it is
going to be tight there.
In conclusion, we have made great progress since the 2000
election. The progress in conducting fair, honest and accurate
elections does come at a price. My hope is that the reduction
in funding for elections does not cause issues on the upcoming
2012 elections.
My fear is that the cutting of funds at the State and
Federal level end up in the laps of local government. We cannot
afford to have the voter confidence that we have gained over
these years eroded. Citizens must have confidence in their
election process. If voters stop believing in the fairness of
elections, they cannot believe in the government that results
from it.
I assure you that elections officials are dedicated to the
integrity of the elections process and will work to preserve
the process to the best of our abilities with the resources
provided.
Thank you very much for the honor and the opportunity to
address this committee.
[The statement of Ms. Gill follows:]

Mr. Harper. Thank you very much, Ms. Gill.
And having been an observer for 2 weeks during the 2000
election recount, I can assure you that you have made eligibly
great strides in the State of Florida.
We will now hear from Mr. Carbullido and look forward to
your remarks.

STATEMENT OF KEN CARBULLIDO

Mr. Carbullido. Thank you, Chairman Harper, Mr. Gonzalez,
and members of the committee for inviting me here to testify on
behalf of the ES&S.
My comments today are centered both on things that went
right as well as things that could have been improved.
Specifically, I am here to address the recent actions taken by
the EAC to open a formal investigation of ES&S's Unity system,
version 3.2.0.0. I have a deep understanding of the issues,
solutions, processes, communications, and the involvement of
the EAC. I have an observation to make as well as some
recommendations that I would like the committee to consider.
What were the issues? The initial issue, first identified
by Cuyahoga County, Ohio, during preelection testing, was a
freeze/shutdown in a limited and random instance on the DS200
scanner. This freeze/shutdown occurred in extremely low
instances. It is critical to note that this situation was
recoverable by merely restarting the unit. No votes were lost;
voting was not interrupted. ES&S takes all system issues very
seriously. So, while the interruption itself was not an
accuracy issue, ES&S recognizes that it could potentially be
concerning to voters that might witness such an event, and
therefore, this became a top priority for ES&S to correct this
issue.
Because the occurrence of the issue was infrequent, random,
and not easily and always reproducible, because there were two
separate low level issues at the root cause, one which involved
COTS software, it took a significant effort to identify the
root causes and the software corrections. And it took quite an
effort to ensure and validate that the corrections and the
updates were completely resolving the freeze/shutdown issue.
Prior to completion of the testing of these updated
software at Wyle Laboratories, there were a series of
additional events that transpired. Additional software issues
were identified and addressed. We were forced to transfer the
testing of this new improved software version to a new voting
system test laboratory. A fix was introduced to correct a
previously reported issue that involved the processing of
skewed ballots. Another issue was the occurrence of a ballot
drop issue that occurred in the laboratory when the ballot
dropped into the box without being counted.
I am pleased to report that all of these issues have been
resolved. The EAC has now certified Unity 3.2.1.0, which
contains the updated version of the DS200 software that
corrects all of the above-noted issues as well as many other
enhancements. This updated version will be used to amend the
3.2.0.0 release, which will provide the required cure outlined
within the EAC's formal policies and procedures.
Relatively speaking, each software solution was found
rather quickly. Getting these corrections and improvements into
the field in a timely manner is where ES&S believes the process
could be improved. For example, the skewed ballot issue was
reported to ES&S on October 8, 2009. The software was corrected
by October 15, 2009. The first approval of this correction was
granted by the EAC on July 22, 2010. It took 7 days to correct
the issues and 9 months to obtain an EAC approval.
The freeze/shutdown initially reported on April 6, 2010,
was corrected by ES&S on June 29, 2010. Just earlier this week,
the EAC certified the corrected software. ES&S devoted 3 months
of intensive investigation to isolate and correct the problem,
and 9 long additional months transpired while the EAC, the VSTL
and the EAC technical reviewers reviewed our analysis and
corrections, developed a test plan, and finally validated the
corrections to their approval. The ballot drop issue was
discovered on November 11, 2010. ES&S corrected it on December
23. Final approval was just received this week.
As you can tell, our primary concern is the timing of
advancing these often-needed corrections into the field in a
way that is beneficial and cost-effective, not only to the
vendors but, more importantly, to the election officials and
the voters. My second concern is with the action taken by the
EAC to open a formal investigation of these issues.
At the time of the investigation, all the facts were known,
all the documentation was given to the EAC, and testing was in
final stages. We are not opposing an investigation where one is
warranted, but in this case, we exhibited total compliance in
working with the EAC to ensure that these issues were corrected
and that the EAC was in full possession of all the
documentation and technical analysis.
It is our belief that the EAC can provide a reliable,
standardized, efficient and effective service for all States
and customers that they can rely on.
Since this is a hearing of what went right in 2010, I would
be remiss if I did not applaud our customers, including Jane
Platten of Cuyahoga County and all of our customers across the
Nation, who conducted over 8,500 elections in 2010 with polls
opening on time, voters voting in confidence, and results
reported in a timely manner in a system maintained in a secure
environment.
We stand committed to working with this esteemed body and
the EAC to continue to find ways to improve the voting system
test program. It is not broken. It is on the right track, but
it does need some work and adjustments to keep it functioning
at a level that is beneficial and timely for all.
Once again, thank you for your time and the opportunity to
speak here today.
[The statement of Mr. Carbullido follows:]

Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Carbullido. I appreciate you
being here today.
I now ask unanimous consent to allow Mr. Lungren, the
chairman of the full committee, to participate in this
subcommittee hearing.
Hearing no objection, Mr. Lungren, we welcome you here.
At this time, we will hear from Mr. Lawrence Norden, and
look forward to your remarks.

STATEMENT OF LAWRENCE NORDEN

Mr. Norden. Thank you to the committee for giving the
Brennan Center the opportunity to share with you the results of
our studies of the Nation's election infrastructure in the 2010
elections. The Brennan Center is a nonpartisan public policy
and law institute based at NYU School of Law, and we work on
issues of democracy and justice.
What went right and wrong in 2010? As we heard from Ms.
Gill, given the pace of change that we have seen in election
administration over the last several years and given the
shrunken budgets of election officials around the country, it
is fair to say that things went remarkably well in 2010.
Unfortunately, in some important ways, national election
infrastructure has not kept up with modern society, and this
has continued to cause problems in our elections--it did in
2010--and I want to point to the continued critical need for
two specific changes.
One is a modernization of our country's registration
system, including the adoption of automated and online
registration for consenting eligible citizens. And the second
is the creation of a national database that identifies voting
system malfunction and flaws to prevent their recurrence.
First I want to talk about voter registration. The 2010
election showed, again, that we have a 19th century system that
needs to be upgraded. It overwhelms election officials with
burdensome and needless paperwork, and it prevents many
American citizens from exercising their right to vote. I am
sure many on the committee are aware of the Harvard/MIT study
that estimated in 2008 as many as 2 to 3 million Americans were
not able to vote because of problems with voter registration.
And we saw similar problems again in 2010.
The good news is, as a result of the Help America Vote Act
of 2002, every State has or soon will have a statewide voter
registration database. And many, as Secretary Ritchie mentioned
they are doing in Minnesota, have been leveraging these
databases to modernize their antiquated systems.
Specifically, I want to talk about four things that States
have been doing. One is that they have automated the
registration process at voter registration agencies for
consenting eligible citizens. Registration information is
transmitted electronically and securely to election
authorities, and this gets rid of the paperwork and the
potential for clerical errors in that process.
Several States have made registration portable. If I go to
a government agency and I update that information, that
information will be updated for registration purposes, unless I
say that it should not be. Eleven States have created online
interface for voter registration, meaning citizens can register
online; they can make sure that their information is accurate;
and they can find the right polling locations. And finally,
some States are allowing for election day corrections, creating
a fail-safe to ensure that errors or omissions on the rolls
don't keep people from voting.
The result is increased registration rates, more accurate
and secure rolls, substantially less burden for election
officials, less data entry, more managing of elections, and
substantial savings for States.
At the Federal level, Representative Lofgren last year
introduced a bill that would allow registration through the
Internet, and we hope that this committee will consider
opportunities to build on that bill.
Something I want to talk about briefly is voting machines.
We have made much progress with voting machines. Unfortunately,
we still see the unnecessary recurrence of problems. The same
failures occur in one jurisdiction with the same machines in
another jurisdiction at a later election. And this has,
unfortunately, resulted in disenfranchisement.
Unlike most products that we purchase and use in the United
States--automobiles, airplanes, even toasters--for the vast
majority of systems in use today manufacturers are not required
to report malfunctions to any Federal agency, and there is no
Federal agency that either investigates such alleged failures
or alerts election officials and the general public to possible
problems. I am running out of time, so I won't talk about some
of the progress that the EAC has made in this area, but I do
think that it is worth coming back to.
I just want to wrap up by saying that, when it comes to
voting machines and the importance of voting systems to our
democracy, the Brennan Center has concluded that we do need a
national searchable database of voting system problems to
ensure that voting system defects are caught early, disclosed
immediately, and corrected comprehensively.
[The statement of Mr. Norden follows:]

Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Norden.
I appreciate that very much.
We now have time for committee members to ask questions of
the witnesses. Each member is allotted 5 minutes to ask
questions of the witnesses. To help us keep up with it, just
like the witnesses, we use a timing device on the witness
table. We will alternate back and forth between the majority
and the minority.
To begin with, I will recognize myself for 5 minutes, and
first, I will start with Mr. Gessler.
I would like for you to just comment on the progress of
your investigation into noncitizen voting in Colorado.
Mr. Gessler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Right now, the next steps that we have for our
investigation is looking into the legal framework as to how we
are going to be able to deal with this issue, where we have
sort of an articulable reason why people who have self-affirmed
as noncitizens are nonetheless on the voting roll. Again, some
of it may be willful. Some of it may be erroneous, and some of
it may stem from misunderstandings. We don't know. We don't
have the tools, or we have not exercised tools in the past to
measure this. So what we are looking at is a way to reach out
to folks, to send them a letter and require them to provide
proof of citizenship. Our view is it is better for someone to
receive a letter in the mail than a knock on the door for a
criminal investigation.
Of course, we are reaching out to some of the Federal
agencies for databases. Unfortunately, we have run into that
roadblock with the district court in Colorado. And we are
trying to create smoother legislative tools. My view on this is
that we have uncovered an issue that does raise the likelihood
that there are a large number of people who are operating
illegally in Colorado. We want to remove that. We are not
looking for a criminal tool, but we are going to take action on
this.
Mr. Harper. Can you tell me if anyone from the Voting
Rights section of the Department of Justice has contacted you
regarding your findings?
Mr. Gessler. We have not received, to my knowledge, any
contact from the Department of Justice.
Mr. Harper. So what administrative remedies would best help
you to deal with this issue that you are working on?
Mr. Gessler. Well, I think the administrative remedy is an
efficient way to reach out to the folks who have self-
identified as noncitizens in the recent past and to get more
information from them. So we are looking at a way to do that
efficiently, ideally through letters, through the mail, rather
than personal investigations. And then the other thing we are
looking at is to be able to reach out to other databases to be
able to check.
In Colorado, we recently had legislation that would require
people to provide proof of citizenship up front--that was
proposed legislation. It was not accepted by our State
legislature; it died in our State Senate. So we don't have a
screen for citizenship on the front end when people register to
vote. What we are looking to do is, alternatively, to search
databases and find other sort of objective ways to identify
people who may have self-affirmed as noncitizens and maintain
accurate voter rolls on the back end as it were.
Mr. Harper. Thank you.
Mr. Ritchie, do citizens in Minnesota have a right not to
register? I mean, the way that your system works, do they have
a way to opt out or is it automatic--tell us how that is going
to work in your State.
Mr. Ritchie. Mr. Chairman, the only State that I know of
where all citizens are just in a sense automatically
``registered'' is North Dakota, which the Secretary there
builds the system. Minnesota's system is very similar to I
believe all other 49 States, that in the process of getting a
driver's license there is a box where you are asked--typically
you are asked--would you like to register to vote, or
reregister, in terms of changing your address? If the person
says yes, that box is marked. That is signed, and then that
goes to the Department of Public Safety, the Division of Motor
Vehicles. That information is then transferred electronically.
It has been screened for citizenship, for corrections, for
everything else. So we have, I would say, a similar system to
the other 49 States other than North Dakota, which is the one
State where everybody does get ``registered'', so to speak.
Mr. Harper. I know noncitizens can get their driver's
license, obviously, in Minnesota, and you referred that you
access maybe another database. What is that other database that
you are accessing to crosscheck?
Mr. Ritchie. Mr. Chairman, that is correct. Our driver's
licenses have a date, they have a way--we call it a ``status
check'' that they use within the inside of the process of
applying for driver's licenses. We use that information to scan
both before elections, to challenge voters on the front end,
and we use it on the back end to see if in fact somebody
registered through the Department of Public Safety, through
vehicle services, that is a noncitizen. The legislature has
also taken action to raise some fees, to provide additional
moneys to the Department of Public Safety to be able to expand
some of their capacity. But so far, it is all done
electronically, basically using their data.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Ritchie.
I will now recognize Mr. Gonzalez for questions.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gessler, let me ask you, there is a difference between
someone who is not qualified, let's say a noncitizen, in
registering, and it would be something separate if that person
then exercised that particular right that they are not entitled
to. Registration and actual voting: They are two different
things, is that right?
Mr. Gessler. Congressman Gonzalez, that is correct. In
Colorado, however, they are both illegal if someone registers,
and they know--which is willful behavior--and they know they
are not----
Mr. Gonzalez. We understand. And if you were going to
devote limited resources, you probably would be targeting those
that exercised an illegal right. I mean, you were a prosecutor
once, right?
Mr. Gessler. That is correct.
Mr. Gonzalez. And so you know what I am talking about as
far as making your best case and then guarding against what
would be detrimental to the voting process and the rights of
all Americans that are citizens and exercise their right to
vote.
Do you have any idea the resources that you expended in
pursuing the comparison of the different data--and I have got
here I think your letter or our report, ``Comparison of
Colorado's Voter Rolls With Department of Revenue Noncitizen
Records, March 8, 2011.'' Do you know what you devoted to that
effort in the way of manpower and dollars?
Mr. Gessler. I know that we did not expend any additional
dollars in our budget. We did expend some manpower. I know I
worked several late nights. However my salary is fixed, so that
did not cost the State of Colorado any additional fees.
Mr. Gonzalez. We are not talking about extra money. We all
work within budgets, or we attempt to--and you will hear that
the Federal Government doesn't, but nevertheless, the attempt
is made.
Let me ask, you were a prosecutor once. Would you take a
case, based on the information that you were able to compile--
because I have read your report--would you present a case that
uses words to a judge like, ``impossible to provide a precise
number,'' ``data are inconclusive,'' ``incomplete,'' ``does not
prove,'' ``cannot be determined''? You wouldn't base any case
with that kind of conditioning language, would you?
Mr. Gessler. Well, I think, Mr. Congressman, there are sort
of two different frameworks here.
One is a prosecutorial framework, as far as going forward.
A second is whether or not that warrants criminal
investigation. And I should say there is a third framework, is
there an administrative way to resolve these uncertainties?
What we are looking at in Colorado is not prosecuting, nor are
we even looking at criminally investigating.
What we are looking at, however, is to administratively
resolve this. So I would agree with you that that is not
adequate to be able to provide a basis for prosecution.
Mr. Gonzalez. So, then, let's just work on what you might
be able to do administratively. Working with the resources that
you do have, who would be those individuals that would be able
to assist you in ascertaining why someone who is not a citizen
would fill out a registration form? Wouldn't that be, let's
say, the Mesa County Clerk and Recorder? Is that Sheila Reiner;
is that her name?
Mr. Gessler. Yes, sir, Sheila Reiner.
Mr. Gonzalez. All right. My understanding is she was very
concerned about your allegations, and she requested the
information of these individuals--obviously within her
jurisdiction--and that you refused to provide her with that
information; is that correct?
Mr. Gessler. It is a tentative refusal at this point. We
have an agreement with the Department of Motor Vehicles, and we
are very concerned about making sure we protect people's
private information. So we are still running the legal traps to
be able to make sure that we are legally able to share that
information with her.
If, in fact, we are--and I believe our tentative
conclusions at this point is that we are, but we are still
conferring with the attorney general's office on that--if we
are able to share that information without violating those
privacy concerns, yes, we will do it. But I think our first
concern is to make sure that we are not violating various State
privacy requirements.
Mr. Gonzalez. I just can't imagine that someone like Ms.
Reiner would not be entrusted with some information regarding
something that comes under the purview of her responsibilities,
but we will move on.
Isn't every voter registration, as a result of the Help
America Vote Act, have a provision at the outset that asks the
question of whether you are a citizen or not a citizen? And if
you are not a citizen, you are not to proceed further with
filling out the form?
Mr. Gessler. That is correct. We have had problems in
Colorado, however, some administrative errors where people that
have filled out a registration form, said they are not a
citizen, yet they nonetheless registered----
Mr. Gonzalez. So who is authorized to have someone fill out
a registration form? Because I am familiar with Texas; I am not
with Colorado.
Mr. Gessler. The clerks and recorders are the ones who
receive that. Unfortunately, we have no verification process in
the State of Colorado----
Mr. Gonzalez. The individual that presents this form, let's
say a Motor Vehicle, an individual, a clerk--in Texas, before
you can have someone actually fill out a registration form,
there is some training. You actually deputize folks. But there
is some training involved so that they are placed on notice
that a noncitizen is not to fill out this form. That is the
first question that they will be asking. Do you not follow that
in Colorado?
Mr. Gessler. I am unfamiliar with the Texas training.
Mr. Gonzalez. So, in Colorado, anyone can fill anything
out, and there are no instructions. If there is an individual
who represents a State, the county, or whatever, they are not
charged with any responsibility to make sure that that
individual is not signing that, and the question is posed.
Because I think there actually is a simple answer to all of
this.
Mr. Gessler. I apologize, Congressman, I didn't fully
follow that last question.
I can say this, however, that people are instructed to read
the questions and to fill them out accurately. I will say that
we have seen human error. We have seen our database that allows
people to be registered and to vote even though they are in a
noncitizenship status. That is a problem with our database that
we have recently resolved.
I do also know that there is no verification, and our
election officials do not verify the accuracy of any of the
information on the voting rolls. I think that is what gives
rise to this problem.
Mr. Gonzalez. There is an affirmation that subjects
somebody to penalties if they lie.
Mr. Gessler. That is correct.
Mr. Gonzalez. So there is then. You said there is--okay,
there is no verification. All we have is affirmation, and that
is, the individual who signs it under the penalty of law
affirms that all of the information on here is correct.
Mr. Gessler. That is correct.
Mr. Gonzalez. And I've way exceeded the time.
Thank you for your patience, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Gonzalez.
I will now recognize Mr. Nugent for questions.
Mr. Nugent. Well, thank you for appearing today in front of
this panel.
Ms. Gill, we absolutely appreciate having you here,
particularly since you are on the front lines in regards to
voter registration and doing elections, and you have done a
very good job in Citrus County.
Going back to this conservation we were having as it
relates to Colorado, what is the verification process in
Florida as it relates to those that are not citizens?
Ms. Gill. Okay. Well, the form says, as Mr. Gonzalez
mentioned, that you are affirming that you are a United States
citizen on our Florida form. That is one of the very first
things that you do. And you are signing that you are. We are
not requiring someone to provide us with proof of their
citizenship because they are affirming that that is so.
Now if we have information, as supervisors, that would lead
us to believe that this person is not a citizen, then we would
proceed from there. Other than that, it is a system that is
built on trust.
It is the same thing, we have the box on our Florida
registration form that says, Are you a convicted felon, and if
you are, have your rights been restored? This is part of the
Florida law. So those boxes are there.
And of course, with the felons, though, we do have a way of
checking. They are matched up against the database with the
Department of Corrections and such.
But as we go forward with this and you talk about
citizenship, you have to be really careful because back in
2000--you may remember this--when we were trying to make sure
that we didn't have felons on the voting list, the first list
that came out was very inaccurate, and it came out just before
election. It was dumped in the laps of supervisors of elections
just before elections and said, do something with this. And
then we had to send a letter that said, Dear Mr. Nugent, are
you a convicted felon? We were trying to find the right words
to say this for a database that was very flawed.
So, as we move forward with this, I mean, it does have
merit. We, as election officials, want to make sure that only
those people who are eligible to vote do vote and are
registered, but we need to be careful on how we go through that
process of making sure that we have the right person.
Mr. Nugent. Have you seen situations where actually those
that are not citizens have----
Ms. Gill. I have had two incidents that I can recall--very
interesting because neither of them were willful. It was
actually a person who, after having served in the military in
World War II, thought that he was an American citizen and only
found out when he went to get a U.S. passport to go on a trip
that he was not a United States citizen, in which case he
immediately saw an attorney and came to my office, took himself
off the voting rolls until he did become a citizen. That is not
willful.
And then the other incident was very much like that, the
person did not believe because of where he was born and his
parents were--the citizenship of his parents and such. So both
of them were not willful. That is Citrus County, Florida,
though, which you are very familiar with.
Mr. Nugent. Yes. Have you heard of any other cases in
Florida that that has been an issue that you are aware of?
Ms. Gill. I am sure there are because there are a lot of
people out there. But again, I have to get back to the fact
that we are asking these individuals who are signing up to
affirm that they are a United States citizen, and our system
right now is built on trust, unless we have some other
information.
Mr. Nugent. And I know that representatives from ES&S, when
they talk about flaws or problems that occur during an election
cycle particularly, it falls back on the supervisor of
election, at least in Florida; you are the one who takes the
heat.
Ms. Gill. That is correct.
Mr. Nugent. And that is not a good spot to be in as an
elected official.
You were talking about budgets, and obviously, we are all
very concerned about budgets. What kind of budget cuts have you
faced as supervisor of elections?
Ms. Gill. Well, fortunately, in my county, they know we are
working really hard to control our budgets, so nobody in my
county has said to me, Susan, you have to cut your budget by 14
percent. I keep telling them--and I have started last year
telling them--look, we have an added election of the
Presidential preference primary; it is a redistricting year; we
have certain expenses that are just happening every 10 years,
notifying voters, letting them know what their new districts
are, letting them know where their new polling places are. So
this is an added expense. So I have been preparing them.
Other counties in our State, they are going forward and
saying, hey, you have to cut your budget, even with those
things, the fact that we have an additional election and then
also the redistricting issues.
Mr. Nugent. The State of Florida I believe has taken on a
very aggressive approach when folks come in for a driver's
license renewal and for first-time driver's licenses in regards
to showing basically whether they are a citizen or not because
Florida's laws are somewhat different. I believe that may help
in regards to identifying those that should or should not be
voting that are citizens or not. I would just recommend to
those States that do not do that--I understand that as
Secretary of State, you can only recommend to the legislature,
as we see up here, and that you still have to get a bill
passed. But I would suggest to you that anything that you can
do obviously to shore up the ability to make sure that we have
U.S. Citizens voting in U.S. elections, I would be grateful.
Thank you.
Mr. Harper. I now recognize Mr. Lungren for any questions
he may have.
Mr. Lungren. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
for having this hearing.
I understand that our system is based on trust. Ronald
Reagan used to say ``trust but verify,'' and it is the last
part of it that I am a little concerned about.
I worked on the Voting Rights Act extension in the 1980s,
and then worked for it when I came back here this time. I also
worked on the immigration bill since it was early in the 1980s.
One of the things that I found out there is that unless you
have an enforcement program, some people take advantage of it.
I am the author of H.R. 4, which is to get rid of an
extraneous part of the health care bill that would have--or
still does, unless the Senate wakes up and finally deals with
the bill--would have put a tremendous onus on business people,
particularly small business people, to file 1099s any time they
had a transaction or a series of transactions that totalled
over $600 in a single year.
And yet the thinking behind that was not that the 1099 had
to be filed because the person filing it had an obligation to
pay something; it was to report on the other side of the
transaction. And then we had the Federal Government score that
section of the bill as worth 19, and then if it involved mom
and pop shops who rented out some property, $21 billion. The
assumption was that business men and women cheated so much that
we would get $21 billion if someone talked about it, yet it
almost presumes that even though business men and women cheat,
nobody else cheats, particularly when it comes to registration
to vote.
I would love to believe in the perfection of humankind that
nobody cheats, but I suspect that that is not true. And as
important as it is to protect one's right to vote is to protect
one's right not to have your vote canceled out by someone who
isn't eligible to vote.
So here is my question to the first three panelists: Do you
have any reason to believe there is any measurable percentage
of people on our voting rolls who don't have a right to be
there? Or is it perfection that we have reached in this
society?
Ms. Gill. Well, if I may, personally, I think that, yes,
there are people on the rolls who probably should not be there,
some of them willfully and some of them not willfully. However,
to your point, what do we do about it?
Mr. Lungren. Well, that is my question. We have three
people here who are experts, and I would like to know what you
think we ought to do about it.
Ms. Gill. Right. How do we enforce it? The only thing that
we can do to enforce it is make people show some sort of proof
of citizenship. Now if that is the way you want to go as far as
nationalization papers or birth certificates. I think with the
driver's license, as we go forward with the new type of
driver's license where, when we go to the driver's license
bureau, now we have to bring a birth certificate. We have to
bring--if we have had a name change, we have to bring some
indication of a marriage certificate or something that proves
your identity. We are moving toward that way.
But as far as making it part of the voter registration
process, I have to really question whether we would
disenfranchise more people by doing it, really eligible voters,
than actually having them have to bring it and show proof. So
if we haven't shown proof, I think we are going to
disenfranchise more people than we save----
Mr. Lungren. So you don't have an answer.
Ms. Gill. Well, no. My answer is, right now, I think that
we have to go with what we have got right now. And if we have
credible information that somebody is a noncitizen, then we
pursue it from there.
And as we move forward with this driver's license, that we
are now going to have some proof of identification.
Mr. Lungren. Has anybody ever been prosecuted in your
jurisdiction?
Ms. Gill. Not in my jurisdiction.
Mr. Lungren. In the State of Florida, to your knowledge?
Ms. Gill. I don't really know.
Mr. Lungren. Mr. Ritchie.
Mr. Ritchie. Chairman Lungren, yes. In fact, in our State,
it is mandatory that county attorneys must investigate any
allegations or anything that we refer, and so it is mandatory.
I think our situation is different than Colorado in that way.
Second, all crimes related to elections are felonies in our
State. I don't believe that is the same--Congressman Gonzalez
asked the question about differentiation--for us it is all
felonies. This is an important thing.
The third thing is that we work very hard to try to reduce
the cost to law enforcement, and the judicial system, by making
sure things are flagged beforehand, making sure that people who
are inadvertently on the list because of a typo at the
Department of Public Safety or some other reason are flagged
beforehand so that we don't have to deal with that situation
after the election because it is very expensive.
Let me give you one quick example. Election day 2008, a
young man way up on the Canadian border, just out of the
prison, was very proud, getting his life back together, putting
his life back together, called his parole officer and got the
answering machine and said: I am getting my life back together.
I am going to be a good citizen. I am a very strong supporter
of Senator McCain and Senator Coleman. I am going down to vote.
Aren't you proud of me for being a citizen and for being
active? He, unfortunately, was not yet off parole. And so he
went down, not trying to hide anything, of course, and before
his parole officer was able to reach him, he violated the law
in Minnesota and committed another felony. His parole officer
called him and said, don't, and it was too late. And so
actually he was prosecuted under a gross misdemeanor, 30 days
in the county workhouse, a little tiny county that really can't
afford to do a lot of extra prosecutions or put people up for a
jail term; very expensive problem for the county and for this
young man's life.
The legislature actually took that seriously because it
turned out many people were not certain about their status, and
it is partly because the States around us have different laws.
In North Dakota, if you are in prison, you cannot vote. If you
are out of prison, you can. That is their law. So when you are
on the border of other States, I think we have a number of our
citizens not certain. And so in that instance, the legislature
passed a law requiring all judges, all correction officials
must say affirmatively, you have lost your right to vote, you
will not have your right to vote until you are completely off
paper; the bill passed, with strong bipartisan support, but it
was vetoed. Our Governor felt like the judges had too much to
do already.
In the course of that process, we made a very strong case
that the expense of prosecuting people who voted inadvertently
for felony offenses was so extraordinary, it was worth spending
the money to convert the court and corrections data into
electronic form so it could be matched with our database, our
elections database, so that they could be challenged on the
front end, in case they went in, then this information would be
there, and you could say, hey, wait a minute, you are
challenged here, you are still on paper. If the person said,
no, I am off paper now, they would say great, and they would
have to sign a separate form. But if they were to say, oh, you
mean I can't vote? Well, no, you can't; it is a felony. And so
we have found that spending the money on the front end saves a
tremendous amount of money on the prosecution side.
Secretary Gessler's approach of trying to identify people
and get the word out to people to avoid prosecutions on the
other end--in my State, it is mandatory and it is a felony--is
a very inexpensive approach to what is going to be a very
expensive process on the other side.
I feel like this change with the new electronics and the
digital data makes it possible--and in our State, we always
have a few prosecutions of felons who have voted and that kind
of thing, but we have the tools now to make our databases much
cleaner and flagged up front. That can save us a tremendous
amount of money in prosecutions, and investigations after the
fact.
But we have to learn how to use our databases. We have got
to get data, and we have to take the money that we would have
spent on prosecutions, and invest it on the front end, so we
have made the technological advances so that our computers can
talk to each other. Then we can save real money down the road.
Thank you.
Mr. Harper. I thank you all for your testimony today.
Mr. Carbullido, I will be sending you a request, some
questions dealing with your dealings with the EAC. I think that
would be helpful to us not only here, but for future matters
that we will consider.
I now ask unanimous consent to enter the following
documents into the hearing record: Number one will be the
report referenced by Secretary of State Gessler in his
testimony detailing their State's investigation into possible
noncitizen voting.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Harper. And the second is an article that sites a
similar study on noncitizen voting that is currently being
conducted by the New Mexico Secretary of State.
Without objection to that request, it is so ordered.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Harper. I want to thank each of you for being here to
testify, for the members, for their participation. I know it is
not easy to get here, and you have been very helpful to us
today. I now adjourn the subcommittee.
[The information follows:]
[Whereupon, at 11:35 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


