- REVIEW OF THE USE OF COMMITTEE FUNDS OF THE 112TH CONGRESS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REVIEW OF THE USE OF COMMITTEE FUNDS OF THE 112TH CONGRESS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Held in Washington, DC, November 30, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on House Administration

Available on the Internet:
www.fdsys.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
72-284                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION

DANIEL E. LUNGREN, California, Chairman
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania,
PHIL GINGREY, M.D., Georgia            Ranking Minority Member
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               ZOE LOFGREN, California
TODD ROKITA, Indiana                 CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
RICHARD B. NUGENT, Florida

Professional Staff

Philip Kiko, Staff Director & General Counsel
Jamie Fleet, Minority Staff Director

REVIEW OF THE USE OF COMMITTEE FUNDS OF THE 112TH CONGRESS

----------

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 30, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on House Administration,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:45 a.m., in room
1310, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Daniel E. Lungren
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives, Lungren, Harper, Gingrey, Schock,
Nugent, Rokita, Brady, Lofgren, and Gonzalez.
Staff Present: Phil Kiko, Staff Director & General Counsel;
Peter Schalestock, Deputy General Counsel; Kimani Little,
Parliamentarian; Joe Wallace, Legislative Clerk; Yael Barash,
Assistant Legislative Clerk; Salley Wood, Communications
Director; Linda Ulrich, Director of Oversight; Dominic
Storelli, Oversight Staff; Bob Sensenbrenner, Elections
Counsel; Karin Moore, Elections Counsel; George Hadjiski,
Director of Member Services; Richard Cappetto, Professional
Staff; Jamie Fleet, Minority Staff Director; Kyle Andersen,
Minority Press Secretary; Matt Defreitas, Minority Professional
Staff; Khalil Abboud, Minority Elections Staff; Thomas Hicks,
Minority Elections Counsel; Mike Harrison, Minority
Professional Staff; and Greg Abbott, Minority Professional
Staff.
The Chairman. I now call to order the Committee on House
Administration for today's hearing on the use of committee
funds during the 112th Congress. The hearing record will remain
open for 5 legislative days so that members may submit any
materials they may wish to be included therein. A quorum is
present, so we may proceed.
As we all know, we are in the midst of difficult economic
times, a $15 trillion debt and a trillion dollar annual deficit
are incomprehensible, yet as we know, they are facts. The
financial realities facing this country are dire and demand
drastic restrictions in Federal spending.
And as stewards of taxpayers' dollars, not only should we
rein in government spending, we should lead by example. So we,
too, must do more with less. That is why, in January, the House
adopted a resolution reducing member and committee budgets by 5
percent. And why the House moved again in July to further
reduce legislative branch spending by an additional 6.4 percent
in fiscal year 2012.
As the chairman of House Administration, I fully understand
the practical impact these reductions have on committee
operations. And as a Representative of California's Third
Congressional District, where many families are faced with
economic hardships, I appreciate every committee's willingness
to find greater efficiencies and do more with less.
Today we look forward to hearing from all of our chairs and
ranking members. These are very important discussions for us to
have. Mr. Brady, my fellow committee members and I are strongly
interested in hearing how committees were able to manage their
reduced funds this past year; how they plan to continue
operating and conducting effective oversight and continue tight
budget circumstances; and how they adhered to a fair allocation
of committee resources.
I want to thank all the chairs and ranking members who will
testify here today. As I said this past March at our first
committee funding hearing, I cannot stress enough the
importance of their work. The executive branch is, as we all
know, enormous. Our Federal Government is much too large, often
at the expense of our States, our communities and our
intermediary institutions. By comparison, our resources here in
Congress are minimal. Thus, we often fight an uphill battle
trying to conduct effective oversight for the American people,
trying to ensure the responsible use of their taxpayer dollars.
Nevertheless, Congress and our committees have trimmed
budgets and expenditures, and we have sought to find ways to do
more with less while carrying out our essential constitutional
duties. And I thank all of the members and the committees for
their service.
I would like now to recognize my colleague and the
committee's ranking member, Mr. Brady, for the purpose of
providing any opening statement he wishes.
Mr. Brady. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you for having these hearings today. It is always
a pleasure to see and hear from our chairman and ranking
members of all the other committees, to say hello and find out
how they are doing, review what they have been up to this
session and what they are going to be doing in the next
session.
These oversight hearings are always important, but
especially so this year to examine the effects of the previous
cuts and hopefully not have to consider, but I am sure we need
to consider, additional reductions for 2012.
As the ranking member, my top concern is the fair treatment
of the minority on each committee. I am fortunate to have a
strong relationship with my chairman. And when I was chairman
during the two preceding Congresses, I saw no reason to
interfere with the minority's control of the one-third of the
budget, and Chairman Lungren has extended me that same
courtesy, and I do appreciate that.
I just hope that each committee has fairly applied the one-
third rule. Where conflicts have arisen, I believe this
committee will be able to help resolve them.
So I thank you for appearing with us. We are going to have
a long day, but it is always a fun day. I reflect back to the
days when we have long hearings because we had chairmen and
ranking members here asking for more money that we had when we
had it. Unfortunately, these have become very short hearings,
because they all know that we don't have any resources to give
out, and they are probably trying to hold on to what they have,
and hopefully, it doesn't get any less.
So, again, Mr. Lungren, thank you.
And I look forward to hearing from our chairmen and our
ranking members. Thank you.
The Chairman. I thank the ranking member, and I would
reiterate the spirit of cooperation that he spoke and is a mark
of this committee. And I appreciated his cooperative spirit
when he was chairman. And I hope I have extended the same sort
of cooperation as I have acted as chairman.
The committee now welcomes Chairman Ryan and Ranking Member
Van Hollen on the Committee of the Budget.
And, gentlemen, we would love to hear from you how you
budgeteers are taking care of your budget as an example for the
rest of us.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. PAUL RYAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF WISCONSIN, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET

Mr. Ryan. Well, thank you very much.
Chairman Lungren, Ranking Member Brady. We have the same
tradition of collegiality in the Budget Committee as you do
here in House Administration.
And onto the chairman's point, the Budget Committee has
requested a flat budget for the past 8 years. And we have kept
spending within the levels approved by this committee. In
addition, regardless of which party has been in the minority or
in the majority, we have always had the kind of collegial
relationship of which you are discussing. We have gotten along
very well. I got along extremely well with Mr. Spratt, Mr. Van
Hollen's predecessor, on the two-thirds/one-third and we
continue that relationship going forward. And I am determined
to keep that going.
You asked us to address two questions. With respect to the
impact of this year's 5 percent cut, we have managed our
operations to stay within that level. Our personnel costs are
the largest part of our budget, as with most committees. We
have had an extraordinary year with enormous demands on the
committee's resources. We currently have some vacancies in our
staff that we will need to fill, particularly before we go into
next year's budget cycle. But we have avoided any adverse
impact on the nonpersonnel portion of our budget, which is
comprised mainly of administrative services, equipment and
travel costs.
An additional 6.4 percent reduction for the next year we
will clearly present a more significant challenge for our
committee. Under this scenario, it provides us with less
possibility to meet our mission going forward, but it is
manageable, and we will do so.
It presents, I would argue, a greater challenge for the
minority. At the beginning of this year when we moved into the
majority, we transitioned to a much larger budget. Mr. Van
Hollen had to go in the other direction and make large
reductions to meet their smaller budget. That smaller budget
has already been reduced by an additional 5 percent, and this
would obviously be the third round of reductions for them on a
very tight budget to begin with.
While it is not part of our committee budget that you
approve, the sound system in our hearing room is antiquated and
expensive to maintain. In addition to the committee's business,
we loan out the hearing room quite frequently, particularly to
the Joint Economic Committee and for other outside events.
In our opinion, transparency is critically important in our
deliberations and increasingly we and others who use our
hearing room are having audio and video equipment troubles, and
this is something that we are going to have to address at some
point in the near future.
I appreciate the committee's efforts and it is great to be
back with you guys. Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Ryan follows:]

The Chairman. Mr. Van Hollen.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. CHRIS VAN HOLLEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MARYLAND, RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE
ON THE BUDGET

Mr. Van Hollen. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Lungren,
Ranking Member Brady, members of the committee.
Let me start by thanking my friend, Paul Ryan, chairman of
the Committee, for that spirit of collegiality that he talked
about. We have the same tradition, as he said, on the Budget
Committee as you do here on the Committee on House
Administration.
And I appreciate the fact that our budget has been treated
fairly by the majority in the committee. We have a third of the
committee budget, and we have the same opportunity to share
some of the overhead costs on the full committee budget,
majority committee budget. So I appreciate that.
I also recognize, as all of us do, that the Congress needs
to lead by example during these difficult times, and I fully
support the need to tighten our belts. I would just want to
emphasize the point that the chairman of our committee made
with respect to the history of the Budget Committee when it
comes to frugality. The Budget Committee has not increased its
budget since 2004, not at all. Flat-lined.
During that same period of time between 2004 and today,
other House committee budgets increased by an average of 21
percent, with one committee budget increasing by 84 percent,
and the next lowest increase--again, we didn't increase at all.
We were flat-lined--the next smallest growth was 8 percent.
During that period of time, the majority under the
chairmanship of John Spratt did not use its full allocation,
and so we were somewhat cushioned early on when the majority in
the House shifted. But that loss, obviously, as many in this
room have experienced, plus the first two rounds of cuts have
meant that we had to lay off a good number of staff members and
cut salaries by 5 percent in the Budget Committee across the
board.
And so while we have been able to do that and still retain
very good staff, I am very nervous that another round of cuts
will mean that we are not able to keep or attract the kind of
quality staff that we all need on all of our committees. And as
all of you know, the Budget Committee has been very, very busy
this year.
So what I would ask the committee to consider is that the
Budget Committee not be penalized for its history of frugality
because that is ultimately what will happen if you take just an
arbitrary across-the-board approach. When you do that, you
penalize those committees that have been frugal in the past,
those whose budgets have not grown at the average of 21
percent. And you often see this phenomenon in other parts of
the Federal Government where agencies are penalized for having
money left over; it means they often don't get as much as
before, and that creates this perverse incentive for them to
spend more at the end. And I think it would be a mistake to
create that kind of incentive here in the House of
Representatives, where ultimately committees that demonstrated
frugality and fiscal discipline end up being punished for that
fiscal discipline.
So we agree that we in the Congress should lead by example,
and I would submit that the Budget Committee has been leading
by example by having a flat-lined budget since 2004. By taking
arbitrary across-the-board cuts and applying that to the Budget
Committee, you are going to punish a committee that has led by
example, not just in the last couple of years, but for the last
8 years. So I ask the committee members to take that into
consideration as you consider our budget. Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Van Hollen follows:]

The Chairman. I just want to reiterate or have you
reiterate that you are satisfied with the two-thirds/one-third,
that there is no question about, even in these tough budget
times, the fairness within your committee itself.
Mr. Van Hollen. Mr. Chairman, of course, we would always
prefer more than one-third, but the answer to your question is,
yes, we have been treated fairly. And as I said at the outset,
I thank the chairman of our committee for that.
The Chairman. I thank you for that.
And, Mr. Ryan, with respect to your comments about the
speaking system over there, I have tried to alert and the
ranking member tried to alert the Members as to the need for us
to do a major renovation of the Cannon Office Building. During
the holidays, they had one hallway in which--I think it was a
64-square-foot section of--the ceiling fell down.
Mr. Ryan. That was the Budget Committee minority staff.
They had--the ceiling came down, a flood and a little bit of a
fire if I am not mistaken.
Mr. Van Hollen. Yes. We invite any of you who want to take
a tour of the Democratic offices; yes, we had a big flood.
The Chairman. And the only reason I bring that up is at
some point in time, we have to stop deferring maintenance and
actually have to try and restore this Capitol. And I consider
the Cannon Office Building part of the Capitol since it is the
first House Office Building. So we are going to have to make
some tough decisions as we go forward. And I take your point
about across-the-board cuts versus going in and looking at
those committees which have been most frugal. Thank you.
Mr. Brady. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
The ceiling fell down only in the minority room? Thank you.
Okay. No, I just--did you lose any employment? Did you have
to lay anybody off this last session?
Mr. Ryan. The minority obviously had to when we went from
two-thirds to one-third.
Mr. Brady. I am talking about as they--total--anybody have
to leave because of the budget cut?
Mr. Ryan. Not on the majority. But you have to understand,
we went from a one-third to a two-third. So ours didn't
increase as much as one would normally because of the cut. So
we had preparation for the cut knowing it was coming, so we
didn't hire up as much as the majority in the past had.
Mr. Brady. How about in the second session, you can
maintain?
Mr. Ryan. Yes, we can maintain. We have lost a few people
who went on to other things, and these are slots that we need
to fill. In the Budget Committee, you need highly technical
people to do the budget. And so we will have to replace a
couple of these highly technical people. And we use some people
from executive agencies on loan, detailees. We rely on some
detailees, you know, like GAO or OMB or other areas for
technical expertise. And that has been very helpful. And we
lost one of those folks. So we are going to have to get some
more technical people. So we will make it work.
Mr. Brady. Okay. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Schock.
Mr. Schock. I would just add that we always get hit up at
home about accountability for the dollars that we spend. And I
can say with a straight face when my constituents ask me about
the Budget Committee, you guys are not only leaders by example,
but you actually produced. And so I think it goes without
saying to both the majority and the minority staff because you
moved a budget, whether your staffs or members voted for it or
not, it actually required work, and it actually produced some
results. And so for that, I say thank you, and I feel much
better about the tax dollars that were spent.
Mr. Ryan. And the minority prepared a budget as well. So
both our staff wrote budgets. And unlike the typical Budget
Committee year, we are doing year-round work because our staffs
did the supercommittee, the select committee's work on number
crunching, on preparing estimates. And then we have also done
very comprehensive budget process reform work as well. So we
have--unlike the past, when the Budget Committee would just
turn on during the budget season, it has been year round. And
so we are doing a lot more work with less people.
Mr. Schock. Great. Thank you.
The Chairman. The gentleman from Florida.
Mr. Nugent. I just want to thank both of you for being here
today. Obviously I am a little concerned as it relates to
making sure that it is across the board in the majority and the
minority.
And, Mr. Van Hollen, I don't know that you answered that.
Have you had to reduce your staff as it relates to the
current budget and the upcoming cut? Are you going to have lay
offs?
Mr. Van Hollen. We will either have to lay off or have an
across-the-board pay cut I believe of 6.4 percent. So that will
necessitate one or the other.
And, again, that is why I thought it was important to make
the point that, unlike every other committee in the Congress,
our budget has been flat-lined, and therefore, there is a lot
less room for maneuverability.
So, yeah, we will have to lay people off. And as the
chairman mentioned, it has been a very busy period of time for
the Budget Committee. I think all of you know well the issues
that have been debated in the House, but also both the majority
and the minority staff did staff this so-called supercommittee,
the Joint Committee on Deficit Reduction, process.
Mr. Nugent. And I would suggest you are going to be
extremely busy in this upcoming year. I don't see any reduction
in the workload. That is for sure.
Mr. Van Hollen. No, I think it is going to be a very high
workload. And as the chairman said, there are a number of
initiatives that are going to be moving through the committee
on budget process reform.
So, again, I would ask the committee to take into account
our history of leading by example and that in answer to your
question, we will either have to lay off people or have across-
the-board pay cuts to deal with this.
Mr. Ryan. And we have not done bonuses as well for staff.
So a lot of committees do bonuses at the end of the year or
COLAs. We haven't done that.
Mr. Nugent. Okay. Thank you. I yield.
The Chairman. Let me just ask one thing. Some folks would
think that since we found ourselves into automatic budget
sequestration, that that would minimize the work you have to
do. Could you respond to that?
Mr. Ryan. It actually makes it more complicated for the
Budget Committee because we police the sequester tool. It is
the Budget Control Act, which is in the jurisdiction of the
Budget Committee, which is in charge of this. So--versus Armed
Services or authorizers or appropriators, we are sort of the
ones that implement and police the sequester as we now know it.
The Chairman. So that would be an additional responsibility
essentially?
Mr. Ryan. That is right.
The Chairman. Well, if you have no other comments, we thank
you for your work, your leadership, your spirit of cooperation
and the effort that you are putting forward on very difficult
questions with respect to our budget. Thank you.
Mr. Ryan. Thank you.
Mr. Van Hollen. Thanks.
The Chairman. I should have thought that folks that deal
with those in the agricultural industry and farmers--including
farmers--would be here on time. So I appreciate it very, very
much.
The committee now welcomes Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member
Peterson of the Committee on Agriculture. And we would ask you
to give us a little bit about how you have managed with the
already existing cuts and how you will manage under the
projected cuts, as required by the resolution passed by the
House earlier this year.
Mr. Lucas.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. FRANK D. LUCAS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE

Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and ranking member and
members of the committee, for the opportunity to visit with you
today about those issues. And I want to express my appreciation
to Ranking Member Collin Peterson for joining me to outline or
committee's proposed budget for 2012. As all of you know, we
have a very long and proud history of bipartisan cooperation,
and I plan to continue that spirit of cooperation as we proceed
with the work of the committee next year.
In addition to a bipartisanship, the Ag Committee has a
strong history of fiscal responsibility. The modest spending
and the cooperative nature of our committee spans back at least
two decades under the control of both parties. And in support
of the leadership in this committee, our budget submission for
2012 Congress includes a 5 percent reduction from the previous
year's funding, but allocated a larger amount in 2011 than in
2012 in anticipation of increased travel needs for field
hearings to prepare for the 2012 farm bill.
Salaries were budgeted to remain the same for both years,
and I am pleased to report that we have successfully
implemented the 5 percent reduction in this year's budget by
making very conservative staffing decisions and stretching our
resources as far as possible. We rehired staff that were with
the committee previously to retain institutional knowledge,
combine staff responsibilities where appropriate of course and
have postponed filling the staff vacancies.
And on the operation side, all purchases have been kept to
a minimum, savings incurred where possible by limiting travel
and shopping around for the best possible prices on equipment
and supplies.
The committee will continue to support the leadership in
implementing an additional 6.4 percent cut. However, I must
note that I am concerned about the long-term impact on the
ability of the committee to retain qualified, experienced
staff. In order to implement this additional cut, we will have
to continue to make very conservative staffing decisions and
additionally left to consider if we have the resources
necessary to do our traditional series of farm bill hearings.
We intentionally allocated more money in 2011 for travel
for farm bill field hearings. We had planned to hold those
hearings this fall. However, we had to delay those hearings in
order to work on a reduction package to submit to the
supercommittee. Therefore, we anticipate holding the farm bill
field hearings next year and will need the resources to do
that.
Because we did not split our funding evenly between the 2
years as most committees do, we are already experiencing a
reduction in funding for 2012 of $71,980.50, or about 1.2
percent, by taking an additional 6.4 percent reduction off the
authorized 2012 account. We would really be taking a 7.6
percent reduction as compared to other committees. We ask that
you take this into consideration when determining the final
authorized amount for 2012.
Mr. Chairman, we truly have our work cut out for us in this
Congress. But we firmly believe we can accomplish all that
needs to be done on fewer resources. We greatly appreciate your
consideration of our budget request and certainly will be
pleased to provide any additional information you may offer and
look forward to whatever questions the committee may have for
us.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The statement of Mr. Lucas follows:]

The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Peterson.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. COLLIN C. PETERSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MINNESOTA, RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE
ON AGRICULTURE

Mr. Peterson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Ranking
Member and members of the committee. I am pleased to be here
today in support of the Agriculture Committee's budget request.
The Agriculture Committee has a history of putting aside
partisanship and working together in the best interests of our
constituents. In fact, we were the only congressional committee
to propose a bipartisan, bicameral deficit reduction package to
the Joint Committee on Deficit Reduction.
Much of the committee's work for the coming year will be
focused on the reauthorization of the 2008 Farm Bill, which
expires next fall. This is something that the committee had
originally planned to begin considering this year, but the work
of the supercommittee modified our original timeframe.
I share Chairman Lucas' concern about the potential long-
term impact of committee funding reductions and echo the
request that you take into consideration the fact that the
Agriculture Committee's original 112th Congress budget
submission placed greater resources in 2011 than 2012. A
percentage cut off the lower number will mean that the
Agriculture Committee would take a greater cut than committees
that kept funding levels equal between the 2 years or had a
larger 2012 number.
So, as I said, Chairman Lucas and I have a good working
relationship, not just on policy issues but on the day-to-day
functions of the committee. I appreciate the chairman's respect
for the minority's control and direction of our one-third of
the budget, and I look forward to continuing to work together
on committee priorities.
I appreciate your consideration of the Agriculture
Committee's budget request, and I am happy to respond to any
questions.
[The statement of Mr. Peterson follows:]

The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Peterson, I take it from your comments that while we
can argue about what the overall numbers are, at least the way
it is allocated between Mr. Lucas and yourself in terms of your
staff and so forth, it is acceptable and is consistent with
what you folks testified to last year?
Mr. Peterson. Yes.
The Chairman. For the benefit of the membership of the
committee and also any member of the public who might be
watching, could you tell us what the implications are of the
farm bill reauthorization coming up this next year? That is the
work your committee has to do, and what are the ramifications
if we were not to have reauthorization in 2012?
Mr. Lucas. First off, let me say, Mr. Chairman, I think we
need to look at the nature of the House Agriculture Committee.
Collin and I have 46 members, counting ourselves, of the total
committee. Of that 46, 23 have never served on the committee
before, and I know those challenges are shared by other
committees. Of the 23, 16 have never served in Congress before.
If you look at the nature of the farm bill, it is not just the
wheat and the corn programs, the cotton programs; it is also
conservation. It is rural development. It is ag research. It is
farm credit. It is the nutrition programs.
Literally, 74 percent of farm bill spending under this
present farm bill goes to the feeding programs.
It is a very diverse set of jurisdictions, and there are
huge differences between commodities and regions. These field
hearings are important so that we can take not only our brand
new members who have never served on the committee before and
give them an opportunity to learn about the needs and the
diversity of the country in the field, so to speak, but it also
an important refresher for upper classmen to understand the
impact the comprehensive farm bill has on everyone, producer
and consumer alike, in this great country. So being able to do
that is a very important thing.
And you are exactly right, if you care about the food on
your plate, then it is important that we continue to raise the
safest, most affordable, abundant supply of food in the world.
If you care about water quality, air quality, if you care about
preserving the soil in place, for instance, the conservation
programs are incredibly important. I like to say, in Oklahoma,
it doesn't matter whether you are a hook and bullet kind of
person or a camera lens person; the conservation programs help
enhance the diversity and the quality of the wildlife of the
environment out there, all of those things. And not to mention
or forget rural development, all of the other programs.
But we have a large jurisdiction. We have got a lot of
important issues. And if we can't--Collin and I working
together--build a consensus and bring our committee together
and up to speed, then we won't be able to present a
comprehensive package to the entire House, ultimately a
conference committee, and the environment as well as the
consumers will suffer if we are not able to do that.
Mr. Peterson. Well, I agree with a lot of what the chairman
said.
But, you know, as I said earlier, we took the Super
Committee's and Congress' request seriously and produced a
product and that probably, preempted what might have been some
field hearings that we would have been doing to do the farm
bill in the regular order next year.
So I am not sure how much time there is going to be,
frankly, to do field hearings. We can try to fit them in. But I
think if we get too far into the year, we are going to run into
the politics of the election year and so forth. But the bill
expires September 30th. You know, we have in the past gone by
the deadline and not done a bill, you know, until I guess one
year, it was May of the next year.
So it is not the end of the world, but people like winter
wheat guys end up planting not knowing what the situation is.
The Southerners plant rice and sometimes cotton without knowing
what the situation is, which is not an ideal situation.
So we will just have to juggle this. I mean, see how the
rest of this year plays out, and see if we can find time to fit
hearings in if we have the resources.
But given the cuts that we are taking, I am not sure that
we are going to have the money to do a whole lot of that
anyway, you know. So we will just have to work through it. We
have always been able to work together and make things work
out.
You know, the chairman had a hearing in every area of our
jurisdiction, so these new members have been exposed to all of
the very--they went through all of these programs and had an
opportunity to ask questions and learn and so forth.
But we do have a lot of new members. We have a lot of new
members on the Democratic side as well. And we are trying to
bring them up to speed as best we can.
The Chairman. Ranking Member.
Mr. Brady. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I know that I am not being presumptuous, but I know on the
majority part, you had to hire new people because you became
the majority. But with the projection that may happen in this
next go around, do you think you will have to lay anybody off?
Any people have to be laid off?
Mr. Peterson. No, I don't think we are going to have to lay
anybody off. When I was chairman, I spent below our budget
every year by a considerable amount. When we went into the
minority, we obviously had to let a number of people go. It is
going to be tight next year, but I think we will be able to
work through it by--we are going to have to freeze salaries
basically is what it is going to boil down to, but I think we
will be able to maintain the people that we need on our side to
do the work that we need to do.
Mr. Lucas. I would just note, Ranking Member, that there is
really a very limited pool of people with the kind of
agricultural policy or agricultural economic experience. Collin
and I are very fortunate in both the majority and the minority
staff, the people we have. We are going to work really hard to
hold onto those good folks until whatever is concluded in the
farm bill process, at whatever point this year or next year
that may be.
Mr. Brady. How do you get along with the Secretary of
Agriculture? Both of you. The response is, well, the Secretary
of Agriculture, you get along well?
Mr. Lucas. Yes, I believe we both have a good relationship
with Secretary Vilsack and with the department agency heads
down there.
Mr. Brady. Now is your chance, because I am taking mine.
Mr. Lucas. I would just say, Ranking Member, to go for a
moment back to what Collin said. The ability of the Ag
Committee to work in a bipartisan way on the House and in a
bicameral way with the Senate to come up with $23 billion in
savings, to make dramatic proposals in policy changes, stepping
away from the direct payment and a number of these things--and
I say this respectfully to all other standing committees--but
Collin and I and the Ag Committee, we stepped up, and I think
that says something about our relationship together and, yes,
for that matter our relationship with the department.
Mr. Brady. I am not talking about--I am talking about your
relationship with the Secretary of Agriculture. I am not
talking about the relationship between each other. The reason
why I say that is because I have had bad experiences with him,
and I hope that maybe he probably can't hear my voice, but at
least I am on record saying that; I might be able to get a
phone call back from him.
Mr. Lucas. I promise you, Mr. Brady, we have had a long
series of oversight hearings, as I call them, looking at how
the departmenthas implemented things. And we have had a long
series of what I call auditing hearings, looking at how the
money has been spent. If there are issues that any Member has
with the department, let us know. We will work with all of you.
Mr. Brady. Thank you.
Mr. Peterson. If I could just--I think that Secretary
Vilsack has brought considerable management expertise to the
department. We have made significant progress I think since he
has been Secretary, compared to what was going on before,
especially in the IT area.
And they are rolling out new IT--well, we have had a
problem there because we were tied into some old system 36 and
AS400 computers that kept us from going to a PC-based system.
But they brought in a couple of people now, and they are going
to roll out for NRCS and FSA this year the ability for farmers
to be able to sign up over the Internet. And they are going to
have mobile computer capability, so the conservation people can
actually sign up people out in the field and only enter it
once, instead of 10 times. And they think it is going to make
their people go twice as far.
So he is dealing with a lot of cuts. We are going to
probably have to consolidate FSA offices because of the cuts
that he has had. But they are responding to it. And one of the
things that was a very difficult thing for me, when I was
chairman, is that I was consistently fighting the Department of
Agriculture. They were opposed to everything that we were doing
on the committee. And they developed their own farm bill, you
know, and caused us all kinds of problems. At the end of the
day, we worked through all of that, and then we went to the
floor, and we passed the bill with 300 and some votes, and the
President vetoed it twice. And we overrode the veto. So this
Secretary has I think learned from that and has been helpful to
us in terms of working with us but has deferred to us in terms
of us setting the policy, and that has made it a much better
situation in my opinion than what went on when we did the last
farm bill.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Schock.
Mr. Schock. Yes. I am just interested in--I know that
according to our records, that you have spent just over half of
the budget allotment for the 2 years in the first year, and I
wondered if you could maybe speak to that as to why, and if
perhaps we are able to pass the farm bill, whether or not you
have got the staff and the resources necessary to commit to do
that in the next year?
Mr. Lucas. Part of the extra spending in the first year was
staffing up in preparation for the farm bill process. I brought
on additional agriculture economists and positioned my staff to
be able to work on the policy issues.
We also made provisions, as has been noted, for field
hearings, which we were not able to conduct. Once the farm bill
process is over with, then because--at least in my tenure in
Congress and I think most of Collin's, too--we have done farm
bills on an every 5-year cycle. So there is some surging up and
down in anticipation of the every 5-year farm bill.
The present farm bill begins to expire at the end of July,
September of 2012. If we are able successfully to craft and put
into place a new farm bill in calendar year 2012, then, yes,
potentially in 2013 and 2014 and on down the road, Congressman,
you would see some of our needs reduced.
If we are not able to pass a farm bill--and I cringe at the
thought of a 1-year extension or I cringe at the thought of a
conference that goes until December of 2012 or we can't pass a
bill and we go into the next cycle--then our tempo will be
maintained for the next couple of years. But I want to do this
farm bill, and I want to do a good farm bill, and I want to put
this puppy to bed for 5 years, which will be good for our
budget request in the future, too.
Mr. Peterson. The only other thing--what a lot of people
forget about is that we had about half of the work and
jurisdiction in the Dodd-Frank bill that nobody really pays
attention to very much, but we did all of the derivative work.
And we continue to work on that. I don't know how many hearings
we have had. There have been all kinds of bills to change this
and that and the other thing, and you have probably run into
some of that with end users and co-ops and those kinds of
people coming and lobbying you to get out from under this and
so forth.
But we have had a lot of work that we have had to do,
especially this year and in the last couple of years before
that, getting up to speed on what was going on in this
derivative market. This is complicated stuff, and we have had
to bring on people that have expertise, you know, so we can try
to keep up with it. And now there has been a lot of lobbying--I
think there has been way more money spent lobbying the
regulators than there ever was spent lobbying us, trying to
undo these regulations.
And so we keep sorting through that, and we don't
necessarily always agree on this particular thing, but I would
just warn people that I am sure in your district, you probably
have some people who got caught up in this MF Global, where
they had their margins frozen. So be careful what you are doing
here because, you know, these guys are slippery, and they need
to be regulated.
I am not a big guy for regulating everything that moves,
but after spending 3 years--we need to be careful in what we
are doing to protect people from some of this stuff. And I know
I had a bunch of my guys get caught up in this, and I am not
sure when they are going to get their money back.
Mr. Lucas. Just to note for the record, the Securities and
Exchange Commission is under jurisdiction of the Financial
Services Committee, but the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission is our jurisdiction, and that is the primary
regulator of the derivatives market.
Mr. Schock. Thank you.
The Chairman. The gentleman from Florida.
Mr. Nugent. I appreciate both of you being here.
Interesting to hear about the derivatives, obviously. I think
that is a little known fact that everybody kind of forgets
about in regards to agriculture and this committee.
I am concerned about the ability to do field hearings as it
relates to the farm bill, and the ranking member brought that
up, and I want to make sure that we are on track to do that,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lucas. If we are not doing a farm bill markup in
February, it is my intention working with the ranking member to
take our folks to the field. Because literally, I think it is
important with 23--half the committee never serving before, 16
of the 46 members never having been in Congress before; it is
important to be in the field.
But as Collin very correctly noted, it comes down to a
scheduling issue. Do we write a farm bill next summer under
regular order? Do we become a part of some effort once again to
address the budget situation and have to move early, February,
March? It is a timing issue. But I want to go into the field,
yes, and with the resources of course, I want to go into the
field.
Mr. Peterson. The other thing--there has been all this
commotion about the secret farm bill. And you need to recognize
where this is coming from. These people that are complaining
don't agree with anything we are doing. They have a completely
different agenda. And they would be complaining no matter what
happened. So people need to understand that.
But during that process, it was a truncated process, but I
know Chairman Lucas met with his members all the time. They had
input into this. I met with my members. We met with all of the
commodity groups and the nutrition groups and the conservation
groups and all of the things that we always do. The only thing
different is we didn't have a markup process but we kind of had
one behind the scenes, if you will.
So it wasn't a perfect process, but it was something that
was put on us by the supercommittee and by that process, and I
think we managed it pretty well. Not everybody is happy. The
corn growers are not completely happy. Some of the conservation
folks aren't completely happy. Some of the nutrition people--
even though we cut very little out of nutrition and cut no
benefits, they are not happy because they wanted more money,
and I don't know how anybody in this climate thinks that they
can get more money.
So I think we did a pretty good job. And I think the
members learned through this process--I know mine did and I
assume Chairman Lucas' did--because they were involved. They
were engaged. They were being talked to by their constituents
and the different groups, and they would come to us, and we
would work through the process.
So, you know, we will see. If we have time. But I am just
afraid if we get bogged down doing a lot of field hearings, we
are going to delay getting started on this, and then we are
going to get too far into the political year and not be able to
get it done. Then we are going to be without a farm bill when
it expires, and that is a worse outcome in my opinion.
Mr. Nugent. We certainly would like to see you get back to
regular order. That is for sure. I think it is good for this
body, and I think it is good for the American public.
Mr. Peterson. We didn't ask for this. I was not a big fan
of the supercommittee. But they asked us to do this. We did it.
We were the only people that did it. It wasn't pretty, but----
Mr. Lucas. And as of all of the committees in Congress in
particular that would understand better than no other, House
Administration, making cuts is tough. And we proposed cuts
everywhere, just as you are having to propose cuts everywhere.
It is tough.
Mr. Peterson. What we don't get credit for is that we cut
$12 billion out of the ag budget before we even started this.
So we had $23 billion that we put forward in this proposal. We
had cut $12 billion the last 2 or 3 years before that. And $4
billion of it went directly to the deficit. We are the only
committee in the Congress that has done this. And I think it
just shows that if you work in a bipartisan basis, you can get
stuff done. And the rest of Congress could take a lesson from
us, I think.
The Chairman. I want to thank both of you for your
testimony, for your work and the cooperative spirit with which
you approach it. I would say, Mr. Peterson, I am shocked that
you would suggest that agriculture issues might be political in
a Presidential year.
But anyway, thank you for your work. And we appreciate your
candor and appearing before us. All right.
Thank you very much for being here on time. The committee
now welcomes Chairman Kline and Ranking Member Miller, the
Committee on Education and Workforce. We are pleased to have
you here.
These hearings are somewhat different than they have been
in the past in that we would ask you to tell us how you handled
this 5 percent cut we have already been under and this
perspective 6.4 percent that we are talking about in the
upcoming year and bring us up to date on how the budget sharing
has gone on between your two operations.
And with that, I would just recognize Mr. Kline.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JOHN KLINE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF MINNESOTA, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION
AND THE WORKFORCE

Mr. Kline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Brady, members of the committee. Thank you for the opportunity
to appear with my colleague, the senior Democratic member,
George Miller, to testify about our budget for the 112th
Congress.
In the first session, our committee was allocated
$8,346,254, of which we are on target to spend roughly 76
percent. Our goal is to spend only what is necessary as we
strive to be good stewards of the taxpayer dollars.
Among the cost-saving measures we embraced on the
Republican side of the committee were the elimination of end-
of-year bonuses for staff and a decision not to fill all of our
staff slots. In the second session of the 112th Congress, if we
face the additional 6.4 percent cuts we anticipate, we will
continue to do what we can to be good stewards of the taxpayer
dollars.
I remain confident that our team will be able to maintain
our current workflow and carry out our agenda for 2012 by
taking advantage of cost-saving measures, including
collaborating with other committees and personal offices and
negotiating prices with current publication vendors, finding
multiple price quotes on equipment and supply purchases before
making a final decision, using new media to get our message out
without incurring printing and publication costs, and producing
posters and reports inhouse rather than hiring outside vendors.
While I am confident in our ability to weather this
additional 6.4 percent reduction in resources, I caution the
committee that cuts above and beyond that figure could
compromise our ability to carry out our agenda. I have serious
concerns that additional cuts could threaten our ability to
conduct rigorous oversight while carrying out our legislative
responsibilities. Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I
appreciate your time. I would be happy to answer any questions.
[The statement of Mr. Kline follows:]

The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Miller.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. GEORGE MILLER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA, RANKING MEMBER,
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE

Mr. George Miller of California. Thank you, Mr. Chairman
and Ranking Member Brady for the opportunity to discuss our
budget for the 112th Congress.
I also want to thank Chairman Kline for his cooperation on
the budget and the other administrative matters during our
first session. As you know, the minority was allotted the
customary one-third of the total committee budget, and the
majority provided the minority the autonomy over that share.
At the beginning of the year, the minority's authority was
$2,782,000. And while the year is not complete, we are
currently anticipating the yearend balance of at least
$100,000. As I said in our last appearance in March, the
committee needs sufficient funding, not only to conduct the
normal legislative and oversight business but also to be able
to deal with sudden critical needs.
This committee has experienced that time and again with our
jurisdiction over mine safety, where we have had tragedies
across the country and have had to dedicate staff and acquire
expert witnesses and talent to understand what happened in many
of those explosions.
The same was true in the British Petroleum oil spill in the
Gulf. Staff was sent to be on the ground. So these kinds of
things come across this committee's jurisdiction with no
warning and no notice. And hopefully, we will be able to
respond to that.
While they were unexpected in that fashion in the 112th
Congress, on the minority side, we have had four staffers in
critical positions on necessary Family and Medical Leave
simultaneously. And this has required the hiring of additional
staffers to help fill those two positions. Chairman Kline was
also very kind and helpful to authorize the use of a detailee
from the Department of Education, which has helped with that
sudden change in the workload and the workforce.
In the next year, we have begun making preparations for a
cut of at least 6.4 percent from the committee budget. We do
not seek to cut any staffers' salaries. Those salaries are
hard-earned and long hours, and to retrain and attract the top
quality staff, we need to avoid cutting too deeply into our
overall staffing budgets. Instead, we plan to try to focus on
our cuts in other areas, such as equipment. We are trying to
replace and upgrade equipment as necessary to meet the workload
of the minority staff and the members. We are doing that now,
trying to do that to the extent that we could out of this
year's budget.
We think that we, obviously, can live with the 6.4 percent.
It is going to be difficult. I would join Chairman Kline in
that going beyond that starts to change substantially the
nature of the decisions and the resources that are available to
us both for the legislative calendar and for the oversight
commitments that the majority has made and, again, that arise
sometimes without notice.
But thank you very much for your cooperation in allowing
the committee to testify.
[The statement of Mr. Miller of California follows:]

The Chairman. Thank you very much.
And let me just ask you about the responsibilities of
oversight that you have in your committee. I mean, one of the
things that seems to me that some people could look at in the
Congress and say, this is my own observation, that we never do
enough oversight, and it is a responsibility that we need to
take very seriously, and I think most Members do. And as we are
about the process of cutting our budgets, I want to make sure
we at least have the continuing capability to do the oversight
where the big money is being spent over in the Federal
establishment better known as the executive branch.
Do you believe with these cuts you will be able to do the
kind of oversight that you think is necessary for all of those
areas of the Federal Government that are within your
jurisdiction? Mr. Kline, Mr. Miller.
Mr. Kline. Yeah, Mr. Chairman, I think that we will. We
organized, like some committees and unlike others, we don't
have a specific oversight subcommittee. Each of our legislative
subcommittees has an oversight responsibility.
We did however on the majority side dedicate some staff
specifically to doing oversight. So I think we can carry out
those responsibilities. I believe we have been able to do so
with this year's budget, and we will be able to do so with the
projected 6.4 percent cut.
But again, my caution would be if we were to cut more than
that, it would make that increasingly difficult to do that
oversight. It is time-consuming. As you pointed out, this
committee has got two major departments, Education and Labor;
multiple agencies, OSHA, MSHA, and so forth. So it keeps the
oversight effort pretty busy.
And I would also agree with you, Mr. Chairman, that both
parties, since I have been here, I think have been remiss in
providing all of the oversight that should have been done.
There is, as you know, a tendency when there is a Democrat
in the White House and a Republican majority over here for
oversight to get more intense, and the reverse is true. We need
to provide that oversight as a constitutional and congressional
responsibility all of the time.
The Chairman. Mr. Miller, you mentioned a couple different
instances that required your staffers to be on location. For
me, that is not only legislative, but that is oversight as
well. Do you feel that--I mean, given these resources that we
have, that you will be able to continue to be able to do that
kind of oversight?
Mr. George Miller of California. Well, we have been able to
do it in the past. I mean, hopefully, we won't have mine
explosions and oil spills and any of these kinds of problems,
and we will be able to do it.
I may not always agree with the oversight selections that
the majority makes, but I think they have actually had a fairly
robust oversight calendar this year, ranging across--we have a
significant number of new members on the committee, and so just
doing oversight, both for the purposes of oversight but also of
helping the members understand the higher education, the
elementary, secondary education, the National Labor Relations
Board, how all of this has played out. But it has been pretty
robust.
I don't know how much you get to do of that when the cuts
go beyond--the chairman says he thinks he can handle this 6.4
percent. And that includes--I assume that includes a
continuation of the kind of oversight they have been doing.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Brady. Yes.
Mr. Chairman or/and Ranking Member, you don't foresee
laying anybody off this next--the second session? With a
possibility of a 6.4 percent cut, you won't have to lay anybody
off the job?
Mr. Kline. No, sir. No, sir. We do not anticipate that. We
have a couple of staff slots that we may have to fill, and I
hope we will be able to do that. It puts a little bit of
pressure on our ability to do that. But under no circumstances
are we looking at laying off staff in order to meet the 6.4
percent cut.
Mr. George Miller of California. That would be our goal,
that we would try to avoid that. And we are trying to make
those adjustments now in looking at how we would manage other
changes in the committee to hold onto the personnel.
Mr. Brady. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Schock.
Mr. Nugent. Thank you very much. I appreciate it.
Mr. Kline. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Well, the committee now welcomes Chairman Hall and Ranking
Member Johnson of the Committee on Science, Space and
Technology. We would appreciate hearing how you have handled
your committee with the 5 percent cut that is ongoing this
particular year and the projected 6.4 percent cut for the
upcoming year. And also, Mr. Hall, I want to know how your 88-
year-old neighbor is doing. You mentioned him last year in your
testimony before us, and I hope he is having a happy honeymoon.
Mr. Hall. Well, they didn't get married, but they are
living together. And she can still drive.
Mr. Brady. Push the button.
Mr. Hall. How is that?
The Chairman. Very good.
Mr. Hall. Do you want us to start over?
The Chairman. We are happy to hear from you on how your
committee is doing and how you would project you will be able
to do in the next Congress with the--or the next session with
the 6.4 percent cut.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. RALPH M. HALL, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

Mr. Hall. Well, I will say to you good morning and thank
you for having me here. And I guess I am glad I am here. But,
you know, I checked the first of the year, from January to the
end of January, how much more I had to do as the chairman, and
it is about four or five times as much, and then when I got my
dang check, it is the same as it had been the last 30 years.
There is something wrong with my thinking and everything.
But I am going to do my best to read this statement that
they wrote for me. They say I am supposed to thank you for
having me here and that we have had a good year on the
committee conducting careful oversight and advancing good
pieces of legislation. Our country is facing major economic
challenges, and we are mindful that we have to be prudent with
our spending. And I think we have been, and I think that Ms.
Johnson has been very prudent.
You asked for a review of the committee funding. Like all
committees we had to shoulder a 5 percent cut this year, and we
were able to use the funds that we were provided and put off
buying some major equipment in the computer field, and that
kept us within our budget.
Our total budget for the 112th Congress is $13 million,
divided up $6.6 million for 2011 and $6.6 million for 2012. For
2011, we are currently projecting a surplus of approximately
$860,800 as a result of, I think, careful budgeting.
And as always the case, personnel costs make up most of the
budget. In 2011, almost 95 percent of our budget was allocated
to personnel costs, and in the majority we didn't staff all of
our slots right away, and we haven't staffed all of them yet.
But with the money that was budgeted and the surplus
accumulated from the unallocated slots, we were able to manage
the surplus in the salary to approximately $846,500. In years
past we have, I think, been careful about making sure the
minority--well we were positive, not just being careful about
it--the minority received one-third of the total staff slots as
well as control over one-third of the personnel salary budget,
and the minority had a surplus of approximately $154,200 giving
us a total surplus together of approximately $1,000,700.
Our other main budget categories are travel, supplies,
equipment, and this is where we shouldered most of the 5
percent cut early this year. Since our budgets are tighter in
these categories, we anticipate using the salary funds to
purchase some items, including an upgraded server for our
leave-tracking system. That is, as well as the remote
applications access, travel through computer, both of which the
House doesn't provide at this time. This will give increased
longevity to existing systems and defer the costs in the
future. With the purchase of the remote application access,
this is the first step of the committee to move toward virtual
desktops.
In 2012, we showed a possible 6.4 percent cut. We found out
that was put into place, and we will continue to meet the needs
of the committee and stay within our means. However, unlike
this year, the bulk of further reductions would need to come
from our salary budget, which is 89 percent of the cut, because
we have already pared down spending in the operational budget.
In order to ease the reduction on salaries, we reduced our
travel budget by nearly 35 percent and our supplies budget by
almost 20 percent.
Our travel budget this year, I think we are at $70,000, and
I am not sure Ms. Johnson is happy with that, but I will be
glad to talk with her about it.
With these cuts, our staff and Members would be further
capped in the amount they can travel to see projects. You know,
travel, we get--our overseas travel is what we have had more of
than the other type travel, and the State Department pays for
that, so that doesn't come into effect here.
With the reduction in supplies, we need to make additional
cuts in publications, and in anticipation of a further cut, we
will make use of the surplus that we have this year to purchase
supplies such as paper and toner for use next year.
I think it says here I would be happy to answer any
questions you may have. That is not exactly true, but I will do
my best.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Hall.
[The statement of Mr. Hall follows:]

The Chairman. Ms. Johnson.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS, RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

Ms. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today on the committee
funding. Chairman Hall has already presented an overview of the
committee finances, so I will just make brief remarks.
As he has noted, we had to absorb the 5 percent cut in our
budget this year, as did other committees, and he already
described the areas impacted by the cuts. And I would just like
to add that the 5 percent cut combined with uncertainty about
the potential additional cuts in the second session of the
112th led the minority to defer filling two staff slots for the
time being as well as to cut salaries of almost--most of the
staff who were retained from the 111th Congress.
And this has been a desirable situation, but it was deemed
prudent--it has not been desirable--to ensure that we would not
have a layoff of additional staff beyond those who lost their
jobs when we became the minority. And we have to make
additional cuts in salaries in the event that Congress mandated
additional cuts of our committee's budget in the second
session.
As a result we will be able to end the current year with a
surplus of approximately $154,000. I do not anticipate being
able to have a similar surplus in 2012 as we would like to fill
the vacant minority slots as well as potentially adjusting
staff salaries as appropriate to attempt to give back what we
cut the staff when we got to the freeze level.
And I would also anticipate that some oversight travel that
had been deferred this year due to committee and congressional
commitments, schedules, were necessary to carry out this year,
so clearly an additional 6.4 percent cut to the committee
funding would adversely impact our ability to meet our
responsibilities for the coming year.
And so I would respectfully request that we attempt to
leave us where we are. I know your hands are tied, but in
moving forward we hope to experience as little cuts as
possible, because we have attempted to reduce our spending, and
we have also done without a couple of staff people.
So thank you again, and I will be happy to answer your
questions.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
[The statement of Ms. Johnson follows:]

The Chairman. I appreciate the work that both of you do on
this committee.
Mr. Hall, you brought up the issue of travel. Congress gets
a lot of criticism for travel. Can you tell us the nature of
the kind of travel that your committee needs to do for
oversight and for anticipation of legislation?
Mr. Hall. Well, this wouldn't apply to oversight, but we
made two trips to the liftoffs at Kennedy, and we travel to
Johnson and to Huntsville and to Kennedy from time to time.
The new Members need--the first thing I did when almost 30
years ago I came here and got on the same committee, I wanted
to go to Huntsville and see what they were doing, and I wanted
to go to Kennedy and see what they were doing, and I wanted to
go to Johnson to see what they were doing. And I took a half a
day and a night at each place. And I found some things that
were unusual to me then, because the McDonnell Douglases and
all of the people that were contracting with the government
were all together, and I thought that probably impaired the
bidding, the competitive bidding. But the answer I was given
almost everywhere, and I was new, was that they had what they
wanted because of the danger of the mission that they were
overseeing, that they trusted those that they had been doing
business with, and they wanted to keep on doing that business.
And just recently there has been an effort for the
commercial people to go into the business of travel and making
some trips to the space station, and maybe one day to Mars or
wherever they are going to go, realizing that we are not going
to get to go anywhere until people can go to the grocery store.
But those are things in store, and we need to try to keep our
space station alive and keep alive just a thread of making it
to Mars when we can. But I think we need to keep--try to keep
NASA going, keep them up and have a little closer supervision
on what they are doing.
The Chairman. Since your committee is called Science,
Space, and Technology, maybe we can ask you to figure out what
technology might be able to get us to keep a warm but not
freezing hearing room. This morning it was 80 degrees in here,
and they decided they would cool it down a little bit, and I
think that they have succeeded. I am kind of reminded of Rocky
hitting that slab of meat. This feels about as cold. That
doesn't need an answer.
Mr. Brady.
Mr. Brady. I just thank you for being here today, and I
appreciate your testimony.
Mr. Nugent. I just echo that. Thank you so very much,
particularly in keeping your spending rates down. Thank you.
Ms. Johnson. I just want to say that, and Mr. Hall pointed
out, there are times when the State Department underwrites some
of our travel. I just returned from Brussels, where I
represented the U.S. Congress, but it was paid for by the State
Department to the European Union on science. So we are grateful
for that help. It is still government money, but it didn't come
directly out of our committee.
We have been very prudent in our spending, but we do have a
large number of new people who have not been to many of the
places that we have jurisdiction, research labs and the space--
the network of space interests we have invested in. So some are
beginning to ask for travel. So we might have to do a little
bit of that more early on in the year.
The Chairman. We thank both of you for testifying.
I don't know, Mr. Hall, if you have any parting thought for
us this year as you gave us a wonderful parting thought last
year.
Mr. Hall. No. I hope I am back next year, and I will try to
save up something for you.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Hall. And thank you. And I still think you should have
been Attorney General.
The Chairman. Thank you, gentlemen, for appearing.
The committee now welcomes Chairman Peter King and Ranking
Member Bennie Thompson of the Committee on Homeland Security.
We would like an update on how your committee is doing from
a budget standpoint after working through the 5 percent cut
this last--or the current year, and projected 6.4 percent cut
as a result of the resolution passed by the House earlier this
year that will affect us in the upcoming year.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. PETER T. KING, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON
HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. King. Thank you, Chairman Lungren and Ranking Member
Brady. We appreciate the opportunity to be here today.
You are right, we did have the cuts last year. We face more
cuts coming into the next year. The ranking member and I have
attempted to work together to work within those cuts. Basically
we have managed to do it.
I should point out that our budget for 2012 will be roughly
what it was back in 2006. And even though we have 75 authorized
positions this year compared to 60 in 2012, we expect to come
in at the same number. We expect to live within the budget
itself. We have done this in a number of ways. We agreed last
year, pledged to do more with less, but in doing that, we still
wanted to have a full range of hearings, of field hearings, of
site inspections, of rigorous oversight. We have had hearings
on radicalization. We have sent Members to the border. There
has been field hearings at the border. We sent staff to
investigate security breaches at airports around the country,
to visit local police departments.
We have also had natural disasters, which come under FEMA,
such as the terrible tornadoes; Hurricane Irene; the tornado in
Joplin, Missouri, which directly affected one of the members of
our committee Mr. Long, and with all that we have managed to, I
believe, do a very admirable job and still live within the
budget.
We didn't fill all authorized staff positions. We did use
existing staff for roles that could have been filled with
experienced, higher-paid staff. We also made use of senior
fellows and detailees, which are at no cost to the committee.
For instance, we have a member of the New York Police
Intelligence Unit who--a full inspector who has been at the
committee now for almost a year at no expense at all. We have
attempted to reduce travel expenses. We have implemented
internal administrative reforms, and we are going to be coming
in under budget for this year.
I will say that with some of the savings from the 2011
budget, we intend to prepay some of the expenses for 2012 as
far as equipment and supplies that will enable us to live
within the 2012 budget. We have eliminated intern stipends, and
we also intend to recruit a GAO office detailee and senior
fellows to augment committee staffing without additional costs
to the committee.
Let me, Mr. Chairman, also maybe in the hope that you will
ask me easy questions, give you credit for the great job you do
as chairman of the cybersecurity subcommittee, which will be
moving ahead in a dramatic way over the next several weeks.
I will continue to leave this to Mr. Thompson to describe
that we have followed the committee's customary two-thirds,
one-third division, and we intend to follow that division in
2012.
So with that I thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member,
members of the committee, for the opportunity to be here today
and again look forward to going ahead into a new year and also
to continue to work with all of you. Thank you.
The Chairman. All right. Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. King follows:]

The Chairman. Mr. Thompson.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. BENNIE G. THOMPSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI, RANKING MEMBER,
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Chairman Lungren,
Ranking Member Brady and members of the committee for the
opportunity to testify regarding the 112th Congress committee
allocation and possible cuts.
In March of this year, I had to reduce the size of the
committee staff by three employees and reduce all of my staff's
salaries by between 2 and 8 percent. Consequently, I also was
not able to fill vacancies.
Our participation in travel on committee business has been
limited, and we have been very conservative in the purchases of
office supplies. With the limited funds remaining, we plan to
replace an aging copier and computers.
For next year, for 2012, an additional 6.4 percent cut for
the Democratic side would place our panel at even greater
disadvantage than we are experiencing this year. At this point
we are not making--talking about any amenities, but rather bare
essentials, like adequate staffing levels. In my estimation we
would not be able to sufficiently execute the duties of a
committee staff without additional funding.
Mr. Chairman, resources matter. Without them we would not
be able to fill vacancies, maintain competitive salaries or
continue to offer paid internships for deserving, eager college
students. While we continue to be frugal with purchases like
news subscriptions and equipment, I am sure our travel will be
even more limited even as the Speaker has directed all
committees to engage in field hearings. I cannot overstate the
difficulty an additional budget cut would create on this
committee's staff. As it stands now, many of them are doing the
work of two or three staffers at reduced salaries.
Let me repeat, my greatest concern is we will be told that
more than 6.4 percent will be taken. If this happens, I will
have no alternative but to, yet again, terminate more staff.
Therefore, I am respectfully requesting this committee to keep
that in mind.
Our legislative and oversight activities require, our
mission and jurisdiction as a committee require us to, in some
instances, go all over the world. That travel in some instances
comes out of the committee's budget. But our mission is to keep
America safe, and we have to do it, obviously within the
confines of the budget, but obviously notwithstanding the fact
that our country deserves no less than to be safe.
And I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank both of you. And let me just ask one
question to start off, and that is, how do you work out the
issue of field hearings majority to minority? Is there
consultation? Is that done from the subcommittee level, full-
committee level? How does that work?
Mr. King. Well, it ends up going to the full-committee
level for the decision, but for the most part we allow the
hearings. It is pretty much the same procedure that was in
effect when Ranking Member Thompson was the chairman. We
generally have at least one Member from each party. They lay
out the reason for the field trip, and almost all of them have
been approved. I can think of a number of bipartisan hearings
that have been held, including some in the districts of the
Democratic Members.
So I would say probably the main field hearings have been
at the--regarding border security, they are the main ones that
I can focus on right now. But I am not aware, for instance, in
the last year of any significant cutback in field hearings.
The Chairman. Mr. Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. Well, that is absolutely correct. I think we
have been to Texas, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, Michigan and
several other States with field hearings both at the
subcommittee level where the chair and ranking member of the
committees agreed. So that policy continues.
The Chairman. Good. I am glad to hear that. I had requested
a field hearing for 2 years in the previous Congress and didn't
get it, and so I was hoping there was a spirit of cooperation
that prevails today.
I would ask this, Mr. Thompson. You have mentioned that you
had to lay off staff. Now, we had testimony from others that as
Democratic membership went from majority to minority, they
necessarily went from the two-thirds to one-third. Are you
saying that in addition to that you have had to lay off staff
on the minority side?
Mr. Thompson. Yes. What we did, obviously, we came from
two-thirds to one-third. We had to make significant adjustments
as well as reduce salaries, and we did it, and we are presently
managing a committee. But it is also indicated that, at some
point, if this cut that is proposed goes into effect,
obviously, we would have to let someone else go.
Mr. King. If I can just note, Mr. Chairman, one of the
toughest moments that I had was when the Democrats did take
control of the committee back in 2007, and I had to make those
decisions to lay a significant number of people off as you go
from majority to minority, and it is always painful because
these are very qualified people.
The Chairman. I am just trying to get at the point that Mr.
Brady had made with several other committees, and that is have
the 5 percent cut required any layoff of staff in this current
year? I think that is what Mr. Brady was asking.
Mr. Thompson. It was three for me.
Mr. Brady. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Also I was interested in the 6.4 projected cut that would
require also the majority and the minority to lay more people--
to lay people off.
Mr. King. Right now I don't believe we will have to lay
anyone off. There are spots we are not going to fill. I think
there are six vacancies right now. I don't if we are going to
be filling them. There are also several more that may be
leaving. We may not be filling them either. So we can work
within the budget we have right now. Obviously it is not going
to be easy. But as of now I do not anticipate having to lay
anyone off on the majority side.
Mr. Brady. You are a pretty important committee, and you
functioned for a lot of years with a--for a limited amount of
years, it was brand new, but now are you going to be able to
function with six being not filled and maybe a possible couple
others not being filled. And as you say in your testimony, and
I agree with you, you have got to keep us safe. And I think of
any committee, I would fight as best as I can to try to make
sure that that doesn't happen to your committee because you
need to keep us safe. And not only us I am talking here, I am
talking about the American people. But that is on the majority
side. But yet on the minority side with a projected 6.4, you
are saying that you probably have to lay three people off?
Mr. Thompson. That is correct.
Mr. Brady. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. King. I would just add to your point. I agree this is
going to be difficult, and in an optimum situation we could
certainly use additional personnel in a very worthwhile way.
Chairman Lungren is a member of our committee. He is a very
senior member of the committee, and he realizes the type of
work we do. I am not saying that these cuts are good for the
committee, I am just saying we can live within them.
The Chairman. It would also help if we finally got
settlement of the jurisdictional question since the last
remaining unfilled recommendation of the 9/11 Commission is
that the Congress consolidate its authority for homeland
security matters in a single committee in the House and the
Senate, and unfortunately, under both Democrats and
Republicans, we failed to do that thus far.
Gentleman from Mississippi.
Gentleman from Florida.
Mr. Nugent. No, sir.
The Chairman. I would like to thank you for your testimony
and thank you for your work. And the only thing I would add is
we have outstanding staff on that committee, and there is a
certain amount of particular expertise that we need in order
for us to be able to cover the subject matter that comes under
homeland security. And it is not just when we lose a person we
can necessarily say we are not going to fill that position if
it is an area of expertise in nuclear materials, for instance,
or other types of things. And so I just hope anybody who might
be listening might understand that for us to do the important
oversight, we have to have the expertise to ensure that the
Department is doing what we intended it to do when we set it
up.
Mr. King. I agree with you completely. The staff does a
phenomenal job, and I can understand, again, Mr. Thompson's
situation is you let people go that have unique talents and
unique abilities. It is not just a staff member who can go from
one committee to another. Many of the people we have, whether
it is a scientific background, intelligence background or law
enforcement background, it is a very unique skill set, and once
you lose them, it is hard to get them back, and it is very hard
to replace.
Mr. Thompson. Absolutely.
The Chairman. We thank you both.
Mr. Filner. I have been delegated to speak for the
majority.
Mr. Miller of Florida. No, you haven't.
Mr. Brady. You know, coming from anybody but you, we might
be able to believe that.
The Chairman. It is a pleasure to welcome both Chairman
Miller and Ranking Member Filner of the Veterans' Affairs
Committee before our committee to hear how well you are getting
along this year, to find out how you are operating under the
current 5 percent cut that was imposed by a vote of the House,
and how you would anticipate operating with the projected 6.4
percent cut that was also the result of a vote on a House
resolution. And I am glad to hear from both of you.
Mr. Chairman.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JEFF MILLER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON VETERANS'
AFFAIRS

Mr. Miller of Florida. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman,
Ranking Member Brady. Good to see you both for the opportunity
to appear before you for the Veterans' Affairs budget for the
112th Congress, for the second session. My good friend Bob
Filner is with me today, and we have worked side by side very
well this year, and we look forward to continuing to work on
issues that are important to our veterans community.
As the committee knows, we have oversight over the
Department of Veterans Affairs with a staff of close to 300,000
individuals and a budget of over $120 billion, and we have what
I think is an aggressive plan of action that has already
engaged in oversight in several of the areas that are included
in our oversight plan.
The VA Committee's total budget request for the 112th
Congress was a 5 percent decrease in funds from the 111th
Congress, and we did manage to find those savings by decreasing
our salary and equipment budget at the beginning of the year.
We had to make some decisions on staffing, equipment and travel
this year based on our cuts, and we are going to be returning
money to the Treasury due to the fact that we have not fully
staffed the majority, and it allowed us some flexibility within
that 5 percent decrease for any needed purchases or committee
travel since we have such a small travel budget for the size of
the committee.
Remember, the vast majority of our travel that we are
engaged in is paid for by the very agency that we have
oversight on. VA pays for the majority of the VA Committee's
travel.
The committee's equipment funds were one-third of what was
requested in the 111th Congress; therefore, we made only major
purchases when absolutely necessary, but by the end of the
year, we do hope to replace some outdated equipment and a
constituent management system that has not been updated since
2005.
We have asked for and received requests from the majority
and minority staff for needed items, and we will consider them
for purchase within our remaining balance for 2011.
Now, the additional 6.4 percent cut from our 2012 budget
will be challenging, but we are anticipating and planning for
it by decreasing the total salary allotment number and
providing the minority with one-third of that salary budget.
This is a small committee charged with an awesome
responsibility: oversight of those who care and provide
services for our Nation's warriors and their families.
Mr. Chairman, you have my assurance that we will account
for every dollar, we will stretch every dollar afforded us as
we outstrive the expectations placed upon us, and we will
welcome any questions that you have before us.
[The statement of Mr. Miller of Florida follows:]

Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, is it appropriate to ask the
chairman a question, or do you want to wait until after the
ranking member testifies?
The Chairman. After the ranking member.
Mr. Filner.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. BOB FILNER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA, RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON
VETERANS' AFFAIRS

Mr. Filner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and as Chairman Miller
said, we have had a great working relationship, and we are here
to talk to you about the budget cuts.
And the concern I have, and it picks up for the end of the
discussion I just heard with Homeland Security, that the impact
upon the staff and on this institution both in the near term
and the future, I think, is threatened by applying these cuts
across the board. The cuts I think we can handle, as the
chairman said, but I really think we should exempt the salaries
from the proposed cuts. I am not sure that in these tough
economic times the ordinary staff person should absorb those
cuts, functioning with that is going to be very difficult.
That is, as--when we went from majority to minority,
obviously we had to cut our staff in half, but we didn't just
cut the staff in half, their salaries went down as was mandated
basically by the cuts that we had and the way they were
distributed. So we already cut the salary of our working staff
members. And, that, as you heard from Homeland Security, the
chair and ranking member--affects the ability to keep good
people, that affects the institutional memory of the
institution, that affects our ability for oversight as the
chairman said was our prime responsibility.
That is, if we continue to have to cut back, reduce
salaries, we are going to lose the very people that we need to
do the function that this Congress is supposed to do, and that
is oversight. We have a small committee, we have the second
biggest bureaucracy to oversee, and it is hard to do that with
the contemplated cuts in the staff salaries.
I don't think that we should make it in those areas. It
becomes really a token demonstration of our seriousness to cut
back, and we risk losing the most able staff among us, the loss
of the ability, the institutional knowledge, and the effect of
the quality of the laws we pass and the oversight that we can
exercise.
So, Mr. Chairman, I agree with Chairman Miller that we can
deal with these cuts. I would just not apply them across the
board and exclude the salaries.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. I thank both of you for testifying. I just
want to say our staff does a great job of doing preparation for
us, and they always have pictures of those who are to appear,
and I must say that they gave us very youthful pictures of the
two of you. They look very, very good.
Mr. Filner. What is he talking about? What are you
referring to, Mr. Chairman?
The Chairman. I think they are your official photos.
Anyway, thanks for the work that you are doing on the
committee, and thank you for your members' work on the
committee as well.
Have you had to--now, look, I know you went from majority
to minority status, and we went from minority to majority
status, but in terms of the 5 percent imposed cut for this
year, have you had to lay off any members of your staff?
Mr. Miller of Florida. We actually have not fully
implemented the staff level that we are budgeted for. We
actually held open numerous positions on the committee so that
we would have flexibility at the end of this session,
contemplating the additional cuts that probably would be coming
forward.
So the answer on our side is we are not fully staffed. I
would say that some areas that we are looking at bringing
additional staff on is within our oversight and investigative
committee, because we have really started what I think is an
important requirement of this committee, and we have very
aggressively been looking at VA in some areas that they have
not been looked at in the past. And I think we have been
derelict from a congressional standpoint in providing the
oversight that has been necessary, and that is going back to
when the Republicans held the majority the last time.
So in answer to your question, we are understaffed at this
point, so it has not been an issue for us.
The Chairman. Mr. Filner.
Mr. Filner. We did not have to lay off anybody, but we did
significantly reduce our staff salaries.
The Chairman. Mr. Miller, you mentioned something, and I
think you mentioned it to me before, and that is when you do
your oversight, your travel is paid for by those you are
overseeing?
Mr. Miller of Florida. We only have a $50,000 travel budget
for the committee, and so we have been very careful in
expenditure of those funds, and I wanted to be extra careful in
the first session because I just didn't know how far we would
be able to expand. However, outside of that, most of the times
when we travel to a Veterans Affairs whether it be hospital,
cemetery, clinic, the VA actually picks up and provides for
that. And my concern is----
The Chairman. Does that cause a difficulty?
Mr. Miller of Florida. It has not caused us a problem yet,
but I am still concerned that it may because they do get a
heads up as to when the committee is coming in and what we are
actually looking for.
But I would say this: Secretary Shinseki has been very
helpful in the areas that we have worked on in this last year,
and we have told each other that we want to continue to work
with the ranking member in helping them fix some of the issues
that are out there.
So, while I was very concerned last time we appeared before
your committee, it has not come to fruition, but it very easily
could.
The Chairman. Mr. Filner, how about you on that issue?
Mr. Filner. When I was chair, by the way, and we had a
significantly higher travel budget, we tried to free ourselves
from that; that is, we did not want to get permission as it
were to travel, and so we paid for it pretty much. And I think
the cutback led to this more--they seem to be willing to step
in, and we know why. But I think we have to be careful of that,
because this is our prime responsibility as a committee is
oversight. And yet if you cut us back so significantly that
they have to pay for it, you have given up some of your
independence in that oversight.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Brady.
Mr. Brady. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Filner, you talked about your cuts to personnel. If the
projected 6.4 cut comes to you on the minority side, would you
have to lay people off?
Mr. Filner. I don't think so--I don't think officially, but
the cutback in salary may lead to movement and basically the
effect of a layoff, because either people will not accept----
Mr. Brady. I don't think you lessen the pain by laying
somebody off unofficially. You said ``officially.'' I don't
think----
Mr. Filner. Well, we may not have laid them off, but they
will have looked for a better job and left.
Mr. Brady. Okay.
Mr. Filner. De facto as opposed to de jure. I don't know, I
am not a lawyer.
The Chairman. The gentleman from Mississippi.
Mr. Harper. Since I hold the seat that the late Sonny
Montgomery held for 30 years, and knowing how important what
you do is, I just want to say thanks for the great job you are
doing, and we look forward to working with you.
The Chairman. Mr. Gingrey.
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Chairman Miller, I want to go back to that point in regard
to the travel budget, that you are underfunded, obviously
badly, in your account in the department of which you and
Ranking Member Filner so clearly said that you have the
oversight responsibility, and yet you rely on them to travel.
Are there any other committees that are in that situation? Is
that unique to Veterans Administration?
Mr. Miller of Florida. Armed Services, I would expect, is
that way as well, although it is a little bit different.
However, I will say this: With the travel budget that we do
have, we have been able to send our investigators and committee
staff members and Members on certain occasions out without VA's
knowledge, and I think that is an important part of what we do.
And so I think we will have the ability to do more, but it is
just--I understand why it is done, but it could be abused if
not looked at very carefully. And the ranking member and myself
have worked as closely as we possibly could to make sure that
that does not become a major issue for our committee.
Mr. Gingrey. Well, I am reassured by what you said in
regard to your working relationship with General Shinseki, and
everything, at least in the first session, so far so good. But
if we get into the second session of 112, and you take another
6.4 percent cut, then it may be very difficult. And we will be
interested in hearing back from you next year.
Mr. Miller of Florida. Certainly.
The Chairman. Mr. Nugent.
Mr. Nugent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you both for
being here.
You know, having a district that has over 116,000 veterans,
and I do veterans advisory board meetings on a monthly basis
throughout the district in different counties, so I would
certainly encourage you to keep your oversight up. My ears get
blistered sometimes in reference to some of the issues that
they see not with the quality of care, but the processing of
their claims.
And so I think that is one area that I know where there has
been some positive movement, but we need to move further, and I
think we need to move faster. But I would like to see more
oversight, and I am concerned about the VA having basically
control over when and where you come and how you do that.
Mr. Miller of Florida. Well, and as you might well imagine,
when you go to a VA facility, whether we were in control or the
Democrats were in control, they will let you see what they want
you to see. If you drill through that and begin the possibility
of talking with some of the employees off site, you will find a
much different picture.
But we all want the same thing, and that is, as Mr. Harper
said, to serve those individuals who have served and protected
this Nation.
For the record, if the Florida maps hold as the Senate
released, my district will then have 147,000 veterans.
Mr. Filner. Let me make clear for the record I don't think
the chairman was implying that they control what we do and
where we go. Like the military, they find it in their interest
to help pay for it. I mean, it makes it friendlier. But then
that, of course, sets some of the stage.
So they have never, I am sure, Mr. Miller, said, you can't
go here, or we are not going there, or because we won't pay for
it. They have just stepped forward to help us like the military
steps forward, but they make sure then they know when you are
coming, and it is a little too friendly a relationship. But I
don't think Mr. Miller would want to imply that they would ever
tell us what to do or where to go.
Mr. Miller of Florida. If my statement needs to be
clarified, I will use a perfect example of the Miami VA Medical
Center where there were significant problems with sterilization
issues, with colonoscopy material a couple years ago. The
director of that facility was removed temporarily, sent to the
VISN, and then ultimately when they did their internal
investigation, they brought that director back.
We continued to drill into and try to find out exactly what
happened and some of the things that took place. While we were
down at the facility sometime earlier this year, I began
hearing rumors of other things that took place. And we had the
director and brought her up here for a hearing and asked her
questions in an open hearing. She was not able to answer those
questions well at all. She is now being reassigned.
The only way that we were able to get the information that
we needed was to go off site, because what I was saying in my
comments was when you go to a facility, as does DOD many times,
they provide you the picture they want you to see. Everything
is rosy, everything is great. But then when you do have an
opportunity to visit with individuals outside of that setting
that the directors never would have allowed us to talk to had
we been in that facility, and we wouldn't have known to ask to
talk to them, we were able to find out some things that were
pretty damaging and unfortunately put veterans in places that
they did not need to be.
In fact, one was shot by a police officer shortly after
walking out of the facility, having been Baker Acted and put
into Jackson Memorial facility involuntarily, and then somehow
when they got brought from Jackson to the VA, it appears there
was a mix-up in the paperwork, and they claim that this person
voluntarily admitted himself even though they had already said
that they were going to commit suicide by cop. This veteran
walked out the doors of the hospital and was actually killed by
a police officer just a short time after walking out the door.
Mr. Nugent. I yield back.
The Chairman. We thank the gentlemen very, very much. I
hope if I went off site to talk to the two of you, I wouldn't
find a different story than I had here from you. This spirit of
cooperation that you have exhibited is refreshing, and I am
glad that we are working together on behalf of our veterans. In
tough budget times we are trying to make those decisions that
are best under those circumstances, so I thank both of you.
Mr. Miller of Florida. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Bachus, for being
here. I understand the ranking member is not going to appear.
Mr. Bachus. Yes, but he and I, I think, are in accord as to
what I am going to say. He is aware----
The Chairman. Actually, it is kind of funny. I considered
Barney a friend, and I saw what he said in his announcement
that he no longer had to be nice to people he didn't want to be
nice to anymore, and I hope that is not an indication of his
failure to appear here.
But we welcome you representing the entire committee, and
we would love to hear from you as to how well your committee is
doing while operating under the 5 percent cut that was imposed
this year and the prospective 6.4 percent cut for next year.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. SPENCER BACHUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ALABAMA, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON
FINANCIAL SERVICES

Mr. Bachus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and members of the
committee. I am pleased to appear before you today as chairman
of the Financial Services Committee.
Our budget continues the policy of providing the minority a
full one-third of both funding and staff slots allocated to the
committee.
For the first session of the 112th Congress, our committee
has managed the 5 percent budget reduction prudently, and it
has not negatively affected our day-to-day operations.
Recognizing that further cuts could occur, we did not fill all
our vacant slots, thus avoiding the need to terminate any staff
from our payroll or reduce salaries.
The budget cuts have not been without impact, however. The
positions we have not filled are analytical and research
positions, the absence of which has restricted our resources we
can devote to forecasting financial, economic and regulatory
developments and researching those that arise under our
jurisdiction.
For the second session, of course, we have been advised to
plan for a 6.4 percent reduction in the amount allocated to our
committee. We will continue to be cautious in our spending and
in our staffing, and although it will be tight, we anticipate
we will be able to operate given the 6.4 percent additional
reduction. We want to be team players, and I think we are
asking the taxpayers, the American citizens, to sacrifice, and
we want to be a part of that sacrifice.
That will restrict our ability to fill some vacant staff
slots, and, as I said, it will reduce our analytical abilities,
and that could prove to be penny wise and pound foolish. As we
have seen many times, government policies sometimes can cause
dire economic and financial consequences.
Our committee continues with a significant amount of work
ahead, given the financial challenges, the economic challenges,
and the events in Europe. They obviously are in a recession
today. And with the interconnectivity of our global economy,
that is going to be a challenge for all of us. We ask you to
continue to provide us with the resources we need to do our
job, particularly in an era where our oversight of financial
markets is critical. But all in all, I am happy to report to
you that we will live within the restrictions you impose.
[The statement of Mr. Bachus follows:]

The Chairman. We thank you very, very much for your work.
Does the committee anticipate what--let me put it this way.
Some people would look at it and say, well, your committee
spent a good deal of time passing what is known as Dodd-Frank,
and this was a monumental task, and there are obviously
different opinions as to its success. And some would say, well,
therefore, that is in your back--in your rearview mirror; you
won't have as much to do now. How would you respond to that?
Mr. Bachus. Several different ways. We have only
implemented 27 percent of the regulations. We still have at
least 73 percent of the implementation. The bill may be about
3,000 pages long, but the regulations presently--and this is--
we are 27, 28 percent through--they fill two bankers boxes. So
we are dealing with really the largest financial services
changes in regulation in the history of our country.
It is putting tremendous stress particularly on our
community banks and our credit unions. It is affecting their
financial health. And we are having to oversee a new agency
with sweeping powers, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau,
integrating mergers of different regulators, instituting a
Financial Stability Oversight Board.
We are beginning, as with the European crisis, which is--53
percent of our multinational corporations', American
multinational corporations', profit is generated in Europe. The
European banks are having trouble financing American companies'
operations in Europe. So there is always--every day there is a
new--there seems to be a new financial challenge.
The Chairman. One of the biggest complaints I have in my
district, I deal with the difficulty of small business getting
loans, and then when I talk to my community bankers, they say
that some of this regulatory reform and implementation of regs
that seemingly were done in reaction to what the, quote/
unquote, ``big banks'' did has come down on them in such a way
that they can't be reasonably flexible and prudent. And my
response to them has been, among other things, that the
Congress of the United States is conducting oversight on that,
and that we are looking at these things, and that as the
regulatory scheme goes forward, we have to ensure that the
voices of our constituents, small business community and small
bankers, that is community bankers, is heard.
For the record, your committee is one that is charged with
that responsibility, correct?
Mr. Bachus. That is right. That is correct. In fact, we
have passed 15 legislative bills which address small business
and job creation, and I am happy to report that those were done
in a bipartisan manner.
The Chairman. We passed them in the House.
Mr. Bachus. They have all passed. I think 14 of the 15
passed the House. We considered three more today.
The Chairman. What has the Senate done so far?
Mr. Bachus. Nothing. The Senate has not done anything.
The Chairman. I want to make it clear that your committee
is working on these requests for consideration by small
businesses and community banks in our districts, and that you
have brought forth legislation. The only reason they say ``do-
nothing Congress,'' and yet on a bipartisan basis your
committee has considered a number of these things and passed
out legislation----
Mr. Bachus. And the Congress has picked them up in a
bipartisan way, and most of them have passed with over 400
votes. So there is a consensus in the House that these are
important measures. I am disappointed in the Senate. It is very
good work product.
There are two ways that small businesses can finance their
operations.
Mr. Bachus. In fact, 70 something percent of your small
businesses say that given additional capital, they would hire
people today. In fact, if you look at the job numbers, 70, 80
percent of your new jobs are in small businesses.
And there are two ways for them to build capital or seek
funds. One is lending, go to a bank and lend. And many small
businesses, because they are new in many cases, they are
sometimes risky enterprises and the regulators are urging the
banks not to take risks. Well, most new businesses don't have a
track record. So the way that they normally do is raise--have
capital contributions, people that are willing to come in and
participate as--you know, put capital in, and, if they lose
their capital, if the company loses money, they lose their
investment. But if the company is successful, their capital
grows.
And we have passed at least six or seven measures which
should enable small businesses to raise capital. But none of
them have been taken up in the Senate.
The Chairman. I thank you.
Mr. Bachus. In fact----
The Chairman. Sometimes we don't connect the budgets that
you have and the staff that you have with the work that you do.
And that is certainly vital at this present time.
Mr. Bachus. And I will say this, I think one thing that we
all feel great about America; America is a country of
entrepreneurs. It is a country of risk takers, people who are
willing to put their capital behind either their own efforts or
the efforts of others and participate in the profits but share
the risk. And there are restraints in peoples' abilities to
become entrepreneurs and to invest in the ventures of other
entrepreneurs. But as I said, we have, in a bipartisan nature--
and many of the Democratic House freshmen have been the major
sponsors on some of the bills.
The Chairman. Thank you.
So you did double duty here and you get out on time. Thank
you very much, Mr. Bachus.
Mr. Bachus. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you very much for being here.
Thank you for adjusting your schedules to be here at this
time. Representing the Oversight and Government Reform
Committees, the chairman of the committee, Mr. Issa; the
ranking member, Mr. Cummings.
We would appreciate hearing from you as to how you are
operating this year with a 5 percent cut that was imposed and
also how you anticipate operating next year with the 6.4
percent cut that is projected as a result of the House
resolution which was passed earlier this year.
Mr. Issa.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DARRELL E. ISSA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON
OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

Mr. Issa. I would ask unanimous consent that my entire
opening statement, plus collateral material, be placed in the
record.
The Chairman. Without objection.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, these are great questions.
Ranking Member Cummings and myself have made the
adjustments to live within our means, barely within our means.
The fact is that both of us could oversubscribe this year and
do more as a result. Clearly, I will finish out the year
obligated greater than the funds available and will then make
appropriate cuts in the future obligations and hope that next
year, additional cost savings we can find will allow us to take
care of those items that we will defer at the end of the year.
Every committee has an obligation to use the money wisely.
I think our committee has done that. Every committee should
look, though, at the Oversight Committee on a bipartisan basis,
which has for multiple Congresses been moving toward greater
transparency. Some of these investments include, we broadcast
every hearing, field hearing or here, to the greatest extent
possible in realtime. With rare exception, we stream, even from
the field, hearings so that the public has full access. Every
single one of our hearings, going back through multiple
chairmen, are online today and available to the public. The
investment in making sure we are not just open in discussion,
but we are open in all access, is critical to our committee.
We require open government every day, no matter who is in
the chair. We work together on a bipartisan basis to make sure
that we open up government. A number of initiatives coming out
of our committee are designed to invest money in open
government. The DATA Act and other bills that are pending now
before the Congress are designed to make government more
accessible and ultimately, as a result, save money for the
taxpayers. Sometimes you have to spend money to save money.
I will tell you that it is my opinion, both having been a
ranking member and now a chairman and looking at the balance
between the executive branch and our branch, that we couldn't
be more wrongminded in what we are doing. Oversight under
Speaker Pelosi and oversight under Speaker Boehner have been
spoken of as extremely important. Committees of all
jurisdiction have been instructed to do more oversight. And
they have tried. Our committee has tried to do an even better
job with even less money.
Having said that, let us just give a couple of comparisons
that will be more fully laid out in my opening statement. There
are 12,000 employees that work for or are the IGs of the
executive branch. They spend over $2 billion, quote,
maintaining an effort against waste, fraud and abuse.
We don't have within our committee's jurisdiction or funds,
the majority and minority combined, enough resources to simply
assign one person per IG to see what they are doing to see
whether or not we can help or whether they are doing their job.
The comparison between the executive branch's resources and
ours shows the difference in whether or not we maintain
properly the balance of power.
Congress, both the House and the Senate, must do a great
deal more if we are going to contain government. Two
generations ago, Harry S. Truman asked for and received at the
start of World War II, a special Senate Committee. That task
force, the Truman Commission, rooted out waste in government
procurement at the start of a war. His resources were roughly
equal to what our combined committee resources equal today. The
investment saved countless, hundreds of millions of dollars.
Today that would be tens of billions of dollars.
We can save $80 billion if we do a better job of oversight.
We can save a few million dollars if we cut budgets. So today I
recognize that we will be operating on a 6.4 less next year,
and we will do what we have to do. But I would say to this
committee on behalf of our constitutional responsibility, that
we need to do a great deal more, and we need to allocate the
resources vastly greater than we are to oversight.
I recognize that there will be asked for cuts everywhere. I
would only say here today that cutting across the board, as we
did last year and as we are being asked to do again this year,
makes the exact wrong message.
And, Chairman Lungren, you and I are often asked whether we
will vote for a 2 percent or a 5 percent across-the-board cut.
Sometimes perhaps we do, sometimes we don't. But we always say
it is not the right way to make cuts. The right way to make
cuts is to say, where should you cut, and where should you
invest?
I would say that there are opportunities to cut both in the
executive branch and in this branch. But there are requirements
that as government grows, that our oversight, whether done by
this committee or other committees of the Congress, be in fact
beefed up, and I would hope that we would make that point here
today.
And I lastly would say that many of the efficiencies that
we are achieving have to do with leveraging electronic
technology. And for the chairman and the ranking member, I want
to thank you for the work you have done with the various
committees to try to give us better resources in the House,
which we leverage to try to do a better job.
And I know there is an initiative by the end of the year to
try to duplicate what we have done doing in our committee so
that all of the House's historic and current hearings be
simulcast so the public has the full access so that our
committee perhaps more uniquely stands with those groups in
support of.
And I thank the gentlemen, and I yield back.
[The statement of Mr. Issa follows:]

The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Cummings.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ELIJAH CUMMINGS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MARYLAND, RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE
ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

Mr. Cummings. Thank you and good afternoon.
I ask unanimous consent that my entire statement be made a
part of the record.
The Chairman. Without objection, it shall be.
Mr. Cummings. First of all, let me say to you that I
associate myself with the words of Mr. Issa.
You know, our staff took a 5 percent cut, which meant that
almost every employee on my staff took that cut. We have had a
situation where, of course, now with the 6.4 percent cut, we
are going to have to let people go. And the work is increasing.
Chairman Issa is absolutely right. Our--the job that we do
is one of trying to bring about transparency as best we can and
accountability. And we have on our side some major priorities
and one of them being foreclosure. We have taken the money that
we have, and we have used it effectively and efficiently,
inquiring into foreclosure with regard to the banks, with
regard to why this is happening and how we can solve it,
addressing the head of the various agencies, including Mr.
Geithner and others.
But I have got to tell you that to cut, cut, cut, I don't
think is the way to go, because I believe now that when people
will hear that Government Reform and Oversight--Oversight and
Government Reform is even looking at them or thinking about
them, they begin to tremble because they know that we are going
to do a thorough job. They know that we are going to be fair,
but they know that we are going to demand accountability.
So when you take away resources, I think all that does is
weaken our position, and at some point, the chairman is right;
the question is, are you cutting in one place but cutting money
that could be used to make sure that you maintain that
accountability?
I am proud of the job that we have been doing. And I have
obviously said that we have to be very careful, not only with
regard to government agencies but to ourselves, that we do not
become mired in a culture of mediocrity, and that is exactly
what can happen. If you continue to pull resources away, you
don't have the personnel. The personnel that you do have is
stretched to the limit. People then look at a situation where
they say, wait a minute, not going to get a raise; I am working
harder and harder. And they don't mind working hard. I know for
a fact that people on the chairman's staff and my staff work
very, very long hours, sometimes late into the night, because I
get the emails.
And I just think that if we are going to try to accomplish
the things that we want to accomplish, another 6.4 percent cut,
I think it does much harm. And again, we will work within the
bounds that you set for us. I mean, we have no choice. But the
question becomes at what price?
And I just think that sometimes we have got to stop and
think about what we are doing. I realize that everybody wants
to have cuts here and cuts there, but sometimes, to be frank
with you, it doesn't make any sense. And in this instance, with
a committee like ours, doing the things that we do, I think
other committees kind of depend on us. I mean, when they see
what we are doing, a lot of times they either use the
information that we are able to obtain, or they find ways to
piggy back on what we are trying to do.
So I would urge--and I would hope that this practice that
we are going through is not one where we just sort of are
sitting here and just talking. I am hoping that you are
listening to us very carefully because I think if there is any
committee that deserves to have the resources that are
necessary to do its job is this committee.
And by the way, our responsibilities are only going to
increase because again, we are demanding excellence from
government. Just as we demand excellence from our ourselves, we
demand excellence from government. And so with that, Mr.
Chairman, I yield back and thank you very much.
[The statement of Mr. Cummings follows:]

The Chairman. I thank both of you for your testimony.
You remind me of something that I heard from the Supreme
Court Justice Scalia this summer when he was speaking to a
group of college students, and he asked them what they thought
made us the freest nation in the world, what protected our
freedoms in the governmental sense? And he said it is not the
First Amendment, not the Second Amendment, not the Fifth
Amendment, not the Bill of Rights together. He said it is the
construct of government that was established by our Founding
Fathers.
And by way of illustration, he said, what is the British
equivalent of our President? He said the prime minister. He
said, what does the prime minister have to be? A sitting member
of Parliament. He said they have no concept; they have it
difficult to wrap their minds around our different branches of
government that create a tension in our constitution for the
purpose of protecting our freedoms from an overreaching
government. He said we have a difference between the executive
and the legislative branch, and that is why I have always been
so strong on the concept of our responsibility, not just of
legislation but oversight, of every committee, including your
committee.
And when you see the size of the Federal establishment,
primarily the executive branch, versus the size of the
legislative branch and we are supposed to do oversight, we have
to make sure that we have the resources that allow us to do
that oversight. Because if we are talking about saving
trillions of dollars, the savings are going to be in the
executive side, not the legislative side. And in order for us
to make the proper decisions, we need to have the ability to
look across the horizon of the executive branch. So I
understand what both of you are saying.
We are in very difficult times where we believe it was
important for us to set the example. We did a 5 percent cut
from our Members' individual staffs, committee staffs,
leadership staff, followed up by the 6.4 percent. Reluctantly,
the Senate joined us. At least the information I have is the
Senate voted a 5 percent cut for the remainder of fiscal year
2011 in March, which resulted in a 1.3 percent cut. And now
they have decided that leadership, committee and support staff
on the Senate side will be cut 6.3 percent next year, but
personal staffs by 3.2 percent.
So I think we are providing that leadership, but I do think
you make a point. At what point do we say we have to have the
resources to be able to really do the oversight that is
necessary on a regular basis, no matter who is President, no
matter what party happens to control the White House.
I think as much as I always talk about the trespass on the
proper legislative role of the executive role by the judiciary,
I am concerned about the trespass on our job by the executive
branch by way of regulation, by way of ignoring what we say in
terms of legislation.
So I thank you for the work you are doing. We have a
difficult task. I mean, this is a very different set of
hearings we are having this year and last year. Usually people
come before us seeing how much they are going to get an
increase, and frankly, they didn't pay a whole lot of attention
when they came here because they expect the increase.
So we are on different times. Folks back home are hurting.
I think they expect us to show an example, give an example. I
think we are. But I think we also have to at some point in time
say, how are we going to effectively do our role in curbing
what I think is the excessive spending and the excessive power
and reach of the Federal Government by way of the executive
branch.
I know that is not a question; it is a statement. But I
thank you for it.
Mr. Brady.
Mr. Issa. Chairman Lungren, in answer to your statement,
just for example, the GAO as an independent body under our
auspices, shows in the last 5 years under these two
administrations, $1.8 trillion in the high-risk loss to the
government. This is either failure to get revenue or excess
spending. It began at $1.31 billion in 2003. This year, the
2011, is at 551. At that rate of lost revenue and/or wasted
money, we are looking at the savings that the supercommittee
not only didn't get in 10 years; this could have gotten it to
us in 5. But the rate of growth means that virtually half of
our projected deficit is right here to be wiped out. But it is
only wiped out by getting these high-risk groups to actually
change.
And many of these, as the chairman and the ranking member
know, many of these high-risk losses, including the IRS's
failures, these, in fact, are on the list every year for 10
years. So it is clear the executive branch won't do it, and if
we keep doing what we are doing, plus or minus 6.4 percent, we
won't get it done either.
The Chairman. Mr. Brady.
Mr. Brady. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
If this 6.4 percent comes to you and your committee, will
you have to lay anybody off?
Mr. Issa. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. Oh, definitely.
Mr. Issa. Both of us hire primarily a great deal of
attorneys, and they are already paid far less than other
attorneys, not just in this town but around the country.
Mr. Brady. That is not making an impact on me, but go
ahead.
Mr. Issa. We are the investigative committee of the
Congress, and I am not a lawyer. The ranking member is an
experienced lawyer. But there comes a point at which we don't
get the caliber. So having a few less but maintaining at least
the minimum salaries so these people don't have to leave
elsewhere will become necessary. Both the majority and the
minority are currently under our maximum cap; something we
never envisioned. We usually bump up against our cap. But that
has been part of what we have done in anticipation of the 6.4
percent cut.
Mr. Brady. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Issa. If you want to say, darn it, we have changed our
mind, we are going to give you the increase you need in order
to do the oversight, we will take it from somewhere else, is
there a motion on the floor?
The Chairman. Darrell, I have known you long enough that I
knew I didn't need to have to say that. Thank you very much.
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
[Recess.]
The Chairman. All right.
The committee will now welcome Vice Chairman Sessions and
Ranking Member Slaughter of the Committee on Rules. We would
ask you to give us an idea of how you have been operating this
year with the 5 percent cut that was imposed by the resolution
passed by the House and how you will operate with the expected
6.4 percent cut as a result of the House resolution passed by
our Chamber earlier this year.
Mr. Sessions.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. PETE SESSIONS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS, VICE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON
RULES

Mr. Sessions. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. And also
certainly, Ranking Member Brady, I want to say thank you for
allowing Louise Slaughter and I the opportunity on behalf of
Representative David Dreier, who is still on an official
business mission over in Egypt as an observer for the free
elections in that country.
Today what I would like to do is represent Chairman Dreier
and let you know that the Rules Committee is the tool by which
this House of Representatives manages its legislative agenda
and schedule. And it is a very small committee, a small staff,
but I believe has a very important responsibility.
And as we work to meet that responsibility, we have been
busy in the last 11 months. We have reported 76 rules that
allowed 89 bills to come to the floor. We have also processed
more than 900 amendments and 103 revisions. The end result is
that floor debate, I believe and the chairman believes, is more
open than it has ever been by either party for sure in the 15
years that I have been here, and it has, I believe, changed in
a positive way the way that we do business. And the
accessibility and the ability for the Rules Committee to
continue this important mission is why we are here today.
We also serve the House as a whole and our award-winning
Web site serves as a location where members and the public can
go quickly to the latest text of bills and to amendments. And
we are working closely with the Clerk and the Government
Printing Office to streamline our document production and to
reduce printing costs. We are doing this as a result of not
just trying to stay more efficient but also because we need to
do that. We need to do that because, as you have already
alluded to, Mr. Chairman, a 5 percent reduction from 2010
levels has made us change the way we operate.
But we have been able to meet our obligations. We are
staying lean, and we are leveraging our investments in
technology to do more with less.
We understand that the committee is also considering, as
the chairman also said, a 6.4 percent reduction for next year.
And we estimate that we will be able to continue to meet our
obligations under a reduced budget. Again, in order to do that,
once again, we are going to use technology, and we are going to
try and do more with less by streamlining our operations.
This year also represents the first year when the Rules
Committee minority has controlled a full one-third of the
budget. We are concerned, however, that next year's cut may
disproportionately affect the minority simply because they have
a smaller share of that budget.
Chairman Dreier has committed to Ranking Member Slaughter,
who is here with us today, that he will continue to work with
her on essential needs that she has in order to perform the
duties that are necessary, not just to her party but also to
the overall effectiveness of the Rules Committee.
Finally, we want to encourage the committee to exercise
caution in future years because the role of the Rules Committee
is unique, and we believe that further additional cuts, even
though we are working within the context of what we have been
given, would mean that it would affect us and our ability to
effectively get our job done.
So with that said, I note you may want to go and allow
Ranking Member Slaughter to give her words, but I will open
myself up for any questions that you have on behalf of the
committee.
[The statements of Mr. Sessions and Mr. Dreier follow:]

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Sessions.
Ms. Slaughter.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. LOUISE SLAUGHTER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK, RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE
ON RULES

Ms. Slaughter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Brady, and our fellow Rules Committee person, Mr. Nugent.
I am glad to be here with you today regarding the budget
request for the Committee on Rules. As I testified to the panel
earlier this year, the Rules Committee has a long and great
tradition, regardless of which party controls the House, of
conducting its administrative functions in a collegial,
nonpartisan way.
Although we often disagree about important policy issues,
we have a deep respect for our committee and for each other,
and we have always managed to ensure that it can fulfill its
unique and essential role. The tradition of working in a
bipartisan fashion on our budget and administrative activities
continues today.
Chairman Dreier, as Mr. Sessions has said, has already said
that we will be able to work together on problems that we may
have in the minority. We are fully prepared to continue those
efforts in the next session as we implement the additional cuts
that will be approved by the House.
I would like to highlight one important concern that has
been raised by Mr. Sessions, a concern which I share. Given the
unique circumstances of our committee and the relatively small
size of our budget compared to other House panels, an
additional 6.4 percent reduction next year could have, as Mr.
Sessions noted, a disproportionate impact on the minority. So,
given this concern, I appreciate Chairman Dreier's commitment
to work with us next year to make sure that the essential needs
of the minority are met.
As ranking member, I look forward to working with Chairman
Dreier and the other members on the committee to continue to
make our committee transparent, fair and responsible.
Thank you very much.
[The statement of Ms. Slaughter follows:]

The Chairman. I thank both of you for your testimony.
Just a question, are all proceedings before the Rules
Committee now televised?
Ms. Slaughter. Yes.
Mr. Sessions. Mr. Chairman, I believe that all of them are.
I don't know that they are live necessarily, but I believe that
all of the committee hearings would be made available.
Ms. Slaughter. I think they are streamed in real-time.
The Chairman. Well, I just want to thank both of you on
that.
I always wondered why the Rules Committee, as important a
committee as it is, has the smallest hearing room in the entire
House of Representatives.
Ms. Slaughter. With the worst ventilation on the face of
the Earth. When we have a long hearing----
The Chairman. At least you have got a heater. If you had
been here earlier, you would have said you wish you were back
in the Rules Committee. But we have managed to bring our
temperature up to almost comfortable.
Ms. Slaughter. We watch them drop off one by one.
The Chairman. I just want to say, I think it is important
for the American people to be able to see what is happening
with the Rules Committee because otherwise it is kind of like
the mystery of the Supreme Court. It is almost too important
for the public to see it, which is a bugaboo of mine. I think
the court ought to allow people in.
I could never understand why we didn't make every effort to
be as transparent as possible in the Rules Committee, where
people could see what the Rules Committee does, which is very,
very important in setting the rules of the terms of the debate
up for the floor. And often, I think there is a great advanced
debate on some of the issues that are going to be on the floor
before the Rules Committee, and I think it is very highly
educational for members to see it and the public to see it.
So I am very, very pleased that that is the case. I know
that there are--I have noticed before the Rules Committee that
occasionally the two of you have differences of opinion. But I
am pleased to see that there is acknowledgement of the
cooperative spirit with respect to the administration of the
committee itself.
Ms. Slaughter. Exactly. That has existed as long as I have
been on the committee. And Pete would say the same thing.
The Chairman. And I know these cuts are tough. I happen to
think we have an obligation to show the American people that we
would lead. At some point in time, we have to make sure that we
still have the capacity to do the job that we have to do as a
coequal branch of government, particularly up against that
large behemoth called the executive branch. That is why
oversight is so important.
But we are going ahead with that. There are tough decisions
that we are to make here on the committee. The expectation is
about 6.4 percent for all committees. We will see what the
final decision is. But I am happy that you at least are
prepared to work within that.
Ms. Slaughter. Indeed.
Mr. Sessions. Mr. Chairman, I believe that your points are
well made, and I believe that what the gentlewoman has spoken
about is a level of consistency and professionalism. We believe
we have now cut there. And we were very eager as a committee,
all of us, Republicans and Democrats, to recognize that the
House of Representatives must lead.
We now think we have done our peace dividend, and it has
given us what we have got. But we have to make sure; for
instance, we had a hearing problem; you could not hear
effectively in the room, and we had to make some other changes
that were necessary. But we will get our job done. But we have
now tried to also say, well, we have accepted the 5 percent,
the 6.4 percent. We think any further cuts would need to be
reviewed as to what we could----
The Chairman. Let us make it clear, the 6.4 percent is on
the reduced number. So it is actually, over 2 years, more than
10 percent. Probably closer to 12 percent. What if we could get
the executive branch to accept a 12 percent cut over 2 years?
It might balance the budget.
Ms. Slaughter. To show how frugal the Rules Committee is,
our chairs, the chairs on which we sit--and I really admire
yours--were purchased in 1967. They have not been changed in
all this time, although some of them are getting a little
shabby. But I think we don't ever spend money up there
frivolously.
The Chairman. I am glad to hear that you are using antiques
so well over there.
Ms. Slaughter. We did go through a flurry of looking at
some chairs and we said, no never mind.
The Chairman. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ranking Member, former chairman.
Mr. Brady. Thank you. Sometimes being comfortable has a
disadvantage.
Ms. Slaughter. Well I tell you being uncomfortable and not
being able to breathe. I mean, we certainly do feel from time
to time that we would like a little relief.
Mr. Brady. Thank you.
I would like to ask the majority and the minority if these
cuts become effective, would you lose any staff? Would you have
to lay anybody off?
Mr. Sessions. We anticipate that as the change--when we
find out what this will be, that we will balance that with the
technology that needs to be gained and try to change the
functions. At some point, there could be a push to have to do
that, but at this time, we are not necessarily believing that
that would occur.
Mr. Brady. The minority also?
Ms. Slaughter. We had the normal attrition going from 21 to
11 with the change in majority/minority. We hope not to have
any more layoffs. What we do have, though, is a vacancy of one
of our major positions that we hope to be able to fill. And we
have worked with Mr. Dreier on being able to do that.
Mr. Brady. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. If you wouldn't continue to raid our Homeland
Security Committee for Parliamentarians, maybe you wouldn't
have to worry on your budget.
Mr. Nugent.
Mr. Nugent. Well, as one of the junior members of the Rules
Committee, I didn't realize the chairs----
Ms. Slaughter. 1967.
Mr. Nugent. My goodness.
Ms. Slaughter. I have a child that age.
Mr. Nugent. As many times as we meet, which is quite often,
those are the lousiest chairs.
Ms. Slaughter. I'm expecting we are going to have a
collapse of one or two of them any day now.
Mr. Nugent. I would think so. I want to thank both of you
for appearing. It is a pleasure to serve with both of you on
the Rules Committee.
I will say this, that there is a lot of mystique about the
Rules Committee because it was not, I guess, televised in years
past. I recommend that all Members come up in front of the
Rules Committee at least once to see how the process works. It
is a lively and open debate.
Ms. Slaughter. Yes indeed.
Mr. Nugent. One thing is there is no time limit on members
to speak in front of the Rules Committee. So it certainly does
keep things lively. Thank you very much.
Ms. Slaughter. Thank you, Mr. Nugent.
The Chairman. So all of the aspiring Senators get to
testify in front of the Rules Committee, is that it?
Mr. Nugent. Basically they could filibuster that one.
The Chairman. All right. I want to thank both of you for
appearing before us. We appreciate the work you are doing. And
once again, I am very pleased to see that we have live
streaming of the proceedings before the Rules Committee.
Mr. Sessions. Mr. Chairman, all we ask is that as you work
through this process, if you will work with us to the best of
your ability, we can then effectively plan our process. And we
appreciate this committee and what they do, and respectfully
would say to you that we believe that Mr. Nugent being on this
committee is a plus for the Rules Committee because it brings
the understanding of the importance----
The Chairman. That is true and your budget is all on him.
Thank you very much.
Ms. Slaughter. Thanks for your hospitality.
The Chairman. Gentlemen, thank you for appearing before us.
We now have the chairman and the ranking member of the
Transportation and Infrastructure Committee. We would ask you
to give us some idea about how the 5 percent cut affected your
committee operations this first session, and you know, what
efficiencies did you utilize? And we are facing a 6.4 percent
cut for all committees as a result of the resolution passed by
the House earlier this year, and we would love to hear from you
on your ideas of how you are going to manage with that.
Mr. Mica.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JOHN L. MICA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

Mr. Mica. Thank you.
And let me try to summarize, and we will submit this whole
statement to the record. But we have, as the Transportation and
Infrastructure Committee, lived within our means. In fact, we
intend to return to the Treasury a greater amount in 2011 than
was returned in 2010.
Part of that was accomplished by not fully staffing up. We
have had to not fill some positions. We have tried to do more
with less, both as far as personnel and also with our public
resources.
We have at the same time run a full operation. We have done
probably close to an unprecedented series of public hearings
during the past year on major legislation across the country,
and we have allowed members on both sides of the aisle to
travel. I don't think any request has been denied that
conformed with the rules.
We have a full schedule ahead, but I think we can do it
with--within the 6.4 percent and maybe even better than that. I
know you are going to hear from my counterpart, the Democrat
ranking member, they have had a rough time of it. And they did
transition into the minority. And I recall from Mr. Rahall that
I had to do the same thing some 4 or 5 years ago when I became
the ranking member. We went from 58 or 59 positions to 29, and
that was also right about the holiday time, which wasn't an
easy task. But both sides, minority and majority, in difficult
times, the public has had to cut back.
We have asked others to be more frugal and more productive
and that is what we have hoped to achieve. I don't think it is
going to impede with any of our agenda, and we do have a full
agenda for the next year.
So, with that, I will also submit this longer testimony.
But we appreciate your work and yield back.
[The statement of Mr. Mica follows:]

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Rahall.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. NICK J. RAHALL, II, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WEST VIRGINIA, RANKING MEMBER,
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

Mr. Rahall. Thank you, Chairman Lungren and Ranking Member
Brady, for having us back for this mid-Congress review of our
committee's budget. As a general matter, I have no complaints
regarding the way in which the T&I Committee handles
administrative functions. I control one-third of the budget for
salaries, and office supplies and electronic equipment are
dealt with on a non-partisan basis. At the beginning of the
year, I was able to fill 27 of the 29 staff slots allotted to
me with available funds for salaries.
When the 5 percent committee funding reduction came down
earlier this year, my senior staff took an across-the-board
reduction in their salaries. As you contemplate an additional
6.4 percent cut for next year, I believe that the only way we
will avoid any further salary cuts is through attrition.
I want this committee to know that I am fully aware of the
problems this Nation faces in terms of fighting high
unemployment rates and the overall economy. We all are quite
aware of those facts. But if we continue to follow the path of
consistently reducing House committee budgets, this place, I
fear, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, will be staffed only by
20-somethings because we will not be able to retain
professional staff.
Nothing against 20-year-olds, just I feel very strongly
that the knowledge, the institutional memory, the background
and the history of this institution afforded by those with
experience to advise us on conflicts, legislative issues is
vital to our functioning as effective Representatives of the
people. And that, I would submit, if we were to allow only the
younger--without this type of knowledge, we would not be best
serving the American people.
In the case of the T&I Committee, we would not have the
type of staff who knows the difference between contract
authority under the Highway Trust Fund versus the General Fund
authority, and who know when we talk about slots at Reagan
National Airport, we are not talking about expanding gambling.
So I think it is important that we have that type of
knowledge. And you know who would be grinning from ear to ear
if we are not able to retain the experienced staff to which I
reference, it would be K Street, because the lobbyists will be
writing the bills, sending them up here for us to automatically
introduce, and I hardly think that is in the best interest of
the American public.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The statement of Mr. Rahall follows:]

The Chairman. I thank you much, Mr. Rahall.
I heard a rumor that you were a 20-something once; is that
right?
Mr. Rahall. I guess I was.
The Chairman. Thank you for your testimony.
Could you outline for me, Mr. Mica and Mr. Rahall, what the
oversight responsibilities are within the jurisdiction of your
committee?
Mr. Mica. Well, they are significant. We do have--we have
an investigative staff on the majority side. And we, of course,
cover all modes. We have also taken on some responsibility for
oversight in the areas for which we have had previous
authorization authority, but we continue oversight. For
example, TSA, we just finished a 4-month pretty comprehensive
review of their activities. So, both within all of the modes,
highway, surface, rail, aviation, we try, both within our
subcommittees and then we have separate investigative personnel
to assist us with oversight and investigations.
The Chairman. Is that done on a bipartisan basis, the
minority----
Mr. Mica. They are welcome to participate. We have
operated--I think they do some, and we do some. And we always
open any of our reports to their comments for minority report.
The Chairman. Mr. Rahall, do you have anything to say about
oversight?
Mr. Rahall. I think the chairman has adequately described
our oversight. He did mention public buildings also. That is a
very important part.
Mr. Mica. And we have done a--I think we have done a pretty
good job, too. We should have a bipartisan bill coming up
pretty soon to dispose of some of the property in a more
orderly fashion. But we have published a report, when we were
in the minority, we did a report entitled ``The Federal
Government Must Stop Sitting on Its Assets.'' And that has
become sort of the blueprint for what we want to do, take
buildings that have been vacant for sometime. The first hearing
we did, an oversight hearing on the subcommittee we held down
in a building half occupied, the old post office, next door,
totally unoccupied, 60,000 square feet, two blocks from the
U.S. Capitol. It happened to be in February; we did it in a
building with no heat, which got a little bit of attention from
GSA, and a little bit of movement working with Ms. Norton and
Mr. Rahall and a great young leader, Mr. Denham.
In fact, now I am seeing that the proposals have come in.
And instead of spending--costing us those buildings $10 million
a year, that we will have that much in revenue. They are
planning hotels, other improvements, and will employ about
1,000 people in the District of Columbia. So we can turn lemons
into lemon aid, and our committee is working hard on oversight
to do that.
The Chairman. We have a very difficult situation here in
the Congress in which we have decided that we as a Congress do
not involve ourselves in earmarks, and yet at the same point in
time, there has been a historic record with respect to the
Federal Government under the constitutional waters of the U.S.,
et cetera being involved in water projects, participating with
local and State governments. Is it your committee that would be
given the responsibility of trying to thread that needle
between what is earmarks----
Mr. Mica. Did you say water projects?
Mr. Rahall. Yes, Corps of Engineers.
The Chairman. And water projects which have always been
something from the beginning of the Republic, as I understand
it, there has been a Federal nexus to that.
Mr. Mica. About some 11 months ago, I inherited a laundry
list of to-do items that were left over, including a 4-year
delayed FAA bill, including a more than year delayed
transportation bill, now 2 years delayed, the reauthorization
for Coast Guard pipelines and other things that needed to be
done, and we have--we have moved forward. My hope is to get
that FAA bill by working with Mr. Rahall hopefully by
Christmas. And we got word today that we will have a little bit
more time in January for the major transportation bill. We
would like to get it out, but we have a jammed schedule, as you
know.
But to answer your question, I would like to turn, with Mr.
Rahall's consent, to a water resources reauthorization bill,
and maybe we can't do earmarks as they used to do, but
hopefully, we can prioritize projects, and I think Members of
Congress deserve to be heard and also to help influence what
gets done on what priority basis.
Mr. Rahall. In addition, though, Mr. Chairman, I think our
Army Corps of Engineers needs some direction on these projects.
These are dams and other infrastructure projects across our
country, many of which are in dire need of repair. And if they
don't receive that repair and, God forbid, a disaster occurs,
it is going to cost our government many times over in disaster
recovery efforts, FEMA efforts, displaced housing and other
untold expenses that will naturally occur if a disaster of that
type would occur.
So the Corps of Engineers responsible, of course, for doing
these projects needs that type of direction or authority from
the Congress.
Earmarks in general, you know, when we were in the majority
under then Chairman Oberstar, we had an extensive scrutinizing
of every Member's request for a project. We had an extensive
survey that went out to those Members. The responses to those
questions scrubbed every aspect of an earmark or project
request, local support, nobody would benefit personally, et
cetera, et cetera, et cetera. And of all of the hundreds of
projects we did, there was little if any--I cannot recall any
pushback that we had from any outside group that scrutinizes
our requests, our projects because every project was found to
be worthy of the Member requesting it. So, you know, there is a
process here that if we are open and transparent with the
people, that I think is proper in whatever process you want to
call it.
The Chairman. Do you two believe that you have sufficient
staff to be able to work on that project this coming year?
Mr. Mica. I do.
The Chairman. That is--I am trying to find a solution to
what we do in terms of water projects. You have a President who
said he won't sign a bill with earmarks. So we voted that we
won't have any earmarks. The Senate has voted they won't have
any earmarks with respect to certain things. Well, I guess the
Senate hasn't.
But somehow we have to confront that question, what do we
do with water projects? And it is going to be a real heavy
lift. And I just want to know whether you think you have got
sufficient staff that you can work on that next year.
Mr. Mica. On the majority side, we have great staff, fully
staffed Subcommittee on Water Resources, experienced personnel,
and I think the staffs have worked very well together. But we
are going to try to do that bill. A lot depends on what our
leadership agrees to. We can't bring any bill to the floor, Mr.
Rahall and I. And I would like, if I had my druthers, by
Friday, we would finalize our transportation bill, and then we
would introduce it on Monday together and mark it up next week
and have it on the floor. But we do not have that ability.
The Chairman. Okay.
Mr. Rahall. Yes, to answer your question.
The Chairman. Okay.
Mr. Brady.
Mr. Nugent.
Thank you both. We appreciate it.
Now the Armed Services Committee.
Mr. Rahall. Where do we get the check?
The Chairman. It is in the mail.
Welcome. It is good to have you here. Armed Services
Committee Chairman McKeon, Ranking Member Smith. We appreciate
you being here. We would ask that you give us an idea of how
you were able to operate this year after we had the 5 percent
cut that we imposed and the expected 6.4 percent cut for the
upcoming year and the kinds of efficiencies that you were able
to implement and those that you look at for the coming year.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. HOWARD P. ``BUCK'' MCKEON, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA,
CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

Mr. McKeon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Brady,
distinguished members of the committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify on behalf of the Armed Services
Committee's funding requirements.
I am also grateful to have my good friend, Ranking Member
Adam Smith, here today also.
Our committee has one of the widest, most critical mandates
in Congress. We conduct oversight of a military that is engaged
in combat operations in Afghanistan, the Horn of Africa and
Yemen, sustaining a drawdown from Iraq, successfully concluding
operations over Libya and are engaged in a wide variety of
training and assistance missions in support of our allies
globally.
We further oversee a Defense Department that is undergoing
one of the most revolutionary periods in its history, both from
a strategic and a budgetary perspective.
The tasks we ask our military to accomplish have greatly
expanded since the end of the Cold War. Annually and without
fail, we produce a National Defense Authorization Act, which
fulfill's Congress' constitutional obligation to provide for
the common defense.
We further conduct a steady series of hearings that, under
the direct--under the joint direction of Ranking Member Smith
and myself, have included rigorous oversight to improve
efficiencies, spending and acquisition programs in the Defense
Department without compromising our national security.
We also must ensure that our men and women in harm's way
are properly equipped, supplied, trained and led. Our staff
provides--prides itself on doing more with less. This committee
provides the American people with an admiral bang for their
buck, especially given our low number of staff relative to the
immense number of defense dollars we are charged with watching.
We rank 12th in overall funding and second to last in
member-to-staff ratio, with 1.15 staffers for every member. It
is important to note here that we are the largest committee in
the House with 62 members. We are proud of our long history
operating in a fiscally conscious manner. That history includes
time-tested operating practices that eschew excess and focus on
providing legislation that is on time, on budget, without fail.
It is worth noting that in addition to the broad Defense
Department portfolio, we also provide significant oversight and
resourcing to the Department of Energy. With that in mind, it
is my opinion that the Armed Services Committee stands above
our fellow committees in both cost effectiveness and
productivity.
Though we have long been a model for fiscal efficiency, we
understand that we live in tough economic times. And everyone
must sacrifice in order to right our financial ship. However,
after absorbing a tough 6.8 percent cut from 2010 to 2011, I
must strongly caution against any further decrease beyond 1
percent from our 2012 budget. It is important to note that
approximately 98 percent of our budget goes to payroll. We
currently have 69 staff members, but should the committee
receive a 6.4 percent cut, the only way to achieve budget
compliance would to be reduce our workforce, which as I noted
already has the second lowest member-to-staff ratio in the
House.
We did not provide COLA allowances in 2011 and currently do
not have resources to offer COLA or nominal end-of-year bonuses
in year 2012. These staffing shortages were the reason I
requested that our committee be reduced in member numbers last
year. I was, unfortunately, unsuccessful in this appeal.
It should be noted that the committee absorbed this year's
reduction by delaying the equipment and supply purchases and
slowly backfilling six staff vacancies created from the new
Congress reaching 69 staff in August. The committee intends to
utilize any nominal remaining funds for necessary equipment,
Web hosting and database upgrades and supplies in anticipation
of next year's budget reduction.
To date, the committee still hopes and expects to return
$50,000 of this year's funds. A 1 percent cut coupled with the
over $540,000 decrease we absorbed last year would still
significantly impact the effectiveness of our personnel and the
committee's mission but would allow us to perform the basic
functions of the committee.
Within that cut, we would operate at absolute bare bones
for technology, equipment and incentives but would be able to
sustain our most critical resource, our staff levels.
Additionally, committees have been directed to reinstitute
reimbursement of Government Printing Office detailees. This was
neither expected nor budgeted for at the beginning of this
Congress. Due to the volume of hearings, the committee holds,
over 113 this year, we have come to rely on our two GPO
printers. However, coming in at a cost of approximately
$225,000, it cuts into personnel funding, funding needed to
sustain our current staffing level.
As you know, attracting seasoned professionals, many of
them military veterans, to staff our ranks is one of our top
priorities. These staffers are our physical warriors, working
to ensure through their oversight the defense programs are
brought in on time and on budget. Forcing us to shed key talent
from our ranks represents a penny-wise/pound-foolish strategy,
as we would lose the ability to properly monitor certain areas
of Pentagon spending, some of which account for billions in
taxpayer dollars.
Further cuts would stretch the remaining staff, already
overworked by a wartime portfolio, and harm their ability to do
their jobs. This committee has always stood ready to do its
part and pay its fair share.
But Mr. Chairman, you simply cannot scrutinize an agency
like the Defense Department on a skeleton crew. I frequently
note that the charge of our committee is specifically
enumerated in the U.S. Constitution. The Armed Services
Committee has faithfully executed that charge through good
times and bad, and we pride ourselves in accomplishing this on
a fully bipartisan and cost-efficient basis.
Thank you for your time, Mr. Chairman. And I am happy to
answer your questions once Ranking Member Smith completes his
opening statement.
[The statement of Mr. McKeon follows:]

The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Smith.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ADAM SMITH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON, RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON
ARMED SERVICES

Mr. Smith of Washington. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a
full statement I will submit to the record, but I will
summarize.
I agree with all of the chairman's statements and just want
to start by answering your question about how we found the
efficiencies. I think the chairman has done a pretty adequate
job of that. We reduced our overall staff level. As has been
mentioned, relative to the size of our committee in terms of
members and also relative to the size of the budget that we
oversee, we already have one of the smallest committee staffs
in Congress.
So we found those efficiencies where we could, and I
believe we are on a very lean, mean operation already. Further
cuts would require reductions in staff, which would make that
more difficult, and I agree with the chairman's assessment that
that should be avoided, and I do think we should look at,
committee by committee, the circumstances and where they are
at, and not simply take a broad brush and say, we are going to
cut everything across the board. It does differ in terms of
responsibilities that different committees have.
I believe we have a fairly large responsibility and more
importantly I think we have already put in place efficiencies
that have got us to a more efficient use of our staffing. The
numbers reflect that. So I think a simple across-the-board cut
approach at that point would be unfair to those of us like our
committee who tried to find those savings up front in the first
place to run a more efficient operation.
And the Department of Defense in general, given the size of
the budget and the responsibilities, our responsibility for
oversight and to implement the defense authorizing bill which
allocates those funds is enormous in the best of times. But we
are still at war in Afghanistan. That requires a substantial
amount of oversight. We are facing the specter of
sequestration, given the inability of the supercommittee to
find necessary cuts. Trying to plan for those significant
changes is a huge, huge responsibility for the staff and for
the members of the committee.
To force further reductions in our staffing would, quite
frankly, undermine our ability as committee members to exercise
appropriate oversight over how the Department of Defense spends
its money and, as importantly, what strategic choices they make
in making sure that our national security is protected. That is
one of the paramount duties of the legislative branch, is to
exercise that oversight and provide for our national security.
And our staff is absolutely critical to us successfully
accomplishing that task.
And I hope the committee will keep all of that in mind as
they try to figure out what to do in this admittedly very, very
difficult budget environment.
And with that, along with the chairman, I am happy to
answer your questions.
[The statement of Mr. Smith of Washington follows:]

The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Let me ask you this. Some would say that the failure of the
Congress to reach agreement with the special select committee
or supercommittee, whatever we call it, requires sequestration
in the military and that, therefore, your responsibilities
would be less rather than more because these are across-the-
board cuts in the Defense Department, as opposed to you
carefully going through and finding out where cuts should be
made versus where they should not be made. How would you
respond to that, both of you?
Mr. Smith of Washington. In two ways. First of all, it is
far from clear that sequestration is going to happen. I think
if you polled the majority Members of Congress, they would say,
we are not going to let that happen, one way or the other; we
are going to find that $1.2 trillion. Sequestration doesn't
happen until January 2013. So the actual situation the DOD and
those of us committed to doing the oversight of it find
ourselves in now is we don't know, we don't know how much money
there is going to be for the fiscal year 2013 budget, even as
we are trying to plan it. So that increases the workload; it
doesn't decrease it because you have got to play out two,
three, four, five, maybe more, different scenarios about how
much money you are going to have, to do what? And even if it
winds up being straight sequestration, there are a number of
choices involved in that and how you move money around in other
places to try to deal with that. I cannot imagine an argument
that says that the specter of sequestration coming down at us
reduces our workload. Our staff would laugh out load at that
notion. It clearly increases it.
The Chairman. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. McKeon. We already are faced with cuts of about
somewhere between $465 billion and $500 billion that will be
budgeted next year. So we are going over the next 10 years, we
are looking at about a $50 billion annual cut; sequestration
hits, you have another $50 billion on top of that. One thing we
could do is just eliminate the Defense Department, and we could
probably save our whole budget. But I think that most of us
would agree that the world is a much safer place than it has
been. I mean, with the places we are already fighting right now
and with the prospects of what is happening in Egypt and Iran;
I mean, we just have to turn on the TV every morning to see
what new place is erupting. North Korea sank a South Korean
ship. We were very close to war in this last year, and South
Korea says, the next time it happens, they are going to take
action.
So--I mean, to think that we are on the verge of cutting
our Navy to the lowest it has been since World War I, to
cutting our Air Force down to the smallest it has been since it
was put into existence, to cutting 200,000 end strength off of
our Army and our Marines, and think that we are not going to
have to spend a lot more time trying to decide what they should
be doing and how they are going to be able to do it and
overseeing the Pentagon to make sure that the proper cuts are
being made. I think our staff has done a fantastic job this
year on preparing us for these future problems that we see
coming at us. And I think to contemplate that we are going to
have to cut them down--we already are authorized 71, and we
have only filled 69 slots. And it looks like if these cuts that
are contemplated--if everybody gets the same cut and we are not
spared any--given the fact we are already so low on the totem
pole, we would have to lose five staff people is the nearest we
have been able to figure. And I tell you, we are not wasting
any money in our committee.
The Chairman. Mr. Brady.
Mr. Brady. Yes.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, losing five spots, losing five people on your
staff, is that the minority and the majority together or just
the minority side?
Mr. McKeon. We do our staff different than probably any
other committee. It is bipartisan. So when we had the
transition from majority to minority, we were able to use a lot
of the same people. We didn't have to go through some of the
things that some of the other committees have to go through. So
when we cut, it would be--it would affect both the majority and
the minority.
Mr. Smith of Washington. We do have some staff that are
specifically assigned to the minority. I have got 14 spots, one
of which is actually split between my office and the committee.
But the larger--the bulk of the folks on the committee work in
a bipartisan way. That staff would impact minority as well as
majority, the losses there.
Mr. Brady. Mr. Chairman, I am probably one of the most
fortunate people in this Congress. I have been allowed to be
able to be on two committees. This one here, which I have a
great relationship with my chairman and the members, and the
Armed Services Committee, which I also have a great
relationship with my chairman and the ranking member. And the
class that they show on committee hearings--and we don't always
agree, like you and I don't always agree, but we don't always
become disagreeable. We don't hold any grudges, and we don't
let the American people be responsible for any bad actions that
we do do from time to time. And I do think that that is a
reflection of the trickle down from the leadership, both in
this committee and the Armed Services Committee. And I thank
you both for allowing me to be a member of that committee and
be able to function. And I thank you for being here.
The Chairman. We thank you very much. You have made a
strong case.
It is a pleasure to have the chairman and the ranking
member of the committee most sought after by Members of
Congress upon which to serve in the entire Congress. I salute
you for the service that you do in this regard because it is a
thankless but necessary job and one that serves the institution
and Members and the country well. So I appreciate your service.
We would like you to give us an idea of how you have been
able to operate this last year under the funding restrictions
we had, 5 percent cut; how you would be able to operate under a
proposed 6.4 percent cut; and efficiencies that you have
already put into effect, and those that you would project to be
put into effect in the next year.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JO BONNER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF ALABAMA, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ETHICS

Mr. Bonner. Well, Chairman Lungren, Ranking Member Brady
and members of the committee, thank you very much for inviting
Congresswoman Sanchez and me to share with you today, to the
best of our ability, some of the budget challenges facing the
Ethics Committee. And thank you also for your nice comments
about service, and I say that on behalf of all the members of
the committee, present and former, who have served on this
committee.
I trust that the Committee on House Administration probably
more than most committees appreciates the fact that some of our
funding challenges are made more difficult by some of the work
that our committee does, which specifically, because of our
strict rules of confidentiality out of necessity, might prevent
me from answering some of the questions which would normally
come from your committee to committee chairmen and ranking
members, especially those who might be seeking additional
funding.
As you well know, the Ethics Committee has a distinct and
vital role within this body and in many ways is more like your
own committee in that our mission is mostly internal and
nonlegislative. In much of our work, particularly in the area
of advice, education and financial disclosure, our objective is
to have a customer service-oriented focus such as the Offices
of the General Counsel and the Parliamentarian. In addition,
the committee serves as the internal agency disciplinary
office, a role of equal importance, that also presents unique
responsibilities and challenges for our investigative team.
In all of these roles, as your committee staff experiences
with their own responsibilities, we do not have the luxury of
setting our own workload or agenda. Our committee's core
mission is, and always has been, to provide fair, prompt and
thorough advice and education, and to conduct investigations
whenever that aspect of our work is required in a professional,
nonpartisan environment that is always driven by the facts and
in search of the truth.
To that end, Mr. Chairman, by and large our largest
consumption of resources is a top-notch professional,
nonpartisan staff who handle our everyday advice, education,
review and investigative functions. Unfortunately, by the very
nature of our work, and consistent with committee precedents,
this committee does have matters, on occasion, that require an
increase in staffing or even the employment of an outside
counsel. I would like to give you some sense of what that
workload looks like.
While public adjudicatory hearings happen on average of
once a decade, one time last year our committee was looking at
two such hearings within 2 months of each other. This would
have been an unprecedented occurrence. While one of
theaforementioned matters was concluded before the end of the
111th Congress, the committee is still working on the second
matter and has employed, as your committee knows, an outside
counsel to help us get through the challenges that that matter
has presented. Needless to say, the entire membership of our
committee very much appreciates you and your staff's working
with us and their assistance in approving and financing that
contract. Obviously, there is no guarantee that the trend of
Members invoking their rights, under our rules, to a public
hearing may not continue to grow.
While the ranking member will describe for you the ever-
increasing workload before our committee, I want to turn for
just a moment to how we have handled that workload and how we
have shouldered and continue to shoulder the financial burdens
that all other offices in the House and, most importantly, the
American people have been sharing.
After an admittedly controversial end to our work in the
111th Congress, the committee began this Congress with a
downslide of staffing. On January 1, we had 23 staff positions
filled out of a permitted cap of 29. While the ranking member
and I worked very hard to find the best nonpartisan,
professional staff we could to fill those ranks, we reached a
low point of 15 sometime in June. At about the same time, we
had found and brought on a new staff director and chief
counsel, who is unquestionably nonpartisan and professional. As
a result, I am pleased to report to your committee that the
pathway toward fully staffing our committee has followed on our
new staff director's leadership and personal example.
As I said, as of January 1, we had 23 staffers on the
books. Today we have 24 full-time staff. But without having to
reduce anyone's salary, and mostly by attrition of higher-
salaried staff and leveling of base salaries, we are spending
less on these 24 outstanding individuals than we were
previously spending on the 23 staff that worked in the 111th
Congress. In other words, as so many others are having to do,
we at the Ethics Committee are trying to find new ways of doing
more but costing less. Indeed, personnel is about 95 percent of
our total budget, as currently 15 of our 24 staffers are
experienced attorneys.
In anticipation of possible additional budget cuts, and in
line with what the rest of the House and the rest of the
country is facing, we have stopped hiring. We have asked our
staff to do everything possible to continue to meet and
maintain your expectations as our customers. And as the ranking
member will also discuss, there is an ever-increasing challenge
that comes with this, but one that we take with a sense of
mission, duty and shared sacrifice.
Finally, and I know I am over my time, but if I might have
an additional minute, I have been asked to discuss the unusual
circumstances of requiring the assistance of an outside
counsel. As leadership of your committee was briefed earlier
this year, Mr. Billy Martin, with the firm of Dorsey & Whitney,
has taken on an immense and vitally important task for us and
is conducting his work with the utmost thoroughness, fairness,
independence and impartiality that would be expected and
required.
From what I have been told, our hopes and estimates for a
quick resolution to Mr. Martin's work may not be realized.
While no final conclusions have been reached about whatever the
next steps in this process might encompass, it is highly
possible that the contract with Mr. Martin will need to be
extended into next year. It is necessary, therefore, in order
to avoid overobligating and to ensure the consistent progress
in this matter and the rest of our work, to plan for such
contingencies before the committee reviews and acts on the
step-by-step recommendations of our outside counsel.
The good news, though, is that we anticipate that the
funding required for this year's work by the outside counsel
will be well below the $500,000 estimated. More importantly,
using the surplus of our budget left over due to the time that
we were short-staffed this year, we have not had to come to ask
for any additional funds for reauthorization to cover his 2011
bills. We consider this a significant accomplishment, and we
are proud of that fact.
For next year, however, it is clear that at least one of
our major investigative matters may require contract or other
significant expenses for hearings and travels such that if our
budget follows the standard formula, we will need to return to
your committee in short order for a reauthorization. We have
considered the work ahead and the stage of progress to date,
and we believe that we will inevitably require a
reauthorization of $350,000 to be safe from overobligating and
to ensure that our duties to be thorough and fair do not suffer
dramatically.
As we have been requested to do, we are proposing to deal
with the outside counsel contract and the growing workload at
this time rather than returning to you at a later date.
Therefore we propose to add a good-faith and fair estimate of
our special investigative needs to an amount that begins with
our current budget of 2012 of $3,043,775. That additional
request is $350,000, to a total of $3,393,775 for 2012.
We appreciate the hard and careful work that you are
putting into your process, and I am happy to answer questions
after our ranking member has had a chance to share some of her
thoughts. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Bonner follows:]

The Chairman. Ms. Sanchez.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. LINDA T. SANCHEZ, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA, RANKING MEMBER,
COMMITTEE ON ETHICS

Ms. Sanchez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Brady. We appreciate the opportunity to provide you with an
overview of how the Committee on Ethics has used its budget in
the 112th Congress and how we anticipate the committee will
operate next year in light of possible budget changes.
As the chairman Mr. Bonner stated, and as we both noted
when we appeared before this committee earlier in the year, we
are a fairly unique committee. Approximately 95 percent of our
budget is spent on staff salaries, and so therefore that is the
focus of any budget conversation that we have to have.
Let me begin by saying how much both of us and our fellow
committee members appreciate the staff and their incredible
work. They work hard, they are dedicated, and the committee's
success depends on this talented staff to do the bulk of the
committee's work.
As has been noted, in addition to hiring a new staff
director earlier in the year, we had to fill a number of
vacancies that came up, but we have not been able to hire the
full complement of staff even though our workload continues to
increase, so our staff and our committee have necessarily had
to do more with less.
Although the public attention tends to focus on the
committee's work on investigations, much of our work is
actually serving the House in other areas, and our work in
those areas is definitely on the rise.
In the last Congress the House increased the committee
staffing allotment in light of an increase in our investigative
work and the creation of the Office of Congressional Ethics.
There is no indication at this point that our workload in that
area will decrease.
In the area of advice, the committee has issued nearly 500
confidential advisory opinions to Members and staff so far this
Congress, and that is an increase of more than 10 percent from
the same period in the last Congress. We also continue to build
on the improved turnaround time for those requests, as timing
is clearly of importance to the Members.
These formal advisory opinions don't include the many
informal requests the nonpartisan staff field by phone, email
and in-person visits. We estimate that the committee fielded
more than 15,000 telephone calls and 3,000 email requests for
advice between January 1 and October 31 of this year.
The committee's privately sponsored travel workload has
increased even more, by more than 20 percent over the same
period in the 111th Congress. We received over 1,700 requests
for approval of travel between January 1 and October 31 of this
year.
The committee's financial disclosure workload has also
increased. So far this year the number of financial disclosure
filings is up by about 20 percent over the same period in the
111th Congress. More than 5,600 financial disclosure statements
have been filed so far this year, and all of these financial
disclosure statements have to be reviewed. And many of those,
in fact, have also been prescreened before the filing as a
service that the committee staff provides to any filer.
Finally, the committee continues to provide training to
more than 10,000 House Members, officers and employees each
year and to review their certifications for satisfying the
House's mandatory training requirements.
The committee staff is handling this increased workload
with excellence and professionalism even though we handled last
year's budget cut by stopping short of our maximum staff slot
allowance.
In addition to hiring fewer staff, the committee also
handled the budget cut by forgoing other investments that we
could have made. Most significantly we postponed a possible
major investment in new financial disclosure software. This
software could have allowed on-line filing, which would have
had benefits to both the filers and the public alike, and may
have made the financial disclosure process less expensive in
the long run.
In addition, we also put off an investment of making our
database of public documents more accessible to the House and
the public. We also put off an investment in improving the
committee's database of internal documents, many of which
predate the digital age, which could have ensured greater
consistency and efficiency in our advisory functions. Although
we were able to make substantial investments in technology in
the last Congress to make the committee and its work more
efficient, we have postponed further investments at this time.
I continue to think that these are worthwhile investments that
would help the committee better serve the House and the public,
and I hope that we will be able to pursue them very shortly in
the future.
Finally, our outside counsel contract is vital to ensuring
our committee, our colleagues and the public that we will
resolve this matter with the utmost care, diligence and, above
all else, integrity. The committee concluded that hiring an
outside counsel would allow for an independent review and a
faster resolution than if the committee staff were to handle it
alone. We currently await the outside counsel's recommendations
for our consideration so the committee can complete the matter
as quickly as possible and ensure that the committee's work
comports with the highest standards of integrity.
For these reasons I join with the chairman in presenting
our joint request for our 2012 authorization as the chairman
described. Thank you, and we look forward to any questions you
may have.
The Chairman. Thank you very much for your presentation.
[The statement of Ms. Sanchez follows:]

The Chairman. As I said before, I think you play a vital
role in this institution. I noted that the public has now--I
think the Congress has risen to double digits now. I think 12
percent of the American people have a favorable opinion of the
Congress. And I think that is a tragedy, because I think we
have a government that was born in a reasonable suspicion of
government. And I am all for skepticism, I am not for cynicism,
and when you move from skepticism to cynicism, you tend the
undercut the foundations of the institution you are talking
about, and that is why I am very concerned that we make a
decision that allows you to have the budget that is necessary
to do the job that you have.
My staff has received tremendous assistance from your
committee staff. Before we take a trip, before we do anything
that could possibly deal with the rules, we contact your
office, we get an informal opinion. I think not only does that
help Members, but it helps this institution in terms of its
standing with the public. So I am very leery about us doing
anything that would undercut your ability to respond in a
timely fashion to a Member's legitimate request about ethical
issues.
Furthermore, in terms of review of financial disclosure,
that is crucial to the transparency necessary for the
operations of this House.
And then lastly, the thing that you can talk least about,
your investigation. There is a lot of cynicism out there about
us; about us, I mean the institution of the House. And the fact
that we do have investigations performed by a bipartisan
committee on as objective a basis as you can possibly have in
an institution like this is important not only for our image,
but for the substance of this House.
So we have some very tough decisions to make because the
rules--excuse me, the resolution passed by the House requires
us to have a legislative branch cut of 6.4 percent. And by and
large we have had committees come in and say they can accept
6.4 percent, they couldn't accept anything more. The Committee
on Armed Services said they can accept 1 percent, but nothing
more. And I read through your language, and it suggests that
you are not looking for a cut, but an increase in part because
of the obligation of outside contracts. Is that correct?
Mr. Bonner. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. Could you perform your task with respect to
the reliability, the efficiency and the timeliness of response
to which Members have a right to expect under our rules, as we
are going into a very, very fractious year, if we were to cut
you by 6.4 percent?
Mr. Bonner. Well, Mr. Chairman, as the ranking member and I
have both tried to indicate in our testimony, we are trying to
do more with less, but we have an obligation that in working
with this committee, your committee, we were able to take what
I think was the right step by bringing in the outside counsel,
and we would like, and I believe have an obligation to all
parties involved, to see that brought to a conclusion. That is
the right thing to do.
But in terms of could our committee accept a reduction in
funding in terms of our base committee and the work of the
committee, the answer is yes, but it comes with certain
conditions, and those conditions are there would be--if we had
to cut salaries or cut our staff even further, we would do so,
obviously, but at the risk of losing institutional knowledge
and skill in handling the kind of advice and instructions that
Members such as yourself have come to us for in trying to be
prompt and responsive.
Ms. Sanchez. If I could just add that because so much of
our budget is comprised of staff salary, that continued cuts
would necessarily mean at some point not either having the full
complement of staff, which is the situation that we are working
under now, or cutting further positions down the line.
And in terms of efficiency and timeliness of Members'
requests, that most certainly would impact that area.
The Chairman. See, I sort of view a preliminary advice from
your committee as an imprimatur essentially, am I doing the
right thing ethically under the rules of the House of
Representatives? I just want to make sure that whatever
decision we finally make, you are able to allow that authority
to be in place so that Members, who I think have a right to
know what the rules are, have a right to know how facts are
applied to the rules, have a right to know whether essentially
they have permission--and I realize it is not total permission,
but in the best sense of the word with an advisory opinion as
to do something like that. Frankly, I think we owe it to the
Members to be able to do that, and we as Members owe that to
the public that we take that effort.
Mr. Bonner. Mr. Chairman, if I might interrupt, and I know
you and the ranking member and your committee knows this, but
we also serve the staff that serves the American people that
work with us. So we are talking about thousands of additional
people that come to us--and we encourage them coming to us. And
with regard to the financial disclosure, we are also talking
about candidates who are seeking these jobs.
The Chairman. If I can use an analogy, we have got the
Cannon Office Building, it is falling down. All right. I
briefed the staff, and we invited Members, but it was all staff
just before we left. I didn't know the ceiling was going to
fall down over there right after I made my talk. Maybe I
shouldn't say as much. But anyway you can pretend we don't have
to deal with that, and you can defer maintenance on that, which
we have done, until the point in time in which it is
collapsing. I don't think we can defer maintenance on the
ethics of this House. That would be the analogy I would use.
So we have a tough decision to make with respect to your
operation. I hope you will work with us in trying to figure out
how to solve this problem, because it is a knotty problem.
Mr. Brady.
Mr. Nugent.
All right. Thank you very, very much.
Mr. Bonner. Thank you, and we look forward to working with
you.
The Chairman. I guess Ways and Means is next.
Thank you very much for being here, Ways and Means
Committee Chairman Camp and Ranking Member Levin of the
committee. We appreciate the written testimony that we have
received from you. We would ask you to try and highlight how
the 5 percent cut that is already in effect this year affected
your committee's operation in this the first session; secondly,
how you propose to operate under what is most likely going to
be a 6.4 percent cut in committee expenditures; and what
efficiencies you have already implemented, and what you might
be looking at with regard to next year.
Mr. Camp.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DAVE CAMP, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND
MEANS

Mr. Camp. Well, thank you, Chairman Lungren, and Ranking
Member Brady and Members of the Committee. I am here to talk
about the budget for the Committee on Ways and Means for the
112th Congress and am joined by our Ranking Member and my
friend from Michigan, Mr. Levin. And today I will give you an
update on how the 5 percent reduction for legislative year 2011
has impacted our budget and operations to date, and what it
will mean for the remainder of the year, as well as a preview
of the 6.4 percent budget reduction slated for legislative year
2012.
And before I do so, I want to assure you that this budget,
in accordance with the long tradition at Ways and Means, has
been divided between the majority and the minority, the
majority controlling two-thirds and the minority having full
control over one-third of the budget.
In March, I reported that the Ways and Means budget
reflected our nation's current financial problems, and that
just as families were cutting back, so would we, and that is
what we have done in the face of the 5 percent reduction in our
budget.
Because staff salaries represent a substantial portion of
the Committee's budget, we have met the challenge of the
reduced funding in part by holding flat the number of staff
allotted to the Committee, and, in fact, have left some staff
slots open. I am pleased to report, however, that our staff,
both the majority and the minority staff, have shouldered this
responsibility and performed well for the Congress and the
American people. In the majority we have used greater
technological resources, especially mobile computer devices, to
garner greater efficiencies.
Additionally, in order to ensure that we met our budget
cuts, we also have carefully limited Committee-funded travel.
Given the Committee's broad jurisdiction, especially with
regard to international trade, the ability of our Members and
staff to attend critical negotiating sessions across the
country and world is imperative to our mission, so we have
tried to balance the need for fiscal prudence with important
policy considerations.
We are confident based on this year's activity that we have
planned prudently for next year's reductions. The bottom line,
we have managed to meet our responsibilities with our allotted
budget and will continue to do so. And I thank the Chairman and
Members of this Committee for the opportunity to update you,
and I look forward to any questions you may have.
The Chairman. Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Camp follows:]

The Chairman. Mr. Levin.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. SANDER M. LEVIN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN, RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE
ON WAYS AND MEANS

Mr. Levin. Thank you very much. I am glad to join my
colleague, the chairman of the committee. He has described it
well.
I want to emphasize how hardworking staff is of this
committee, both majority and minority. And there are so many
issues, as you know, that come before Ways and Means, and that
requires long hours, sometimes around the clock, and I think
our staffs have very much met their responsibility.
Mr. Camp mentioned part of our jurisdiction relates to
trade, and I simply want to add that we have had the need to be
very, very careful about attendance at meetings overseas,
sometimes in other States that are far away, and we have tried
to meet our responsibility. I think that the reduction in our
expenses at times has made it very challenging for us to carry
out those responsibilities, but we surely have tried.
We also have attempted to very much marshal our resources.
Our chief of staff on the minority side, Janice Mays, has been
exceptionally diligent to make sure that the staff that was
hired met the responsibilities they do, and we had to assume
some considerable losses last time in our staff.
So very much, if the 6.4 is applied to us, we will do
everything we can to live within it and to very much meet the
major responsibilities of this committee.
Thank you very much.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
[The statement of Mr. Levin follows:]

The Chairman. Mr. Chairman, can you tell us what is your
staffing level right now, total staff, on your committee?
Mr. Camp. Total staff is 50, 5-0.
The Chairman. For both majority and minority?
Mr. Camp. That would just be the majority side.
The Chairman. And minority is?
Mr. Levin. Twenty-five.
The Chairman. Okay. Seventy-five.
Has that changed much over the last couple years, and did
it change at all with the 5 percent cut?
Mr. Camp. We ended up not filling some positions, but it
has not changed.
The Chairman. With the prospect of a 6.4 percent cut, would
there be any expectation of layoffs?
Mr. Camp. I think what we are going to try to do is upgrade
some of our technology capacity so we can better handle some of
the flows of information and documents. And I think that we are
hoping to be able to hold with that, but we are going to be
having to do that in order to handle the vast amount of
information we have. And obviously, given my service on the
Supercommittee, we also had Mr. Becerra on the Supercommittee
from the Committee on Ways and Means, there really were no
staff assigned to that whole project, so the Committee staff
worked very, very long hours and way into the night on many
evenings in order to meet those responsibilities.
So we had a lot of responsibilities, but I don't anticipate
any layoffs with that amount of reduction.
The Chairman. Mr. Levin.
Mr. Levin. We don't anticipate it, and I will indicate why.
I think we have to try everything short of layoffs. I think you
all know the responsibilities of the committee, and as I look
ahead to next year, if we can possibly do that, it is likely, I
think, that the responsibilities of this committee on both the
majority and the minority side, those responsibilities would be
enormous. And since we know firsthand the long hours worked by
our staffs, I can't foresee how we could perform adequately
with any layoffs. We would have to simply find other ways to
live within.
The Chairman. So if you got one-third of the reduction in
overall budget, I presume you are the one that makes that
decision on how to handle it?
Mr. Levin. That is true.
The Chairman. Boy, is that a lot better than the 1980s. I
remember being a member of the Judiciary Committee, and I had
actually voted for a smaller budget for the legislative branch.
And there were three professional staff on the subcommittee on
the majority side and one on our side, and that lady left, and
I went to go hire somebody, and the staff director of the
committee told me that I guess 7-to-1 ratio of professional
staff on the full committee was not sufficient, and since I had
voted to cut spending, I would have to do without a
professional staffer. It just happened that the person I was
hiring was a woman and replacing a man, and the majority did
not want to be in a position of denying advancement to someone
who happened to be a woman. I didn't hire her for that reason,
I hired her because she was good. But I had to go and grovel
before the chairman of the committee to get someone hired.
So I am glad to see that things have changed in this
Congress.
Mr. Levin. We have a different tradition.
The Chairman. Yes, we do.
Mr. Camp. It has been a longstanding tradition in the
Committee to operate this way. So this is a continuation of
what has occurred for many years on the Committee.
The Chairman. And it has through all the committees in the
Congress now. I appreciate that.
Mr. Brady.
Mr. Rokita, any questions?
Mr. Rokita. No, Chairman. I yield back. Thank you for
having me.
The Chairman. Mr. Nugent.
Next up is Foreign Affairs.
Well, it is good to have both of you here. We are reviewing
the budgets for the upcoming year, and so we would love to hear
from you as to how you have been able to deal with the 5
percent cut that was imposed as a result of the vote of the
House for this current year; and how you would envision dealing
with a 6.4 percent cut in the committee as a result of the
House resolution that was passed on the legislative branch
appropriations; and efficiencies that you have already put into
place in your committee, and efficiencies that you would expect
to put into place next year. So, welcome.
And Madam Chair.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON
FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Member Brady, and members of the committee and staff. Thank you
for allowing my good friend Mr. Berman and I the opportunity to
appear before you this afternoon.
Our Committee on Foreign Affairs has been challenged this
year by significant global developments, as we have all
followed them on the tube, and these required rigorous
examinations of our national security interests and foreign
policy priorities, as well as U.S. programs and funding, in
order to determine an appropriate and timely response.
Despite the 5 percent reduction to the committee's budget
for this calendar year, we have met and we have surpassed our
goals as described in our oversight plan. We have covered every
region, every functional area, and held an average of one
markup a month, including one of the most robust debates our
committee has had in over a decade concerning the funding
authorization and the policy prescriptions for the Department
of State, USAID and other agencies under our committee's
jurisdiction.
We have taken a strategic approach by hosting visiting
foreign dignitaries, by considering whether there is added
value to holding the meeting, by focusing on the most senior
foreign leaders, and by scheduling during off times rather than
during breakfast or lunch, that are expensive items to provide
for. We cut a number of fatty administrative expenses, such as
domestic travel and high-priced subscriptions. We also conduct
a cost estimate and do comparison pricing before deciding on a
purchase.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. By taking these small steps, the
committee has been able to carry out its protocol
responsibilities while keeping costs down at the same time.
We also established for the first time an oversight and
investigations team and included a whistleblower feature on our
committee Web site. This has enabled us to conduct serious
oversight over the range of activities and agencies under our
committee's jurisdiction.
One of those investigative efforts relating to the sexual
assault of Peace Corps volunteers resulted in legislation that
was signed into law by the President on Monday of last week.
We have established several mechanisms to carefully
scrutinize every congressional notification received by our
committee to ensure that taxpayer dollars are being used for
their intended purposes and are in a tangible way advancing
U.S. interests and U.S. priorities.
The main committee Web site added a new interactive feature
this year called ``Ask a Question,'' and it allows the public
to submit questions that they would like to have answered by
our witnesses testifying before our committee.
Looking forward, it will be tough, but I believe that we
can continue to operate successfully despite the additional 6.4
percent cut to our operating budget. We have restructured the
breakdown of the committee budget to minimize the impact on
current personnel allocations, as I believe our most valuable
resource is our dedicated staff.
I made a commitment to Ranking Member Berman at the
beginning of this Congress to provide the minority with an
$180,000 supplement to their one-third allocation of the
personnel budget. The additional $180,000 will continue in
calendar year 2012.
In making determinations about resource allocations, I
respectfully ask this committee to take into account that the
Foreign Affairs Committee, out of its budget, covers all
administrative costs for the House Democracy Partnership and
the Tom Lantos Human Rights Commission. This includes office
space, equipment, supplies, and other support. The Committee on
Foreign Affairs also covers the full salary for the staff
director of the House Democracy Partnership. It covers a
portion of the salary for the majority professional staff
member of the House Democracy Partnership, and covers a portion
of the salary for the majority professional staff of the Tom
Lantos Human Rights Commission. These two entities act
independently and do not contribute to the work of the
Committee on Foreign Affairs. And the further reduced budget
for the calendar year 2012 will again pose a challenge, but one
I believe we can and we will meet successfully. By
demonstrating that we can do more with less in the running of
our respective committee, we can demand the same from the
agencies under our jurisdiction.
I thank the chairman, the ranking member, Members and staff
for their time.
[The statement of Ms. Ros-Lehtinen follows:]

The Chairman. Mr. Berman.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. HOWARD L. BERMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA, RANKING MEMBER,
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Mr. Berman. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I
want to thank both you and Ranking Member Brady and your staffs
for all of the assistance that you have provided to the
minority staff of the committee over the past year. And I also
particularly want to thank my chairman Ileana Ros-Lehtinen. Her
efforts and that of her staff director, Dr. Yleem Poblete, have
really been very helpful to us in shaping a budget request that
is fair.
I don't want to sugar-coat my testimony. It has been a
difficult year for the minority on the committee. You mentioned
the two joint resolutions that governed this year's spending
and next year's spending, and we had that election back in 2010
that also had an impact on us. And just as all Americans have
had to do, we have tightened our belts. We have made
significant sacrifices while trying to ensure that we do not
jeopardize the committee's essential operations to oversee the
foreign relations of the United States.
Mr. Chairman, you asked me to comment on how the reduction
this year affected our operations in the first session. First,
as a result of that election--well, first, we were forced to
keep one of the positions vacant that were allotted to us. This
is after we had to dismiss 28 employees as we transitioned into
the minority. When another senior staffer departed, we also
kept that position vacant. So now we have two vacant positions
that we can't afford to fill.
Secondly, all of our staff, including the seven minority
subcommittee staff, experienced an average 10.17 percent cut to
their salaries, and this was despite a truly generous
allocation of additional funds to the minority's salary budget
by the chairman. I am very grateful to the chairman for once
again offering the minority the $180,000 from operating funds
to supplement the minority salary, but even after taking those
funds into account, the 6.4 percent cut to the committee's
budget will probably require us to cut salaries of existing
staff by an additional total of $53,000. And we will not be
able to fill the two vacancies, which to some extent certainly
impacts our ability to exercise the full oversight over all the
programs in our jurisdiction. As the chairman states, our
dedicated staff are our most valuable resource, and she has
demonstrated her commitment to them in her relations with us.
And I do want to also reiterate the chairman's point about
the budget of this committee covering the administrative
expenses for both the House Democracy Partnership and the Tom
Lantos Human Rights Commission. Those are both very good
programs. When I chaired the committee, I supported the request
of these two entities, but for funding independent of the
committee. I continue to believe that should be the case. They
are created by the body as a whole, and, it seems to me,
concomitant and part of that is to fund them as such. But as it
is, they represent an additional cost to the committee, which,
as the chairman notes, includes office space, equipment, and
other support.
Again, I want to express my appreciation for the chairman's
efforts to ensure a smooth coordination of committee functions.
We do receive our share of all nonpersonnel expenses in each
expense category, travel, communications, equipment upgrades.
And I look forward to working with her in a bipartisan manner
on a wide range of issues in the second year of the 112th
Congress.
Thank you very much.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. We thank you for your
testimony as well as your service.
[The statement of Mr. Berman follows:]

The Chairman. Let me just ask a question, and I just don't
know what the answer is to this. With the House Democracy
Partnership and Tom Lantos Human Rights Commission, they are
neither fish nor fowl. They are not legislative. They are not
executive. They are not independent. What are they?
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. They were created by Congress and are
technically under our committee, and so we have to fund their
operational costs, as I pointed out in my testimony, whether it
is this staffer or office space, et cetera. And it comes to an
estimated cost for staff salaries, equipment supplies, and
other administrative expenses for these two entities that are
under our jurisdiction, so they are going to come from our
budget, is close to $225,000. So that is the way that they
were--when the bills were passed establishing them, they were
placed under our jurisdiction, but we don't get any money for
them.
The Chairman. Is there a prohibition against--and again, I
am aware that they exist, but I don't know the actual way they
are set up. Is there a prohibition against them receiving
outside funds to support their efforts?
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. I am sure that there would be. But they
could be funded separately. We would love to farm them out. I
think the House Administration Committee is a wonderful
location for both Tom Lantos and the House Democracy
Partnership.
The Chairman. I am very serious about this.
Mr. Berman. You mean outside of our budget or outside of
the government's budget?
The Chairman. Outside of the government.
Mr. Berman. I think there could be a problem there because
of the commingling issues. They are created by House
resolutions.
The Chairman. Do we have any other creations like that?
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Well, these are the only two that are
under our jurisdiction. There might be some other commissions
that are under the jurisdiction of other committees, but these
are the only ones----
Mr. Berman. We used to have a bunch.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And as Mr. Berman said, they are
wonderful organizations.
The Chairman. No. I understand that.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. They come out of our budget but they are
not really part of the Committee or contribute to the work of
the Committee.
The Chairman. I know. I am not against those organizations.
All I am saying is when we are looking at very tough budget
decisions--I just had the Ethics Committee here talking about
how they might not be able to serve the Congress in the way
that I think they need to be served because of monies. I have
got to think outside the box as to where monies are coming from
and where certain groups are. I am not trying to target it. I
am just trying to think. We have got to make some tough
decisions. That is all.
Ms. Lofgren. Would the gentleman yield?
The Chairman. I would be happy to yield.
Ms. Lofgren. Like you, I am eager to think outside the box,
but I think, having worked with both of these Commissions, to
get outside funds, who would be interested in it might be a
source that would undercut the mission. For example, on a
bipartisan basis we have sort of a Freedom in Vietnam Caucus,
and the Commission has been very, very helpful on many of those
issues. I want to thank both the chairman and ranking member
for their really terrific service to our country. But if there
were funding sources, I mean, depending on who they were could
really undercut the mission. So I would be very nervous about
that.
I thank the gentleman for yielding.
The Chairman. I appreciate that. We have real tough
decisions to make. We are talking about a 6.4 percent cut
across the board. Or if we find that some--I hope I am not
talking out of school--but if we found some committees had a
specific actual need next year, I have got to find that money
somewhere else, out of other committees or somewhere. I am not
sure this committee has ever had hearings, except for last year
where it was a fait accompli, where we have ever talked about
you getting less than you got before. I can tell you the
difference in demeanor of chairmen and ranking members from
when it was just ``how much more are we going to get'' versus
now.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Well, if I may, Mr. Chairman, not knowing
what would happen last year, we had drawn up several scenarios
and several budget projections on whether it was going to be 2
percent to 8 percent or anything in between. And so we were
prepared for as tough a cut or as small of a cut. And I think
that has given us great flexibility to see what is the most
needed program and what is not.
The Chairman. And just to let you know, we have led, and
the Senate has followed. When we took a 5 percent, they decided
to take a 5 percent, but after most of the year was through. So
they got a 1.3 percent cut. They are coming in with a 6.3
percent cut, I believe is the number I have got from their
leadership committees, et cetera, support staff, but 3.2
percent, I think, for their individual offices. So we are
leading the way, and there is no doubt about that. But they are
going to have some consequences, and we have to understand what
they are as we go forward.
Mr. Brady.
Mr. Brady. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
If the 6.4 percent does go through, would you have to lay
anybody off not by attrition, but by laying somebody off?
Attrition, to me, means somebody who wanted to go anyway, or
they are going to go because they found another job or
whatever. But I am talking about telling somebody they are no
longer employed that want to be employed. Either one of you.
Mr. Berman. On our side, we have two authorized slots that
we are not filling, and the additional 6.4 percent cut will
mean a salary cut again this year after a significant salary
cut last year for those who are remaining. Obviously we are in
a special situation because we had the transition from majority
to minority status, but over and on top of that, our
contemplation would not be to lay off. It would be probably to
just have to spread the pain of salary reductions, because we
feel like we are fairly short staffed now with our two open
slots that we can't fill. So we probably wouldn't lay off, we
would probably opt for reductions.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. If I could add to what Mr. Berman said.
We established an innovative, and have been very productive in
the way we have implemented it, mentor/mentee program where we
have had our junior staffers working with our most senior
policy staffers, and then when those senior staffers have gone
on to retire, we have been able to ride that problem out by
promoting from within.
Mr. Brady. Sometimes that can contribute to attrition.
Mr. Berman. Yes, that is true.
Mr. Brady. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Rokita.
Mr. Rokita. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. I appreciate your work
and your presentation here today.
Intelligence is up next.
Thank you, chairman and ranking member of the Intelligence
Committee. And I also thank you for sending your first
communion pictures for us here. Really nice looking. That was
his line.
Mr. Rogers. It is the only pictures we can show, actually.
The Chairman. We welcome you both representing the House
Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence. While your written
testimony will be made a part of the record, if you could
summarize and give us an idea of how you were able to operate
with the 5 percent cut this last year, what efficiencies you
may have implemented already and those you anticipate as we are
looking at a 6.4 percent cut as a result of the resolution
passed by the House.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. MIKE ROGERS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF ALABAMA, CHAIRMAN, PERMANENT SELECT COMMITTEE
ON INTELLIGENCE

Mr. Rogers. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Brady. I appreciate the opportunity to be here.
Mr. Ruppersberger and I have worked pretty closely on all
things on the committee, including the budget process, and we
absorbed the 5 percent reduction last year, I am pleased to
tell you, and were able to still continue to do our business.
It enabled the committee to hold about 100 events, including
hearings, briefings, roundtables with key leaders in
intelligence, and off-sites to important facilities to conduct
oversight--proper oversight of the Intelligence Community at
large.
We were authorized 44 staff positions. We achieved that
cost savings by only filling those vacancies that we believed
we could get by to fulfill the committee's mission. So at
present the committee's 20 members are served by 30 staff, to
include 19 majority staff, and 8 minority staff, and 3 support
staff. Although we have not hired to capacity, we maintain the
flexibility to hire additional staff should circumstances
require and budget permitting.
We continue to work for efficiencies gained from previous
improvements to its information technology system. We had a
heavy investment up front, and we think we are reaping some of
those rewards now. These improvements have allowed us to reduce
expenditures for equipment, while continuing to ensure the safe
processing, dissemination, and retention of committee documents
and communications, as well as classified information received
from the executive branch.
As you know, Mr. Chairman, it is a unique committee indeed
in the sense that all of the information that flows through has
special handling requirements. So we have made sure that we
have protected those handling requirements and our ability to
secure that information, and at the same time try to maintain
our tempo when it comes to aggressive oversight.
We were able to put together a budget. We think it was
probably the best we have seen in many, many years, mainly
because it was a bipartisan effort not only with the Members,
but we have joined the staff together--we are not sure that has
ever happened before--to have joint briefings between
Republican and Democrat staff sitting at the table to go
through the numbers. We think it made a better product, we
think it made it more efficient, and we stand ready, knowing
the fiscal environment, to find that 6.4 percent, I believe, as
we move forward into this year. We will do it through
efficiencies, we will probably keep some vacancies on the
committee, but we think we can absorb it and keep it. We are
working in the tempo, and we have got some great people who are
logging some long hours, and we will continue to ask them to do
that as we move forward into next year.
[The statement of Mr. Rogers and Mr. Ruppersberger
follows:]

The Chairman. Mr. Ruppersberger.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. C.A. DUTCH RUPPERSBERGER, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MARYLAND, RANKING
MEMBER, PERMANENT SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE

Mr. Ruppersberger. Thank you for having us here today. I
think when Mr. Rogers and I in the beginning took over the
leadership of the Intelligence Committee, we had both been on
the committee before. And it was a very partisan committee, and
the stakes on Intelligence are very high on the issues we deal
with, whether it is cybersecurity, terrorism, rush tranche,
China threat, all the things that we deal with. And it wasn't
serving our country by having a partisan relationship, so we
agreed to work together. Mike was a former FBI agent. I was a
former prosecutor. I do remind Mike that good FBI agents listen
to their prosecutor, even if they are in the minority. That was
a joke. But I think the reasons that we----
Mr. Rogers. And he reminds me often of that, Mr. Chairman,
for the record.
Mr. Ruppersberger. But I think the reason that we have been
so successful is that we have brought our staff together, which
just hasn't happened in the past, and we have worked together
as a team on the committee.
We knew that we had to absorb cuts like every other agency
has to, every other committee, and when we did, we did program
review. We made sure that our first goal, we would not affect
the mission. We didn't affect the mission, and we were able to
do the cuts that were necessary in personnel and other areas.
We hope that the committee gets better because eventually it is
going to affect us all, but at this point we have to do our
share, and I think it has been done, and I think the leadership
of Chairman Rogers, working in a bipartisan way, has really
helped us to accomplish what we did.
We can say this publicly--I can't give you an exact
number--but we were able to cut over $1 billion from our budget
without affecting the mission.
The Chairman. That is very good. Are you fully moved into
the CVC now?
Mr. Rogers. Yes, sir. We are fully moved in. The staff is
in. We hold our hearings and briefings in the CVC.
The Chairman. What has been the difference with respect to
utilizing that----
Mr. Rogers. Well, we have less claustrophobic reaction from
the staff. For those familiar with the previous space, we were
in--they call it ``the tube.'' There really was not sufficient
staff to meet the demand not only just for staff space, but for
the proper handling of the material as it came through the
committee space. It looked like a rabbit haven back in there.
So the space is appropriate. We now have ample enough space
to accurately and adequately store and categorize the
information that we had, and that was a weakness before. They
couldn't access information historically because of the really
limited space and the way that it was filed. So it has been, I
think, an exceptionally good thing for both the staff and our
ability to function when it came to properly handling
materials.
The Chairman. It is a great space. It is a little further
away from the House floor and other things. Has that proven any
difficulty for your Members, or for the general membership when
they want to go and look at classified information? Have you
seen any increase or decrease----
Mr. Ruppersberger. We lose a couple of pounds--that is one
of the changes we have seen--by walking so much.
The Chairman. You are walking better.
Mr. Ruppersberger. I just had my knee operated on 3 weeks
ago.
Mr. Rogers. And the good news is when we tell them to show
up to the committee meeting, nobody can find it. So we kind of
like it that way. The participation gets whittled down.
Mr. Ruppersberger. Another thing, we also have more
conference rooms. A lot of what we do and what our staff does
is oversee and interview all the agencies on a regular basis.
In the former--in the other facility that we had, everybody had
to wait because we have to be in a SCIF in a classified area.
So having different conference rooms has really helped
efficiency so when people come in, we can meet with them, and
we don't have to wait a half an hour for a room to become
available.
The Chairman. As I understand your testimony, you folks can
operate effectively with a 6.4 percent cut, even though you
would not be asking for a 6.4 percent cut.
Mr. Rogers. Obviously, Mr. Chairman, being from a committee
that has not had a lot of plus-ups in the past, is it going to
hurt a little bit? Sure. But we can understand the environment
that we are in, and we believe together that we can meet that
number and still efficiently perform our duties.
Mr. Ruppersberger. And we did work with the other agencies
to do this. We just didn't say there--we work with each agency,
we review their programs, and they give us their priorities.
That is the way we should do it. You just can't come in and
say, cut this percentage. You will throw the baby out with the
bathwater if you do that in that style.
Mr. Rogers. Mr. Chairman, we did that through IT purchases.
We renegotiated contracts. Some of those contracts we believe
were probably not in the best interests of the government, so
we went back and renegotiated contracts, and, again, we are
getting a little bit more of staff. And we focused our travel.
So we have made some changes on--in the intelligence
business you can't do it from the Capitol Building completely.
You have to be someplace else. So we focused that travel, and
we were able to trim some travel budget costs that way. So we
were watching the pennies. Again, we think this is an important
commitment for our committee to make, as all the committees are
making here on the Hill.
The Chairman. Mr. Brady.
Mr. Brady. Mr. Chairman, an FBI agent and a prosecutor in
front of me, I have no questions.
Mr. Rogers. Mr. Brady, could we see you afterwards, please?
The Chairman. Mr. Rokita.
Mr. Rokita. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank both of you gentlemen for your leadership
and the staff that you have provided me on a couple of
occasions when I needed your attention. I didn't even have to
bother you. I was a little skeptical the first time I had to go
behind two or three different vaults to have the conversation,
but your staff was very professional and treated my concerns
with a lot of respect. As a new Member, I greatly appreciate
them.
I am very interested to know that--if I understood the
testimony right, it went from 44 to 30 staff members?
Mr. Rogers. Forty-four authorized, but we filled thirty
slots, and we did that in order to try to save some money.
Mr. Rokita. And that saved $1 million. So all the savings
came from staff?
Mr. Rogers. Oh, no, no, no. There was a series. It was IT,
renegotiated contracts, some for staff, some on travel. And the
money that Mr. Ruppersberger was talking about is the money
that we found in our authorization bill. It was $1 billion is
the unclassified----
Mr. Ruppersberger. Not for administration, for our whole
bill.
Mr. Rogers. From the Intelligence Community itself. We went
back and forced some--as we went through efficiencies, we
forced efficiencies onto the Intelligence Community as well and
came up with--the unofficial number is about $1 billion.
Mr. Ruppersberger. For certain programs. For instance,
there are a lot of programs that are good, but some we can't
afford, so we needed to go to the agencies. We also didn't have
jurisdiction over the Intelligence Community and the military,
and we made sure that whatever we did, it would not affect our
national security. But there are certain programs we just could
not afford, and we did away with some of those.
Mr. Rokita. Thank you for clearing that up.
The Chairman. Ms. Lofgren.
Ms. Lofgren. Just real quickly, thank you, of course, for
your service. I want to make sure--and don't discuss the
details, obviously, in this open setting, but in a reduction in
the IT budget, are you confident that you have the resources to
have the vigorous kind of cybersecurity that is necessary for
the committee itself?
Mr. Rogers. Yeah. I do believe that we are. Now, we have
some added advantage from having some leverage from the
agencies of which we oversee and, because of the nature of the
information that they are involved in, our security procedures
as well; NSA specifically, the Agency and others. So we do
believe that we can do it.
And, by the way, in the savings, we have even have added
some other--and I can't talk about what--but some other
electronics matters to the committee that hadn't been there
before. So even though we have found the savings, we have found
other places where we thought a small amount of investment
could enhance the security and the security procedures at the
committee.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you very much.
Mr. Ruppersberger. Let me address that, too, because I
think it is important.
The first thing, the cyberthreat is one of the most serious
threats that we have in our country. As we speak, we are being
attacked. We are losing billions of dollars. And my concern is
we are going to have a catastrophic attack. The ability is
there for other countries, al Qaeda, an organization like that,
to hire a hacker, attack a banking system. North Korea just
attacked South Korea. Our air traffic controllers. It is a very
serious issue. So because of that, we didn't do it. We did away
with some programs, but we added billets, as an example, in the
agencies that deal with cybersecurity. So it is a matter of
prioritizing, doing away with one so we can put more in the
area of cyber.
Ms. Lofgren. I appreciate that. But I was specifically--you
know, every committee has information, some of it is more
sensitive than others, and I can't think of a committee that
has more sensitive information than yours. So that is why I
wanted to make sure you felt comfortable with the funding
level.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you. Again, many of our systems--I worry
about the House in general mainly because of----
Ms. Lofgren. That is a whole separate subject.
Mr. Rogers [continuing]. As a whole separate subject. Our
committee, because of--we are connected to already secured
networks provided by the agencies, so in that regard I feel
pretty comfortable.
If you are asking me about the House computers of which our
committee uses them as well, we have concerns that I have
talked to Mr. Lungren, and I think we are hopefully on the
right track to making some changes, and some of that is
cultural changes as well. It is beyond the scope of a policy or
a dollar. It is cultural.
Ms. Lofgren. Human behavior is your weakest link.
Mr. Rogers. And 80 percent of our problem in the House of
Representatives could be cured by changing human behavior when
it comes to the use of those computers.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ruppersberger. We just dropped today a bipartisan bill
on cybersecurity, which is what we have been working on this
for close to 5 years, and the bill is being dropped today.
Ms. Lofgren. I will be eager to look at it.
The Chairman. Thank you very much for your testimony. Thank
you very much for your service, and we appreciate it.
Mr. Ruppersberger. May I ask you a question, Mr. Chairman?
What about the issue of subway?
The Chairman. We are working on that.
Mr. Ruppersberger. Inside joke.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you very much, Mr. Lungren, Mr. Ranking
Member.
The Chairman. Judiciary.
All right. Thank you very much for being here. The
committee now welcomes Chairman Lamar Smith and Ranking Member
John Conyers of the Committee on the Judiciary. We will receive
your written testimony in its entirety. We would ask you to
briefly outline how you have operated under the 5 percent cut
this last year; how you would operate with a 6.4 percent, at
least, cut to this coming year; and efficiencies that have been
instituted already, and those that you may be looking forward
to.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. LAMAR SMITH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

Mr. Smith of Texas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Lungren, Ranking Member Brady, other members of
the committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on the
Judiciary Committee's budget for the second session of the
112th Congress.
In this economy, all Americans are forced to tighten their
belts and do more with less. In recognition of that, earlier
this year Ranking Member Conyers and I requested a budget cut
of 5 percent below the funding for the 111th Congress. Now we
are being asked to accept a further funding cut of 6.4 percent.
In the 112th Congress, so far the Judiciary Committee has
sent more bills to the House floor than any other committee.
Among the important issues the committee continues to consider
are ensuring that Federal law enforcement agencies have the
necessary tools to prevent terrorist attacks, that America's
borders are secure, that our Nation's children are safe from
sexual predators, and that the administration of justice is
fair and efficient within both the Justice Department and
Federal law enforcement agencies and within our Federal
Judiciary.
In addition, the committee plays an important role in
strengthening our economy and putting Americans back to work.
We ensure robust and fair competition under the antitrust laws,
promote America's global competitiveness through our
intellectual property laws, improve our immigration laws to
attract the best and brightest from around the world, and
bolster the business climate by reining in burdensome and
unnecessary regulation.
During the first year of this Congress, the committee
worked to enact an historic patent reform bill that would make
our economy much more productive by speeding up the issuance of
patents and improving the quality of those patents. New jobs
should follow as a result. This bill is the first major
revision of the patent system in 60 years and is a result of a
project started several years ago.
In the next 2 weeks, the House is considering three
significant regulatory reform bills reported by the Judiciary
Committee to update a system designed in the 1940s for an
industrial society and make it more responsive in today's
global information society. All of these issues are critical to
the safety and well-being of millions of Americans. Because of
this, it is vital that we retain a highly qualified staff as a
cornerstone of the committee's capacity to consider complicated
and often controversial legislation and policy issues that fall
within its jurisdiction.
To attract and retain quality staff, the committee must be
able to offer compensation that is at least somewhat
competitive with the private sector. This is particularly
challenging when a disproportionate number of committee staff
are attorneys with substantial public policy expertise who
could command higher salaries from the private sector.
Although I would rather not see the committee budget cut
for a second year in a row, I do support our leadership and
this committee's decision to reduce our budget by 6.4 percent
in the coming year. I will do what is necessary to ensure that
the Judiciary Committee is even more productive while operating
with less.
Mr. Chairman, you asked to explain how we coped with this
last year and how we might cope this coming year. This last
year we were able to achieve a 5 percent cut mainly by cutting
back on subscriptions to periodicals and other publications.
This next year will be a little bit tougher, but we have a
staff vacancy occurring actually at the end of this week, in 2
days, and by not filling that staff position and having another
individual basically hold down two positions, we are going to
be able to achieve, I believe, that 6.4 percent recommended cut
in our budget.
I will be happy to respond to questions after the ranking
member has made his statement as well.
[The statement of Mr. Smith of Texas follows:]

The Chairman. Chairman Emeritus Conyers.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JOHN CONYERS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN, RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE
ON THE JUDICIARY

Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Chairman Lungren, Ranking Member
Bob Brady, our colleague Zoe Lofgren, and Mr. Rokita.
First of all, I endorse and support the comments of the
chairman of the committee, and I just want to add a few points.
Since the 112th Congress has begun, we have had 79 subcommittee
hearings, 8 full committee hearings. More than 640 bills have
been referred to the committee, and 43 bills marked up, 32
bills reported out of the committee, 20 bills passed by the
House of Representatives, and 8 bills signed into public law,
accounting for somewhere between 20 and 25 percent of the
legislative total of the entire 112th Congress.
Now, I am less enthusiastic about the continued reduction
of congressional budgets as it applies to the Judiciary
Committee. I understand, of course, the tremendous fiscal
pressures that our Nation is under, but I do not believe that
underfunding the Federal Legislature is consistent with what we
need to do in terms of our mission, and I think that sometimes
this is counterproductive.
A 6.4 percent cut on top of a 5 percent cut, I think, will
reduce our productivity and our effectiveness. But in the end,
I think the relationship between myself and the chairman--after
all, he was the ranking member when I was the chairman--is one
that has helped us maintain a very good working relationship. I
have never had a problem with respect to the budget request in
this area in terms of controlling our nonsalary items, and I
look forward to our continuing to work together. Two of you I
do not need to add or embellish what goes on in the committee
because you know that as well as I do.
So I appreciate being here once again and plead for your
generous tendencies to keep us together and as whole as
possible in the circumstances that we are going under at the
present time. And I thank you for this opportunity.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
[The statement of Mr. Conyers follows:]

The Chairman. I just wonder what would happen if we told
the judiciary--not the Judiciary Committee--they had to cut 5
percent one year and 6.4 percent the next year. They would
probably issue an injunction. I know the work the committee
does. I appreciate the chairman's comments on what we do with
respect to dealing with this expected budget cut.
And, Mr. Conyers, I understand the position that you have,
being in the minority with one-third as opposed to two-thirds,
as I have certainly been there before. But I thank both of you
for your attention to detail on this.
Mr. Brady.
Mr. Brady. No. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Brady is not asking a question of
lawyers?
Mr. Brady. I learned my lesson.
The Chairman. Mr. Rokita.
Mr. Rokita. No. Thank you.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you to both of you. It is a hardworking
committee, and this is a lean budget.
The Chairman. I just wanted to let you know something I
learned a little bit earlier. Have you always heard of that
court that they hold in Philadelphia at the football field on
Sundays when the Eagles have a game? Guess who the judge is at
that court. My ranking member's brother. So if you go up to a
Philadelphia Eagles game, make sure you don't find yourself in
front of his brother.
Mr. Brady. Especially if you are rooting for another team.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you very much.
The Chairman. Thank you.
We have the Energy and Commerce chairman and ranking member
before us. We appreciate you coming. I observed that you were
here when we did the previous committee. So we would ask the
same of you; that is, if you would give us an idea of how you
were able to handle the 5 percent cut this last year, what your
plans are for the 6.4 percent cut that is occasioned by the
resolution passed by the House, and efficiencies that you can
put into place and expect to put into place this next year.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
COMMERCE

Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Both of us are
glad to be here.
We did demonstrate our commitment to deficit reduction by
living with the 5 percent across-the-board cut this last year.
We were very meticulous about our direct operating expenses. We
deferred the hiring of some staff at the beginning of the year.
I look to live within the spirit of the 6.4 percent cut
coming in the second session. To manage that I don't expect to
fill some remaining staff slots, and in some cases not replace
departing staff. We will continue to struggle to do the
upgrades of our committee's equipment and computers. I would
note that this current year we have had very few field
hearings. I would anticipate that we will do none in the next
year. Certainly we will expect to do the traditional two-
thirds, one-third split with the majority, minority. It seems
to work pretty well, at least from my end of things.
There is an incurring cost of software that we have to
continue to manage as we get thousands of pages of documents
with a small oversight staff. And we expect that you all can
help us with the high cost of information access and
management, LexisNexis, et cetera. We look to meet our legal
responsibilities to prepare and print hearing transcripts, et
cetera. This year, we had over 100 hearings and markups. We are
in full committee markup now, which is why I am going to
abbreviate my testimony and yield to my friend Mr. Waxman.
[The statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

STATEMENT OF THE HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA, RANKING MEMBER,
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

Mr. Waxman. Chairman Lungren, Ranking Member Brady and
other members of the committee, I am pleased to be here with
Chairman Upton to talk to you about our situation, our budget
situation.
The first year of the 112th Congress posed substantial
budgetary challenges for the minority of the committee. As I
noted in my testimony last spring before you, the Committee on
Energy and Commerce has jurisdiction over subjects with broad
impact on public welfare, health, and the economy, including
implementation of the comprehensive health reform law, making
sure our food and drugs are safe, ensuring the effectiveness of
Medicaid and much of Medicare, developing the Nation's energy
and environmental policy, telecommunications policy, and
consumer protection law. To meet these responsibilities, we
need staff with expertise in a range of areas, access to key
periodicals to keep staff current on the subject areas under
the committee's jurisdiction, and the ability to travel to
conduct fact-finding and field hearings.
Unfortunately, underfunding in this Congress has posed
obstacles to meeting these basic staffing needs. I am proud of
the work our committee has done, but we have been unable to
fulfill all of our slots. We have a shortage of manpower. We
have had to carry a significant number of vacancies due to
budgeting constraints. Further, at the same time that staff
have been shouldering an extraordinary workload, they have seen
their pay decrease from last year. In addition, we have had to
forgo basic administrative resources such as a backup server
that ensures the integrity of the committee files.
In the coming year, the Committee on Energy and Commerce
will continue to be at the center on policymaking on issues key
to the health and welfare of Americans. We need to ensure
national energy security. We have a variety of health and
environmental challenges posed by global warming, climate
change, and we must determine how to forge a successful
telecommunications policy that encourages innovation and
appropriate allocation of spectrum resources.
We need an increase in funding for the Committee on Energy
and Commerce for the remainder of the 112th Congress in order
to ensure retention of expert staff and essential resources to
support their work. A cut in funding would have deleterious
consequences. It would mean that we could not replace departing
staff; we could not participate in committee field hearings,
which shouldn't be all that difficult since we are not going to
have any next year; and we would have to eliminate paid
subscriptions to newspapers, on-line news services, and
databases.
That is our story, and I would be happy to answer any
questions.
[The statement of Mr. Waxman follows:]

The Chairman. Let me just ask this, Mr. Waxman, about what
you said. You anticipate if we had a 6.4 percent cut that you
would actually have layoffs on your minority personnel?
Mr. Waxman. We probably would have to. We have already had
four people we have had to let go because we couldn't meet the
payroll with the cut we had last time. And I think we would
like to not have any more than that 6.4 percent cut so we could
have some attrition of staff and not have to lay people off.
The Chairman. When you say you have lost four already, was
that over and above the fact when you go from majority to
minority obviously----
Mr. Waxman. Yes. Aside from that.
The Chairman. Okay. Mr. Upton, would there be any personnel
consequences?
Mr. Upton. We may well have some. I am very pleased with
the staff that we have. They are tremendous. And as was said by
other committees, I heard Lamar from the Judiciary Committee, I
know that to have the talented staff that we have, particularly
as we have taken them from the private sector, many of them
have taken a reduction in pay from what they earned before. We
are aware of some of those salary changes. And I am hoping that
we don't lose anybody. We are trying to keep them as happy as
we can so that they want to continue to come work. But we are
very aware of the need for sacrifice and leading the way and we
are doing so by----
The Chairman. What is your total personnel now, both
majority and minority?
Mr. Upton. I think our side has about--some staff would be
joint. I think the count is about 75. Again, it is two-thirds,
one-third. Six subcommittees. And we are active every day of
the week.
The Chairman. All right. Thank you very much.
Mr. Brady.
Mr. Upton. Any parking spots to give us? Something?
The Chairman. I will give you parking spots in return for
jurisdiction. You would have to give something that is very
dear to your heart.
Mr. Upton. Ahead of us, I say nice things about the
Judiciary Committee.
The Chairman. No. I was thinking of Homeland Security.
Mr. Rokita.
Mr. Rokita. Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very, very much. I know you have to
get back to your full committee. I appreciate it. Thank you.
Thanks for being here early, Sam. We were running behind
time, and now we are ahead of time. We are trying to get this
done before the votes. So we understand your ranking member is
on her way.
Mr. Graves. Yes, I think she is.
The Chairman. We want to welcome the chairman and ranking
member of the Small Business Committee. Your written statements
will be made a part of the record. We ask you to summarize. And
if you could give us some guidance as to how your committee was
able to deal with the 5 percent budget cut in the current
fiscal year; how you would expect to deal with a 6.4 percent
budget cut, as promised by the resolution passed by the House;
and any efficiencies that you have been able to incorporate in
the operations of the committee from the majority and minority
side of things.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. SAM GRAVES, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF MISSOURI, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON SMALL
BUSINESS

Mr. Graves. Thank you, Chairman Lungren and Ranking Member
Brady, for the opportunity here. I will just briefly summarize
everything, and then I will go through real quick the budget
plan, as you asked for.
By the end of this year, the committee, we have held 40
hearings in Washington and 5 field hearings. We have also held
five markups and participated in several roundtable events in
Members' districts. Other oversight activities conducted
outside the hearing room have also had some pretty positive
results, and this activity reflects the committee's very narrow
legislative authority and broad oversight jurisdiction, as well
as our priority to bring in the committee directly to
constituents back home.
We have invested in outreach through technology. We
launched a new feature on our Web site called ``Open Mic''
which allows small business men and women to communicate
directly their concerns and ideas to the committee. The
committee's success is reflected in the awards that we have
received both on the Web site and social media communications
through the year. As a committee with one of the smallest
budgets and staffs in Congress, we are very proud of those
accomplishments.
Now, in reviewing the committee's budget, as of October 31,
the Small Business Committee spent 69 percent of its total
allocation for 2011, which is very good news as it indicates
that we have been able to live within our means and still do
the work required of us, even with the 5 percent cut this year.
But it is very important to note that 2011 was somewhat of an
anomaly for the committee because of the change in the majority
status, which required so many staff changes at the beginning
of the year. Speaking for the majority, this meant that we had
a gradual hiring of staff over the first few months, which
resulted in significant personnel changes early in the year,
because our staff was smaller earlier in the year.
But those savings won't be realized in 2012 because we are
staffed at least where we feel we need to be at the moment. We
had a plan to add more staff, obviously, but that was stopped
in mid-2011 when we learned that there might be potential cuts
in 2012. Now, additional staff would be dedicated to oversight
and regulatory review, which are very important priorities for
the committee. The staff would help us further the goals of
cutting waste out of the government; reining in regulation,
which is a very big aspect of what we do; and provide a better
environment for job creators. We are going to continue to
evaluate our personnel to ensure that we are maximizing the
resources under the budget constraints.
While we have been forced to make adjustments to our plans
and projections in anticipation of cuts next year, we will
continue to prioritize effective oversight, obviously travel to
Members' districts, and technology that provides much greater
transparency and access for the public. We do believe in proper
planning, and we will have the resources next year, even if
there is a cut, to make the investments that allow us to meet
the committee's objectives.
So with that, I would be happy to answer any questions. And
I will turn to Ranking Member Velazquez.
[The statement of Mr. Graves follows:]

STATEMENT OF THE HON. NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK, RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE
ON SMALL BUSINESS

Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Chairman Lungren, Ranking Member
Brady.
You know, given the role--and I would like to put this in
the perspective of our economy and the important role that
small businesses play in helping us get out of this recession.
It is important to understand that the committee serves a vast
array of issues impacting small businesses, that Chairman
Graves has held different field hearings to tackle those issues
that are important to small businesses, and given the state of
the economy and the fact that it took this committee close to
20 years to receive funding that was on margin with inflation.
Initially we started off this year with a 5 percent cut in
funding. That was already a challenge in and of itself. That
cut represents money that could have gone towards operational
costs. Mr. Chairman, I run a bare-bones operation. While I
understand that the cuts are all around, I don't have to tell
you that working with a smaller budget has its challenges. We
have barely managed this first round of cuts and are bracing
ourselves for the next round. An additional 6.4 percent
reduction in funding is going to have a significant impact on
my office.
As you may recall, historically this committee has
repeatedly received the smallest funding of all committees. And
the chairman can attest to the fact that we get calls from
Members, individual Members--not only the members who serve in
the committee, but individual Members who are being approached
by small businesses in their districts. So a second round of
cuts will make it even more challenging. We will have to
examine our operational costs to see where and if we are able
to cut expenses, as our office already runs with the bare
necessities. I am afraid that with these cuts we will have to
resort to attrition, thus losing valuable staff. This also
means foregoing field hearings, which give us the opportunity
to hear from entrepreneurs outside the Beltway.
Chairman Graves and I are committed to small businesses and
our committee members. We are focused on helping small
businesses with the support they need in order to help them
create jobs, the jobs this country needs so desperately right
now. And I am concerned whether this budget will allow us to
meet all the needs of our committee and the Members throughout
the different districts.
Small businesses turn to this committee time and time
again. We need the resources to serve them properly and
efficiently. With less funding available to pay staff salaries,
subscriptions, equipment, it will be a challenge to fulfill
this committee's oversight responsibilities.
And with that, I will answer any questions you may have.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
[The information follows:]

The Chairman. If we have a 6.4 percent cut, would that
require layoffs, either majority or minority; that is, would
you have to cut personnel, actually cut already existing
personnel?
Mr. Graves. What we did, we actually stopped hiring when we
heard on the majority side--when we heard that there were
potential cuts coming. What that ended up happening is--I mean,
we are obviously getting the work done, but it is taking
longer. And the staff we would have hired would have been
senior staff to do oversight on administrative--from the
administration standpoint when it comes to all this new
regulation that is coming down in the SBA regulations. So we
are behind on that. And that is where the staff would have gone
to. But obviously we are dealing with it, and we just froze
hiring for the time being.
Obviously I sympathize with the minority. Any time you have
a change in majority/minority, you have one side that is
staffing up, which makes it easier to slow down. You have got
one side that has got to significantly staff down, which is
obviously a very tough thing to do for anybody in that
position.
The Chairman. Madam Ranking Member, would you have to lose
staff, do you think, if you had----
Ms. Velazquez. I would have to look at everything, and I
would say that layoffs, salary cuts, and furloughs are all
possible.
The Chairman. Okay. I understand what you are talking
about, being a small committee; although, according to my
records, you folks are the third smallest in terms of budget.
Ethics and Rules actually have smaller budgets, believe it or
not.
Mr. Ranking Member.
Mr. Rokita.
Mr. Rokita. I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you very, very much for your
presentation. We appreciate it and will take it under
advisement.
Mr. Nugent, you are sitting back with staff.
It is my pleasure to welcome the chairman and ranking
member of the Natural Resources Committee. We have your
statements. We would ask if you might highlight how you have
been able to operate in this last year under the 5 percent cut
that was imposed as a result of the vote of the House; what
your prospects are in terms of next year's budget, which is
subject to a 6.4 percent cut as a result of a vote on the House
resolution; and efficiencies that you have been able to achieve
this past year, and others that you might anticipate in the
upcoming year.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DOC HASTINGS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON
NATURAL RESOURCES

Mr. Hastings. Thank you. You have my full statement. I ask
unanimous consent that it be made a part of the record.
The Chairman. Without objection.
Mr. Hastings. Thank you, Chairman Lungren, and Ranking
Member Brady and members of the committee, for having Ranking
Member Markey and me before you to discuss the budget of the
Committee on Natural Resources.
Earlier this year we testified before the committee and
presented a budget for the 112th Congress that reflected the 5
percent decrease from the budget of the 111th Congress. Our
nonpartisan administrative staff review each and every budget
category for savings. The most significant impact of the
reduction, however, is the salary portion of our budget.
Retaining and hiring knowledgeable staff with expertise in the
diverse areas within the committee's jurisdiction is critical
to the legislative and oversight duties that we have
responsibility to carry out. On our committee salaries account
for about 90 percent of the total committee budget. Decisions
on hiring have to be made very carefully to ensure compliance
with the overall salary budget.
For 2011, we fully expect to have unspent funds at the end
of the year, but that is attributable to the timing of the
hiring of both the majority and the minority. For example, if a
new staff member was added to the payroll on July 1, there is a
budget savings of 6 months of the salary for that year, but
they will, of course, earn the entire year's salary for the
ensuing year. This results in a saving at the end of 2011, but
that will not occur in 2012.
You have also asked that we discuss the impact of the
possible 6.4 percent reduction in the committee budget for
2012. This obviously was not anticipated at the beginning of
this year and would have impacts on the committee's operation.
As I previously stated, 90 percent of the committee's budget is
for salary, and we feel the greatest pressure of the 6.4
percent reduction on our ability to hire and retain necessary
staff. I have asked our committee's nonpartisan administrative
staff to review how much savings could be found in each
nonsalary budget category, though it would not be possible to
implement a 6.4 percent reduction in the committee's budget
from just the 10 percent of the budget that is nonsalary.
Now, to be clear, if the 6.4 percent reduction were to
occur, we would find a way to implement it in a way that best
maintains the committee's ability to fully and effectively
function. In these tough economic times when we need to reduce
Federal spending, Congress must do its part. However, it is
important to maintain the ability of Congress to effectively
conduct oversight of the spending and activities of the various
Federal agencies and departments.
Not many people realize that our committee oversees the
greatest source of revenue to the Federal Government after the
Federal income tax, and that revenue is offshore and onshore
energy leasing. Tens of billions of dollars every year are
generated and collected by the agencies under our jurisdiction.
Our committee budget and the staff is tiny compared to the
billions of dollars spent and generated by, and the tens of
thousands employed by, those agencies that we are charged with
overseeing. There is a point at which budget reductions cross
from belt-tightening to having an impact on our core oversight
functions. While it is my hope that a possible 6.4 percent
reduction could be absorbed without unduly impacting our core
duties, a reduction beyond 2012 would certainly raise some
serious concerns.
I know that this committee is also concerned about how we
share resources at the Natural Resources Committee. That is
covered in detail in my full statement, but in short we operate
on a two-thirds, one-third budget for salary and staff
positions. The remainder of the budget is shared openly between
the majority and the minority.
Thank you very much for the invitation to appear before
you, and I will be happy to answer any questions you may have.
[The statement of Mr. Hastings follows:]

The Chairman. Mr. Markey.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. EDWARD J. MARKEY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS, RANKING MEMBER,
COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

Mr. Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Brady, members of
the committee.
The Chairman. Did you notice the BC game this year? Oh, I
am sorry.
Mr. Markey. Notre Dame's superiority is a lifelong
condition I have had to live with.
As Chairman Hastings has noted in his testimony, when we
appeared in March, we presented a budget for the committee's
operations that represented a 5 percent decrease in the budget
for the committee. We have held that we would be able to carry
out the committee's work at this funding level by making cuts
in our budget for field hearings and related travel.
The 6.4 percent reduction poses a real challenge to us.
While we do expect to have some unspent funds at the end of
this year, as Chairman Hastings has pointed out in his
testimony, this is largely due to the fact that both of us had
to hire significant numbers of new staff. When Nick Rahall left
for the Transportation Committee, he took a huge percentage of
the staff with him, and many others retired, so I have had to
spend the year rebuilding that staff. In Chairman Hastings'
case, that was due to the transition from minority to majority,
and the same thing is true for me, taking over for Nick.
I am nearing the completion of that hiring process; so is
Chairman Hastings. And we expect our staff budget for next year
to be much higher than this year's budget within the context of
the spending constraints that this committee has imposed upon
us.
Further cuts in the committee's budget could, as Chairman
Hastings has noted, seriously impair our ability to hire and
retain the skilled professional staff we need to support our
legislative and oversight activities. It would certainly make
it difficult, if not impossible, for the committee to conduct
field hearings in the many areas of the country that are
directly affected by the laws and regulations within our
jurisdiction.
Such cuts also could adversely affect our ability to
efficiently process legislation referred to the committee, much
of which is not controversial, in response to real local needs
and concerns, such as the settlement of Native American land or
water claims; adjustment to borders of public lands; or the
protection of the historical, cultural, and natural resources
of the Nation.
Demand among our colleagues for approval of legislation
within the jurisdiction of the Natural Resources Committee
remains exceedingly high, and the committee has a proven track
record of efficient bipartisan consideration of these measures.
To date, the committee currently has reported or ordered 76
bills, 16 of which have already passed the House. This
represents the most reported bills of any committee other than
the Committee on Rules. About half of these measures have
bipartisan support, and each and every one of them has been
subject to a committee hearing, to the credit of the chairman.
In fact, our committee has already held more than 100
legislative or oversight hearings this year, in the first year;
100 hearings so far this year. And I would suggest that to the
extent to which committee activities should meet the needs of
Members and demonstrates that bipartisan cooperation, this
record shows the Natural Resources Committee has an excellent
record and really is a peer for any committee in Congress.
We have significant differences, obviously, on many issues;
but at the same time we work together cooperatively on the
oversight and legislative activity.
And with respect to the allocation of funds within the
committee, Chairman Hastings has, consistent with prior
practice of the committee, allocated one-third of the personnel
and salary budget to the minority. We have continued that
longstanding practice of the committee to employ nonpartisan
shared staff responsible for many of the financial management,
administrative, and support functions out of the two-thirds
share for the majority. Thus far we think this arrangement has
been very fair to both the majority and the minority.
Again, I thank the committee for all of your work, and we
appreciate the attention you are giving to our request.
The Chairman. Thank you very much for your testimony.
[The statement of Mr. Markey follows:]

The Chairman. I just have a general question. What would be
the impact of a 6.4 percent cut on your ability to do
oversight? And how broad a range of oversight do you have
jurisdiction over, which entity?
Mr. Hastings. Well, just to give you an example, I
mentioned that the second largest source of revenue to the
Federal Government comes from those areas over which we have
jurisdiction. We have 69 staff, and we have an oversight
responsibility for tens of thousands, within the Federal
Government, with a budget of well over $20 billion. So
oversight is important.
And I might add that--and I think I might have said this
when I was here the first time--that we need more oversight. I
am not saying that just because, I am a Republican and the
administration is Democrat. I think that we have been negligent
for some time, quite frankly, in the time that I have been in
Congress, for proper oversight. And clearly we set the agenda
for oversight, but that always illuminates something. I think
both sides win, but, more importantly, the American people win.
We think that we can do that with the constraints of the
6.4 percent decrease. We are planning to do that. But clearly
in the long run, if we are going to be more aggressive in
oversight, because, as you know, when you have oversight, you
turn up something, and you want to follow it down a line, you
simply have to have the resources to do so. But we can live
within those constraints, but I think in the long term it
raises serious concerns.
The Chairman. Let me ask you this: The second largest
committee by staff is the, quote/unquote, oversight government
ops committee. It does a lot of oversight. How would you answer
a constituent who said to you, why do you folks have to do
oversight? You have got an oversight committee that has got
more staff than anybody else. Can't they fill in the blanks
where you folks miss it?
Mr. Hastings. Well, we set policy, too. The Oversight
Committee does the oversight, and they may find something that
needs to be corrected, but it is up to the authorizing
committee to do that. But I think on a regular basis--and I
would expect that Oversight Committee to probably look at
something that may be more egregious. I mean, they look at
things. As I mentioned, the revenue coming into our committee.
Are we getting all of that revenue? Is there waste someplace
involved? That is the sort of stuff that we need to look at. I
fully recognize we set the policy, and the executive branch
carries it out, but I fully recognize that we have to make sure
that they do that in a proper way.
I think it is just a division of power. If there is
something that has to be done legislatively, whether that
committee finds it or our committee finds it, it still comes
through the authorizing committee, and it is our
responsibility.
Mr. Markey. I would just give one example. We had the worst
oil spill in world history last year, and it was on public
lands in the jurisdiction of our committee in the Gulf of
Mexico. As a result, the entire agency has been reorganized.
But there are still oversight questions in terms of how much of
the pollution has been cleaned up, how it affects the
fishermen, how it affects the workers on all of the land-based
industries down there. And while there is an oversight
committee, there is no way they can do the work this committee
does on an ongoing basis.
That is just one issue on the 20 percent of the land and
the oceans of the United States that we have jurisdiction over,
but that alone is a huge responsibility that the Oversight
Committee just could not discharge with the level of expertise
and accountability that this committee can extract from the
Department of Interior and all other entities affected by that
catastrophe.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Ranking Member.
Mr. Brady. Yes, Mr. Chairman, thank you.
I know you talked about hiring somebody 6 months into the
year. Fast forward up to the second session. Would we have to
lay anybody off with the 6.4 percent budget cut?
Mr. Hastings. We don't anticipate that, no.
Mr. Brady. Does the minority anticipate that?
Mr. Markey. No. I agree with the chairman.
Mr. Brady. Thank you. That is all I have.
The Chairman. Mr. Harper.
Mr. Harper. No questions, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Gingrey.
Mr. Gingrey. I have no questions, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. I now recognize Mr. Nugent in the far right
corner.
Mr. Nugent. No questions.
The Chairman. You did such a fantastic job, or maybe it is
just because you are the last of all the committees, and we are
tired.
Mr. Hastings. I will think it is the latter rather than the
former.
The Chairman. We appreciate your testimony and appreciate
your work. Thank you very much.
Mr. Markey. We appreciate your work. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
The Chairman. The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:28 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

