- MODERNIZING INFORMATION DELIVERY IN THE HOUSE

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MODERNIZING INFORMATION DELIVERY IN THE HOUSE

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

of the

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Held in Washington, DC, June 16, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on House Administration

Available on the Internet:
http://www.gpoaccess.gov/congress/house/administration/index.html

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
67-667                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION

DANIEL E. LUNGREN, California, Chairman
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania,
PHIL GINGREY, M.D., Georgia            Ranking Minority Member
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               ZOE LOFGREN, California
TODD ROKITA, Indiana                 CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
RICHARD B. NUGENT, Florida

Professional Staff

Philip Kiko, Staff Director and General Counsel
Jamie Fleet, Minority Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Oversight

PHIL GINGREY, M.D., Georgia, Chairman
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               ZOE LOFGREN, California
RICHARD B. NUGENT, Florida           CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
TODD ROKITA, Indiana

MODERNIZING INFORMATION DELIVERY IN THE HOUSE

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 16, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight,
Committee on House Administration,
Washington, DC
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:07 a.m., in
room 1310, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Phil Gingrey
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Gingrey, Nugent, and Lofgren.
Staff Present: Phil Kiko, Staff Director and General
Counsel; Peter Schalestock, Deputy General Counsel; Kimani
Little, Parliamentarian; Joe Wallace, Legislative Clerk; Yael
Barash, Assistant Legislative Clerk; Salley Wood,
Communications Director; Linda Ulrich, Director of Oversight;
Dominic Stoelli, Oversight Staff; Reynold Schweickhardt,
Oversight Staff; Jamie Fleet, Minority Staff Director; Kyle
Andersen, Minority Press Secretary; Matt Defreitas, Minority
Professional Staff; Khalil Abboud, Minority Elections Staff;
Thomas Hicks, Minority Elections Counsel; and Mike Harrison,
Minority Professional Staff.
Mr. Gingrey. I will now call to order the Committee on
House Administration Subcommittee on Oversight for today's
oversight hearing on modernizing information delivery in the
House. The hearing record will remain open for 5 legislative
days so that Members may submit any materials that they wish to
be included therein.
A quorum is present, so we may proceed.
Central and integral to our oversight responsibility is
ensuring efficiency and transparency in how we, the House,
create and disseminate legislative information. Today, we are
interested in learning from our witnesses about how we can
improve information delivery in the House, how we can improve
the way we create and distribute legislative documents, and how
we reduce costs and increase transparency.
I am eager to hear from our knowledgeable witnesses about
their experiences and, of course, recommendations as we seek to
improve both of these aspects: the creation and the delivery of
legislative information.
In today's environment, we have no choice but to cut long-
term costs, eliminate unnecessary printing, adapt to the
electronic delivery of information, and bring more
transparency, accessibility, and accuracy to the legislative
process.
We are approaching the 20th anniversary of the GPO
Electronic Information Access Enhancement Act of 1993, which
began the transition to electronically based legislative
information. Title 44, the statute governing our paper-based
requirements, has not been seriously and properly reformed and
updated in decades. Now is the time to reevaluate and revisit
these laws and bring our information delivery system into this
21st century.
We need to reevaluate what documents we need to maintain in
hard copy and which ones can be made solely available
electronically. For example, it is estimated that only 3
percent of introduced bills in the House ever become law.
However, the House spends $1.7 million annually printing all
introduced bills, every one of them. And while we know from our
last hearing, that for some publications approximately 70
percent of the costs are related to preproduction, perhaps it
is worth considering only printing bills that are reported by
committee or are actually going to be considered on the House
floor.
Finally, we should utilize our collective wisdom. During
the 112th Congress, both the Rules and the Natural Resources
Committees have been experimenting with cost-savings measures
in relation to markups and committee documents, respectively.
I would like to thank both Chairman Dreier and Chairman
Hastings for their submitted statements describing what they
have learned. I request unanimous consent that we include these
two statements in the record. Hearing no objection, so ordered.
Again, I look forward to hearing from our witnesses as we
continue to reduce government spending and increase efficiency
and transparency.
I would now like to recognize my colleagues, starting with
Congresswoman Lofgren, for the purpose of providing her opening
statement. I turn it over to Congresswoman Zoe Lofgren.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I
welcome today's hearing on modernizing information delivery in
the House of Representatives. As a Member representing Silicon
Valley, I know the importance that technology can have on
adding productivity and maximizing efficiency in the workplace.
As I was mentioning to my colleague Mr. Walden, I first
came here in the 1970s as a young staffer, and the House was
using typewriters and carbon paper at that time, and something
called a Robo Machine, which was a tape with little holes
punched in it. When I came back as a Member in 1995, not every
office had a computer, e-mail was in its infancy, most Members
did not have Web pages. Blackberrys, smart phones, a necessity
in today's work environment, weren't in wide use until after
2011.
Change sometimes comes slowly to a body that is based on
traditions and precedent. However, we have been embracing new
technology at an accelerated pace over the last 2 years,
particularly under the leadership of Representative Bob Brady,
the former chair of this committee, who I would like to single
out for tremendous credit for the leadership that he showed in
this area.
During the last Congress, the committee oversaw a number of
technology initiatives for the House. We redesigned the
house.gov Web site to make it easier for visitors to navigate.
We initiated HouseLive, a searchable video database of floor
proceedings. We started posting statements of disbursements
online, reducing the need for printed copies. We consolidated
individual servers in Member offices to centralize location,
reducing energy and resources required for computer operations,
and also increasing cybersecurity.
We increased Internet bandwidth for most district offices,
and installed a campus-wide wireless network. We started
supporting Apple products, including desktops, iPhones and
iPads, and we are testing Voice-over-Internet Protocol, known
as VoIP, a system for House implementation.
These improvements help Members and their staff work more
efficiently, but also provide the American people more access
to information on our branch of government.
One of the most important partners that Congress has in
terms of disseminating legislative information to the public is
the Government Printing Office. And just as Congress has
changed, adapted, integrated technology, so has the GPO. Going
back to my first time here as a staffer, the GPO is not the
same. When I started in the 1970s as a staffer, printing was an
important function of the GPO, but they had around 8,000
employees at that time. The GPO today is down to 2,200. They
have streamlined their workforce and are using technology.
Since the GPO has started making government documents available
online at gpo.gov, this has been one of the government's most
visited sites.
On the ink and paper side, 70 percent of the printing GPO
is responsible for is done by outside contractors. GPO's
printing procurement program continues to be one of the
government's longest-running partnerships with the private
sector, saving millions of taxpayers' dollars per year, and
creating jobs and tax revenues in States and localities
nationwide. Moving forward, I hope the GPO continues to be a
close partner with us in providing documents for the
legislative branch and the general public.
I think it is important to have this hearing because
although we have made tremendous progress, we always seek
further improvements. And I look forward to hearing from our
witnesses today, and yield back the balance of my time, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Gingrey. Thank you, Congresswoman Lofgren.
Does any other Member wish to be recognized for the purpose
of making an opening statement?
I would now like to introduce our first witness. The
Honorable Greg Walden represents the Second Congressional
District in the great State of Oregon. Elected in 1998, this is
Congressman Walden's seventh term in the U.S. House. A former
small business owner, he is chairman of the Energy and Commerce
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology, and has served
as chairman of the House Republican leadership since February
of 2010. He is also a deputy whip, and he chaired the majority
transition team for Speaker Boehner after the 2010 midterm
elections. In that role, Congressman Walden and his colleagues
analyzed House practices and procedures for ways to improve
efficiencies, increase the effectiveness of the House, and to
reduce costs to the taxpayer.
Congressman Walden has a bachelor of science degree from
the University of Oregon, and was a member of the Oregon State
House of Representatives from 1989 to 1995, and the Oregon
State Senate from 1995 to 1997.
On the first panel, our second witness is my colleague, our
colleague, the Honorable Michael Honda. Congressman Honda
represents the 15th Congressional District of California. He is
a member of the Appropriations Committee, a member of the
Budget Committee, a House Democratic senior whip, and cochair
of the Democratic Caucus's new media working group. Congressman
Honda has been a California State Assembly member, a Santa
Clara County Board supervisor, a San Jose planning
commissioner, a Peace Corps volunteer in El Salvador, and a
teacher, principal, and school board member. In 2000,
Congressman Honda was elected to the House, where he has served
ever since.
Ms. Lofgren. And if the gentleman would yield, Mr. Honda is
also my neighbor in Santa Clara County, and someone who I have
served with in local and Federal Government for 30 years.
Mr. Gingrey. Very happy to yield to the ranking member. And
that prompts me to say that Congressman Walden is my neighbor
on North Carolina Avenue here in Washington. I wish he would
keep his yard in a little bit better shape.
Finishing up with my introduction of Congressman Honda, he
earned a bachelor's degree in biological sciences and Spanish,
a master's degree in education from San Jose State University.
Congressmen, we both thank you for being here today. The
committee has received your written testimonies, and I will
recognize each of you for 5 minutes to present a summary of
your submissions. To help keep that time, we have a timing
device near the witness table. The device will emit a green
light for 4 minutes, and it will turn yellow when 1 minute
remains. And when the light turns red, it means your time has
expired. For my colleagues, the gavel will be quite soft.
Congressman Walden, we will start with you. Please proceed.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is an honor and
delight to be before your subcommittee here. I recognize you
and your ranking member, Ms. Lofgren. And Congressman Nugent,
always good to see you. I want to commend this committee, both
in its current configuration and in its prior iterations, for
the work it has continued to do in a bipartisan way to reform
how the House operates.
When Speaker-designee Boehner asked me to chair the
transition team, I approached it from the notion that it was
the people's House, the public's business, the taxpayers'
money, and they should have the right to watch and participate
in the process, and that we had an obligation to make sure that
their precious dollars were spent as efficiently and minimally
as possible.
We created a 22-member team, including four freshmen. I
reached out to Speaker Pelosi's office and asked them to
designate Representatives from the Democratic Caucus. And they,
fortunately, gave me two outstanding Members, Mr. Andrews and
Bob Brady from this committee. We solicited every Member in the
House, current, and their staff. I, like your colleague there,
Chairman, served on congressional staff in the 1980s. And while
I wasn't here to learn about the Robo-tape, when we got here I
was the recipient of the memory typewriter, though, because I
was press secretary. That meant I didn't have to retype the
Congressman's biography every time it needed to go out. I could
push a button. It was remarkable. But we still had typewriters.
And then I was here when we got our first XT IBM PC and had
to figure out that the floppy disk in the drive was the reason
you couldn't do anything because it would give you that error
message.
Anyway, you all understand that. We have come a long way,
is the long and short of it. And as we approached the
transition, I invited back people who had led transitions
before. Jim Nussle, who coordinated the 1994 transition. I
said, tell us lessons learned. What did you find? What did you
change? The same with Mike Capuano. I asked him to have lunch
with me. We had a delightful talk about things that worked,
things that didn't, and how we could continue to restore faith
and confidence in this institution and bring about efficiencies
and transparency.
I know Jim Nussle mentioned that in 1994 they were still
delivering ice to each office. Now, ice was a delivery that was
begun before refrigeration and only stopped in 1995. And it
saves taxpayers about a half a million dollars a year. So we
began to look for ice buckets of our own. What was working,
what wasn't? And in a bipartisan way, we decided the composting
attempt didn't work. And both parties agreed that the way it
was configured it was probably an idea ahead of its time and
not as efficient or cost savings as anticipated. So it went
away.
We also reduced our own budgets by 5 percent. We looked at
a number of other things that needed to be done. And then we
solicited the public. And I think your committee is the
beneficiary of over 2,000 responses we got. Some of them you
probably don't want to print publicly. But most of them were
very helpful.
And the staff I think really were helpful. My wife and I
were in small business for 22 years. And I always enjoyed
filling in on the vacation shifts at our radio stations because
I could really learn what our folks were dealing with firsthand
and then work to improve and gain efficiencies.
If you go in my chief of staff's office or in our back
legislative office in the Rayburn Building offices, you will
see upwards of 50 file cabinets. Those originated in the days
when you had typewriters and carbon paper and you filled files.
Today, we click a place on a piece of software and file a
document. So then that really leads us to how we can tighten
our belts here.
GPO received $147.46 million in 2010, with $93.7 million
appropriated for congressional printing and binding. I have
before me here some documents that I am not saying you get rid
of these, but let's talk about going forward, some make sense,
some may not.
We always continue to improve. These are the statements of
disbursements of the House. This is a set of documents that is
published quarterly and distributed. Does everybody need one?
Do we have to have them published? How big? How many? Every
Congress, they do a congressional directory. Now, that is a
pretty handy document. You may want to keep that in written
form. But in today's world with the changes that occur every
minute around here, maybe an electronic is actually more up to
date and better.
There are periodic publications. Very nicely bound
documents. This is Deschler-Brown-Johnson Precedents of the
U.S. House, volume 17, chapters 34 through 40. Now, I was up
last night going through chapter 17, but I am not sure
everybody does this. No, I am kidding. I don't know who reads
these other than the Parliamentarians and your colleague there.
But do you need the printed copies? I don't know.
The calendars are delivered every day to the House. This is
May and June piled here. A total of $2.3 million a year.
Congressional Record, which we all dutifully vote on almost
every day, $2.1 million, delivered to each House office when we
are in session. And then we send out an index every 2 weeks to
this directory. And I would wager there aren't many Members
that spend much time reading the hard-bound copies.
The Federal Register gets published every day that the
Federal Government is open. Is this the best form? Does it need
to be distributed as widely as it is?
I just think these are questions that we should ask. As the
chairman said, we spend $1.7 million each year on printing
bills that we introduce, only 3 percent of which ever become
law. Maybe we ought to print our own bills as needed, but not
have them printed fully.
I realize--I couldn't see the clock, Mr. Chairman--my time
has expired. I thank you for taking a look at these issues. I
encourage you and applaud your work, and look forward to doing
my part to be of assistance. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gingrey. Thank you, Congressman Walden.
And now we will turn to Congressman Honda for his
testimony.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. MICHAEL M. HONDA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Honda. Thank you. And good morning, Chairman Gingrey,
Ranking Member Lofgren, and Mr. Nugent, for allowing me and
asking me to testify today.
This hearing, Modernizing Information Delivery in the
House, is extremely broad because as Members we receive
information from many sources. This information is developed
within the House by the Clerk's organization, the committees,
and others, along with their Senate counterparts. Official
legislative information is prepared and disseminated mainly
through documents delivered in electronic and printed form by
the Government Printing Office.
Bills have been introduced that would cut back or eliminate
most congressional printing, which begs the question: Is
Congress ready to go paperless? While I wish the answer were
``yes,'' I am extremely doubtful that old ways can be changed
on a dime. And we saw with the recent autopen signature of a
bill by President Obama that not everyone is ready to bring our
legislative process into the current century.
We are also not a society that likes to read and analyze
everything digitally. We like to receive information digitally
and then print electronic documents in sometimes multiple
copies.
When it comes to GPO documents such as bills and reports,
it may be more expensive to eliminate GPO prints, leaving
offices with only electronic copies that are printed at a
higher rate. According to GPO, it costs taxpayers 7 cents for a
Member's office to print a single-sided document. GPO can copy
or print that same document for 5.5 cents. And if the GPO press
were being used, it would cost taxpayers about 1 cent.
Also these bills assert that they would save money, and the
estimates used are often inflated. During a recent hearing that
we held in the Legislative Branch Appropriations Subcommittee,
I was surprised to learn that according to GPO, approximately
68 percent of the costs producing the Congressional Record
would be incurred, whether multiple copies were printed or not.
This is the pre-press cost, which is used to create the
electronic file form, which they upload online and also print.
Again, 68 percent of the cost is incurred before the very first
copy is printed.
GPO has made progress in using technology to cut down the
amount of congressional records that it needs to print. When
GPO started offering online access in 1994, about 18,000 copies
of the Record were printed daily. Today, GPO prints 3,600
copies, about 900 of which are sent to local libraries and
reading rooms in communities across the country for our
constituents to access.
Now, GPO has surveyed the House and Senate for their
continued need for print copies of the Record, along with other
print documents like the Federal Register, the first survey of
its kind. For those offices that have told GPO they want to opt
out of the Record, they stopped those deliveries. The goal of
some of these bills, to decrease Congress' paper usage, is
laudable. I believe every Member can support moving towards a
more paperless Congress as technology allows. And I would join
my colleagues on both sides of the aisle in finding ways to
restructure our processes so that we can eventually get to a
point where less and less paper is needed for this body to
properly function.
However, we are just not there yet. For example, when a
Member submits a document to the body, whether it is a bill,
extension of remarks, or an amendment, he or she is required to
sign that document as verification for the Clerk that it is the
official document that Member intended to submit. And as an
individual, when I write a bill I like to see that in print,
too. There certainly is technology out there that would allow
Members to provide an electronic signature for these documents.
But to my knowledge, the House has no infrastructure in place
for using this technology.
Furthermore, any effort to modernize the House way of doing
business would also have to be joined by the Senate. It would
be impractical for the House to send the Senate digitally
signed copies of bills and for the Senate to still send us
paper copies.
Again, the goal of some of these bills, to decrease
Congress' paper usage, is credible; but we must caution
ourselves against imprudently going paperless without putting
the necessary infrastructure in place that would allow us to
reach those goals in a constructive way.
So as we explore ways to modernize congressional printing,
let's make sure that we somehow don't treat GPO as the villains
or deprive the agency of tools they need to support us in what
we do.
The men and women of GPO are truly our partners in the
legislative process. At this time, we could not function
without the Congressional Record every morning in both printed
and electronic form, and other congressional documents, too.
Those are the principal ways Members receive official
information for their work. And GPO assists us in our work.
Also, Members should know that GPO does not print anything that
is not required or requested by Congress.
The House Clerk, Senate Secretary, and the congressional
committees are the drivers of many of our GPO practices. If we
want to make it a priority to become a paperless Congress, then
we need to start in house, and GPO will follow whatever
business practice Congress wants. Just to put it succinctly,
GPO will do whatever they are directed by both the House of
Representatives and the Senate.
Again, I thank the subcommittee for inviting me to testify
today.
[The statement of Mr. Honda follows:]

Mr. Gingrey. I thank both witnesses for their testimony.
And Representative Honda, thank you for your comments in regard
to the laudability of our efforts in regard to what we are
trying to do here in this hearing, and, in particular, the last
paragraph of your printed statement in regard to GPO.
I agree with you that we should never try to villainize,
not certainly to do anything like that with the fine men and
women that work in the Government Printing Office. We are just
looking for their help, and you and Congressman Walden and the
second panel, to find ways to save money for the taxpayer. But
thank you so much, both of you, for your testimony.
We now have time for committee members to ask questions of
the witnesses. Each member is allotted 5 minutes of questioning
time. To help each member to track that time, we also will use
the timing device on the witness table. We will alternate back
and forth among the majority and minority.
I will recognize myself first, and then defer to the
ranking member, Ms. Lofgren.
It is my understanding that while traditionally when
Members of Congress testify before a committee or subcommittee,
we extend the courtesy to them of not grilling them with
questions. But it is my understanding that Congressman Walden
would be willing to take a question or two. So I will direct my
time to Congressman Walden and put the first question to him.
Congressman Walden, what publications do you think we could
publish only in electronic format? Are there some on the table
in front of you?
Mr. Walden. I would think, first of all, I would look at
the calendar, the House calendar, which the Clerk maintains all
the relevant data for the calendar and provides the electronic
feed to GPO. GPO then charges the House $2.3 million, I am
told, for the preparation and publication of the calendar. I
think it is something that could be posted electronically and
could save us money, and certainly probably in a more
searchable format than what we have here.
I was thinking, Mr. Chairman, searchable format means you
have to, you know, on a printed document look through it,
electronically just like that. And that would save us money. I
was also thinking, as I just sat here looking around me, and
having been a small business owner, the fact that we actually
have pads printed up to make notes on that somebody is paying
to put the ink on to say House of Representatives, Washington,
D.C. The napkin here, I would never preprint napkins for my
little company. I would have found--you know, these are very
nice, and I am not criticizing the committee, we all do this
around here. And I think we really need to just say when we are
borrowing 42 cents on the dollar, is this something you would
do if this was your money? So I would start with the calendars.
Mr. Gingrey. Congressman Honda.
Mr. Honda. I think that is a great question: What can be
done electronically only? Being a classroom teacher, and then
also coming from Silicon Valley, process is kind of an
important issue. And I would probably engage members of the
committees and also those who are in GPO to sit down and look
at the array of things that are done, and then ask ourselves,
and perhaps poll our own membership, as has been done in the
past, to find out that which can be done. I wouldn't mind
having certain things electronically printed, because then I
can enlarge the print.
Mr. Walden. I concur with his assessment.
Mr. Honda. And I think it is important to figure out which
ones do we contract out for printing and for less of a cost to
Congress, and that which is done commercially that may be sold
in our stores downstairs. So those categories would probably
have to be looked at, too. But I think it is a great question
because it really moves us towards becoming more refined in
some of the things that we are doing.
Mr. Gingrey. I thank both of you for your comments
regarding that question. We, by the way, will be hearing from
Silicon Valley in our next panel of witnesses.
Is it, Congressman Walden, is it just about saving money?
Mr. Walden. I don't think so, Mr. Chairman. It is about
saving money; I was intrigued to learn that 68 percent of the
costs of doing some of the printing, according to my colleague
here from GPO, is just the setup fees. And I thought to myself,
so the other part is 32 percent. That is a huge savings.
Now, you are not going to not print everything,
necessarily. But what if you were able to cut back your
printing 10 percent, 5 percent? These are the things you look
for in small business, things we always look for all the time.
And what we were doing is, is there a better way? Sometimes
that requires an up-front investment to get a longer-term rate
of return that saves you more. Sometimes it is just a matter of
changing practice. And I think we all are of a mind to embrace
this technology.
As chairman of the transition team, I was honored when Eric
Schmidt came to see me from Google to talk about just
brainstorming how we might use technology in our committee
sessions. And we got to talking about how markups occur. And he
said, What if your amendments popped up on a laptop, and in
real time as they are adopted, merged into the statute so you
could actually read the statute as it is being changed? He was
like, Well, this could be done. This is a software issue. This
could be managed.
And by the way, the entire world could watch this process,
and maybe help us be better legislators by weighing in as we
went along. Just as we now put all of these hearings up online
for the public to watch, it is their business and their money.
What if our markups actually were something more meaningful
than if you looked at these amendments where strike line 2, add
``the'' to line 7, delete paragraph 3, move section 7 up?
Nobody knows what that means. Wouldn't it be great if there
were a better way?
And I think the brilliant people behind us could give this
Congress some real help in how to improve that process. If we
each had our own laptops or whatever, and you all made progress
making Internet available around here, it could be a really
better legislative process.
Mr. Gingrey. Thank you. Congressman Honda.
Mr. Honda. Mr. Chairman, I think that is also a great
question about should everything be a cost consideration.
I think the other question would be cost benefits. And I
think that Congress and our government wants to be the
Nordstrom's of government, where the customer is always right,
and we like to deliver to our customers.
So I think the 18,000 copies that the GPO used to make,
reducing it down to 3,600, and 900 going out to the
communities, is something that we still need to keep an eye on,
making sure that the public has access to it, both printed and
electronically. But that that is available.
And then I think things like my colleague had mentioned,
real-time kinds of efforts. It wouldn't be a bad idea to have
an iPad during our committee hearings when we are looking at
amendments. Because I look at insert ``the,'' and I am thinking
what page? You are shifting through. I can do that with an
iPad.
Mr. Gingrey. I will just say this, and I know my time has
expired, and I want to yield to my colleague, Ms. Lofgren. But
as part of the rules package for the 112th Congress, we did
make that--change the rules to allow the iPads to be used on
the House floor.
Mr. Honda. Right.
Mr. Gingrey. I am not sure in regard to in committee, but I
see all my colleagues on both sides of the aisle looking at
them. So we must have approved it for committee use as well.
I will now yield to my colleague, Ms. Lofgren, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And respecting our
tradition of not grilling our colleagues as witnesses, I will
just maybe make a couple of comments and invite their
reflection.
I think Mr. Walden said something about the Senate. And in
fact, if the Senate doesn't join us in modernizing, the value
and cost savings are going to be more limited than they
otherwise would be. So actually, I am really focused on that,
and you mentioned it.
So I think in addition to reaching out to users, as Mr.
Honda has suggested, we really need to reach out also to the
United States Senate, that may be a little behind us in terms
of the embracing of technology.
The other thing I am thinking about--and would welcome your
comments--are really twofold. Most of the costs of the
printing, as Mr. Honda has mentioned, is in the preparation. So
that is going to be an expense whether there is a single thing
printed. And it is cheaper to print at the GPO than to print in
the offices. So anything that people are going to be printing
we ought to have printed and distributed.
The question is: How do we define what really isn't
necessary in terms of printing? And I think we need to reach
out beyond the House itself for some of those items. For
example, we have got repository libraries. And although we are
into, you know, real time, there are actually people around the
country that are looking at the real copies. And not everybody
in the world, I hate to say, is online. So we are going to have
to make a finding of what is going to have to be printed at
some point anyhow. And the extra copies are tiny compared to
the production of the first one. So it is really a process that
I am suggesting, rather than a conclusion that we need to go
through.
And the second issue has to do with retention and
cybersecurity. Mr. Walden and I were talking while we were
assembling, and he mentioned the old technology of a wire that
you could play music on. Now, the Library of Congress has that.
We think of digital as permanent, but it is only as permanent
as we have the programs to read them. And so that is something
that we are actually not addressing as a Nation, let alone as a
Congress. And it has important historical and archival
implications. And I think that is something we need to reach
out to the broader community about.
And then certainly I don't use the calendar very often.
That is the kind of document that I think probably could go
online, because it is real time. The archivists aren't looking
at it. The repository libraries maybe aren't--I don't know. We
should solicit input. But the opportunity to have a more user-
friendly markup and the like, and also to have that be
available online so that the public can see exactly what we are
doing as we are doing it, I think has tremendous potential and
would really be good for openness in our democratic system.
So any comment you have on those thoughts, and then I will
yield back.
Mr. Walden. If I might respond, I concur with your
statements both in terms of partnership we need to have with
the Senate as we move forward--or as you move forward on these
initiatives, or we do in the House. And also I think just the
notion of permanency and archival storage is really important
for historical purposes.
There are other things, though, that are changing in such
real time that technology is the better way to go. I was
thinking that as I was looking and mentioned this Congressional
Directory. People are changing jobs all the time. The directory
is printed once a year, is out of date before the ink is dry.
Now, is it handy to have a hard copy so you have a base number?
Yeah, but maybe you do that differently then.
I was also thinking, as I was looking at the Congressional
Record and the calendar, they don't even have the Web site
printed on the front. Now, you show me any other material in
the private sector that is trying to get you do something; I
will wager, whether it is the cover of a magazine or an
advertisement, they all have the Web site. Now, maybe it is on
here and I just missed it, but I don't see it on any of these
that direct you where to go to the Web site for the House to
find it. And if we are going to continue printing, at least we
ought to perhaps--and maybe, again, it is in here. It is not
obvious to me. So I think technology in some places is a better
fix, and in other places having a printed copy makes sense. And
that is what you all get the big bucks to sort out the
difference. So your surveys are going to be real important.
Mr. Gingrey. Representative Honda, do you have a comment?
Mr. Honda. Yes. It is an interesting dialogue, because I
think when we talk about Web sites, it should be obvious on
some of our documents. But I thought about our own Web sites
that we have individually, that we can also refer to documents
electronically to where our readers or our constituents,
whoever is tracking us, can be referred to also.
And in terms of real time, not only real time but access to
the information should be universal, and not only to the
interests of congressional Members. So those are the things.
And calendars, I too, don't use the calendar every day, but I
suspect that my staff does. So I have to sort of talk to them
before I make any firm comments. But I think that the process
will help us get to an answer. And I think one thing I learned
about in schools is I have to trust the process.
And then on the archival issues, I think that is important.
And it sort of reminded me of the near trauma that this country
went through when we got to Y2K and when we had looked at our
digital thing and said originally we could have done it in four
digits rather than two, and then when we got to Y2K we started
saying, oh, my God, what is embedded in there?
And so the congressional library serves a wonderful
function. I don't know if there is a congressional museum. But
there has got to be someplace where we can access processes
that were historical, but may be needed in the future so that
we can solve or anticipate problems in the future, too.
Mr. Gingrey. Thank you. Thank you, Congressman. I now yield
5 minutes to my colleague from Florida, Mr. Nugent.
Mr. Nugent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you very much
for this distinguished panel.
You know, as sheriff, we went digital. And there was a lot
of gnashing of teeth as to why it wouldn't work and why we need
to have copies, why we need to have paper. In the legal
department that I had that worked for me as sheriff, they would
buy the statute books. They looked really nice on the shelf.
But in actuality, the attorneys were utilizing the digital on a
CD that was a lot less expensive than the hard copies and much
more relevant because she could actually search. Like I said,
there was a gnashing of teeth as to why we have to do certain
things.
I am going to be interested to hear from the next panel
particularly about the archival process; you know, how do we
make sure that we have those documents available for public
scrutiny off into the future?
Obviously, on the transparency side I think we would all
agree that having the ability for the general public to look at
what we do on a regular basis. And I am intrigued by the
opportunity, possibly, to as it moves along in the process, to
see the actual markup change before your eyes. Because you are
right, I am sitting here reading it; I am going, I don't
understand what that means. You have any comments?
Mr. Walden. Yeah, I would. I serve on the Energy and
Commerce Committee, as does Mr. Gingrey. And I am amazed during
a markup; we sit and wait while the staff rushes around with
the--I don't know, somebody on your staff could probably tell
you--I think you have to make 50 or a hundred copies of every
amendment and submit it to the committee. Literally, they are
carting in these boxes of paper and trying to keep piles this
high so they can quickly distribute it to 50-plus Members. It
may be a two-line amendment that we have already voted on
before it is fully distributed because the Clerk has read it
and it is agreed to. And I assume all that paper gets recycled.
But you think of each of our offices and anybody that is
offering amendments, if that process alone were made electronic
for us, there would be enormous savings.
Now, the public may need to see copies, and maybe there is
another way to handle that. But for heaven's sakes, for the
committee members we ought to have a more simplified and
efficient system, because there often we wait while the clerks
literally run around and hand out the amendment. We are
debating it, and then it is agreed to or rejected because we
know what is coming in this process. Wouldn't it be great if it
popped up on your screen, you are able to see how it integrates
into the statute?
The Oregon legislature, oftentimes in committee we could
see how the statute was being amended. So you could actually
read the statute as you went. Now, I am not a lawyer, but you
could read the statute as it went, and then you could kind of
question, well, how does this read then if it says this here?
And you get a better understanding and better feel for it as
opposed to debating the concept.
We are into the weeds a little deeper. I don't know if that
addresses your question, but that is what we should look at
getting into.
Mr. Honda. That is a great question because in
Appropriations, you know, I will see--I will replace 100
million with 179 million. I want to know, is that good for me
or is that bad for me?
Mr. Nugent. Right.
Mr. Honda. And electronically, you can get that quickly. Or
if I have a question, you really need to get the answer
quickly, because the committee moves forward sometimes very
quickly, and you need to get a response to make the right
decision in voting.
But having said that, to put the master piece together, the
master copies together, whether it is electronic or not,
someone has to input all that first. And so if we save 32
percent and expend 68 percent on staffing at the committee
level, that is still a savings. But we still have to remember
that someone has got to put the initial input while we make
amendments on the bill.
But I think that there is always a way, if we look at it
and study it. So I think that this is a very good process that
we are going through.
As far as being a sheriff, when I did ride-alongs I had a
mountain area, and the sheriff's office--this is back in the
early 1990s--and the sheriff's office up in the hills, he had a
CB radio, a shortwave, and then cell phones. And he had two
cell phones because of the way communication was done. But with
the proper repeating stations and access to information at
headquarters, they can get their job done quickly, and either
act as a law enforcement agent or a counselor at the site.
So I think that it all has benefits. But I think we have to
look at, you know, what is the bottom line that we have to look
at, and then factor in the extra costs or how many jobs we will
be saving and things like that. So it is a worthwhile effort
that we are in.
Mr. Walden. Could I add one other thing? Because we are
focused on sort of calendars and Records and indexes and things
of the House. Let's not forget in many pieces of legislation we
demand of agencies that they report to the Congress. And until
that is removed, they report to Congress. And I know in the
past there have been efforts to look at whether those reports
are needed, how they are produced. Some of them used to be
really glossy, glitzy, expensive, four-color, slick paper.
And I think as a Congress, on a regular basis we should be
reviewing a compendium of the reports that we require and
asking ourselves, are they still necessary? Has the purpose
been served? And can we eliminate them?
Ms. Lofgren. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Gingrey. I yield to the gentlewoman.
Ms. Lofgren. Just a quick follow-up on that. That is a
really good opportunity for digital reporting. And sometimes a
picture----
Mr. Walden. There you go.
Ms. Lofgren [continuing]. Says more than 50 pages. But
digital photography is available. So I think that that is
something that we really ought to utilize the process to
expand. I thank the chairman.
Mr. Gingrey. That concludes our questioning for the first
panel. I would like to thank Congressman Walden, Congressman
Honda, for your generosity of your time and willingness to take
questions from the members of the subcommittee. And we thank
you for that.
We will now dismiss the first panel and ask the second
panel to come to the table to be seated.
Mr. Honda. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Honda. It has been enlightening to me. And I just want
to leave the last message that GPO will do what the House of
Representatives and the Senate together will be directing them.
Again, I thank you for this opportunity.
Mr. Walden. And I will try to get your lawn mowed again,
sir, soon.
Mr. Gingrey. Please do. Thank you, Congressmen.
I would like now to introduce our second panel of
witnesses. Mr. Thomas Bruce is the co-founder and director of
the Legal Information Institute, a research and publication
endeavor of the Cornell Law School. The Legal Information
Institute's mission is to facilitate public access to legal
information through the application of technical and editorial
innovation. The LII was the first legal information site on the
Web, offering Supreme Court opinions in 1992, and a full U.S.
Code in 1994. It developed the first XML version of the Code in
the year 2000--and for those that don't know, XML stands for
extensible markup language--and will this year release a full
edition of the Code of Federal Regulations developed in
collaboration with the Office of the Federal Register and the
United States Government Printing Office.
Mr. Bruce was educated at Yale College and the Yale School
of Drama, and has been, among many other honors, a senior
international fellow at the University of Melbourne School of
Law in Australia.
The second witness on the second panel is Mr. Kent
Cunningham. Mr. Cunningham is the chief technology officer for
the Microsoft Corporation. He has been in the field of
information and communication technologies for over 20 years,
and has worked directly with vendors and the standards bodies
through nearly every phase of the evolving communications
market. He is currently a business development manager for
Microsoft in the Applied Innovation Group. In this role, he is
responsible for defining go-to-market strategies and product
development roadmaps, as influenced by and tailored to meet
public sector customer needs.
Mr. Cunningham holds a bachelor of science in electrical
engineering and communications from ITT Technical College. He
has an MBA in business strategy and leadership from New York
Institute of Technology Old Westbury, and an MBA in business
strategy from Carnegie Mellon University.
Our last witness of the second panel is Mr. Morgan Reed.
Mr. Reed is the executive director at the Association for
Competitive Technology. ACT is an international grassroots
advocacy and education organization representing more than
3,000 small and mid-size IT firms from around the world. Mr.
Reed is a widely sought technology expert, with a background in
software development, having contributed to several open source
projects. He also specializes in issues relating to patents,
copyrights, and intellectual property in the digital age.
Mr. Reed studied political science at Arizona State
University. He did graduate research at the University of Utah
and in Taiwan.

STATEMENTS OF THOMAS BRUCE, RESEARCH ASSOCIATE AND DIRECTOR AT
LEGAL INFORMATION INSTITUTE, CORNELL LAW SCHOOL; KENT
CUNNINGHAM, CHIEF TECHNOLOGY ADVISOR, U.S. PUBLIC SECTOR,
MICROSOFT CORPORATION; AND MORGAN REED, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
ASSOCIATION FOR COMPETITIVE TECHNOLOGY

Mr. Gingrey. This panel has a wealth of knowledge and
experience, and we thank each of you for being here today. The
committee has received your written testimony. I will recognize
each of you for 5 minutes to present a summary of that
submission.
To help keep the time, as you heard with the first panel,
we have a timing device near the witness table. The device will
emit a green light for 4 minutes, and it will turn yellow when
1 minute remains. When the light turns red, it means your time
has expired.
We will start with the testimony of Mr. Bruce.

STATEMENT OF THOMAS BRUCE

Mr. Bruce. Thank you, Chairman Gingrey, Ranking Member
Lofgren, members of the committee. I would like to thank you
for inviting me to appear today and for giving such a nice
recitation of our corporate resume. I would add to that that we
continue to work with government on a number of projects,
including one currently with the Library of Congress to rethink
some of the model underpinnings of both the THOMAS and the LIS
systems.
Last year, our Web site served more than 14 million unique
individuals, with over 71 million page views of legal
information. Roughly 22 percent of our referred traffic comes
to us from government Web sites; notably, the IRS.
Speaker Boehner and Majority Leader Cantor have already
voiced support for new electronic data standards at the House,
including especially the creation of documents in open,
machine-readable format such as XML.
Today I would like to say a little about the implications
of that strategy, and sketch the shape and size of its
benefits. I would also urge you to consider some specific ways
to make it happen. The manner of its implementation will
strongly affect its usefulness to the Congress and to the
American people.
The use of open standards to create interoperable,
accessible legislative information creates four main benefits:
First, it can make the internal work of Congress faster and
easier. Many have spoken about that already.
Second, by reengineering the document lifecycle, it can
reduce the costs of congressional work.
Third, it can make the work of Congress easier to find and
understand. Now, usually when we talk about that kind of
threshold lowering, we talk about transparency. That is often a
code phrase for public accountability, which is certainly a
noble goal. But transparency has another meaning: opening
legislative data to questions asked for business and
professional purposes. For example, data about the legislative
activity that creates and surrounds the Tax Code is as much a
predictor for the business climate as the weather data provided
by NOAA is for the climate itself. And that predictive value is
used to plan business strategy and activities at all scale of
business. When primary legislative data meets this huge public
need, it stimulates and shapes business activity at all levels.
That in turn creates a marketplace for information products and
services where editorial and technical innovation can be
rewarded.
Finally, the use of open standards can help technical
communities inside and outside government to carry these three
aims further by making new products and services.
What is needed to make this happen? Well, first we need to
clean and open up the data. The data provided under any
modernization initiative should meet a short list of
requirements. It should be clean and consistent. It should be
compliant with open, well-documented standards such as XML. It
should be clear as to its authority. It should be available in
bulk through well-documented access methods and APIs. Most of
all, it should be timely.
Right now, if you are using the systems that government
provides to the public, it is very difficult even to work out
what the current state of the law is. This morning the LII's
U.S. Code updating feature shows that 988 changes have been
made to the Tax Code since the last electronic release of a
full title update by the Office of the Law Revision Counsel. It
can be as much as 18 months out of date, depending upon where
we are in the revision cycle, and what has happened in between,
and various other accidents of the calendar. We can reach these
goals by implementing standards and creating partnerships.
First, the House needs to create a model or models for
legislative data and metadata, one that embraces the entire
legislative lifecycle. That effort can usefully draw on several
similar undertakings now underway. It needs to be aimed at both
the modernization of systems and work flows inside the House,
and at the free provision of high-quality, open, interoperable
bulk data to outside innovators and markets.
The specifications for that project might best be created
by an advisory group drawn from government, the technology and
legal publishing sectors, and the legal information science and
engineering community.
The second need is for an appropriate framework in which to
foster public-private partnerships designed to make use of such
data. Remarkable things are possible when data is carefully
leveraged to promote both efficiencies and services through
collaboration between inside and outside stakeholders.
Collaborative projects make the most sense when they are aimed
at particular constituencies affected by defined categories of
legislation. That implies that the best results will be
achieved by chartering multiple small projects based upon
public-private partnerships. Development of a suitable
framework for chartering such projects will be critical.
I thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I
look forward to your questions.
Mr. Gingrey. Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Bruce follows:]

Mr. Gingrey. We now go to Mr. Cunningham.

STATEMENT OF KENT CUNNINGHAM

Mr. Cunningham. Chairman Gingrey, Ranking Member Lofgren,
and members of the subcommittee, my name is Kent Cunningham. I
am the chief technology officer for Microsoft's Federal
Civilian and Healthcare Group.
I appreciate today's opportunity to share Microsoft's views
on how the House can modernize information delivery, improve
productivity, and reduce paper throughout the legislative
process.
The first thing that I would like to openly acknowledge is
that technology does not solve problems. People and processes
solve problems. And before any workplace can become truly
productive, we have to engage the right people and craft the
optimal processes which we will utilize to reach our collective
goals.
During this past year, I have responded to countless
government RFPs, edited numerous public documents for
Microsoft, and most recently collaborated to produce my first
House testimony, all without highlighting, retyping, or even
printing a single document until this one that I hold in my
hand today.
Perhaps of additional interest is that, thanks to the
technology advancements which I will share with you today, I
have also been able do all of this while living in Nashville,
Tennessee, working almost exclusively remotely from Microsoft's
headquarters and my geographically dispersed teammates.
Through the use of centralized collaboration platforms, my
co-workers, partners, and I routinely collaborate to create
confidential documentation from different corners of the
country, all while working simultaneously from various devices,
operating systems, and platforms.
I firmly believe that the House can also achieve great
productivity gains through the use of these tools, while
reducing costs and ensuring confidentiality. As we all know,
the House is inherently a collaborative body. Collaboration,
relationships in the House often evolve based on particular
interests or issues. This means that who you work with on one
project may very well not be who you are working with on
another project. And this is why confidentiality and access
controls must be integral components of any system that the
House adopts. Today's collaboration platforms can easily
accommodate these scenarios.
And in the next few moments, I would like to highlight four
specific ways in which the House could benefit from a more
modern and collaborative IT environment.
First, the House could quickly expand upon its existing IT
systems by providing unified access to real-time collaboration
mechanisms such as user presence, instant messaging, and even
real-time voice and video conferencing for the House Members
and staff. These tools deliver the capabilities to quickly
determine who is available for an immediate conversation and
what might be the best way to engage them for a given scenario.
Second, the House could deploy technology to improve the
creation and sharing of digital information. Web-based document
co-authoring could be utilized to develop and refine
legislation across multiple authors, offices, and computing
platforms in real time. If this information were then
downloaded and shared electronically via e-mail, permissions
can be assigned to the document itself which controls who can
view, edit, or modify the content, or even who can copy it,
paste it, and forward it to others.
Third, the House could implement enhanced search features
to enable faster access to more contextual decision-making. For
example, the House directory could be published in a searchable
electronic format which makes it easy to discover which offices
and individuals are working on a particular issue, or find
someone who has expertise on a particular topic, or even
perhaps build a mailing list of all LAs who cover a particular
issue for Members of a State delegation, committee, or party.
Finally, the House could increase productivity by
empowering people to work effectively regardless of where they
are, whether they are in the office or on the go. In fact, many
Members of the House are commonly adopting a broad range of
exciting new devices and applications to connect with each
other already.
However, many of these tools were designed primarily to
meet the day-to-day needs of consumers, and not the special
needs of a government institution, where security, reliability,
and trust are paramount. As the House considers how to best
modernize its IT system, it should keep in mind three important
challenges.
First is security. The House routinely deals with sensitive
or confidential information that must remain protected and
secure.
Second is document fidelity. Unless the electronic system
can ensure document fidelity, information or features that are
embedded within the document could be lost while documents
traverse various files and platforms. For example, imagine if a
watermark, including the information that named a document as
confidential, were lost in this process.
Third is interoperability. For the House to obtain full
value from its information technology investments, the various
applications, devices, and platforms used by Members must be
able to access and utilize this information easily.
In conclusion, I am happy to report that the House has
already laid the foundation for this framework with many of its
existing infrastructure investments. My written testimony
details specific measures that the House is well positioned to
implement over the next 18 months. These include Web-enabled
document collaboration; shared online work spaces; an
electronic directory; presence features to enable real-time
instant messaging, video chat, application sharing, and even
group teleconferencing; and finally, federation for agency
communications.
Again, on behalf of Microsoft, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today. I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Gingrey. Thank you, Mr. Cunningham.
[The statement of Mr. Cunningham follows:]

Mr. Gingrey. We will now call on Mr. Reed for his
testimony.

STATEMENT OF MORGAN REED

Mr. Reed. I am going to make sure I eat my own dog food
here. I am using a nonpaper version today.
Chairman Gingrey, Ranking Member Lofgren, and distinguished
members of the committee, I am the executive director of the
Association for Competitive Technology, or ACT, and we are an
advocacy and education organization for people who write
software programs, we refer to them as application developers,
and providers of information technology services. We represent
over 3,000 small- and mid-sized IT firms throughout the world,
and advocate for public policies that help our members leverage
their intellectual assets, raise capital, create jobs, and
innovate.
In discussing this hearing with committee staff, the
question was posed whether the House could conduct official
business, especially hearings, using modern technology rather
than the traditional binder, folder, or sheaf of looseleaf
paper. Could committee members use a Windows tablet, an iPad or
a Kindle during a markup or a hearing in the absence of paper?
The answer is, of course. But this isn't really the whole
question.
Instead, the larger question to answer is how can the House
use technology that is transformative to the way that Members
of Congress do the work of representing their constituents? And
``transformative'' may seem like a broad term, but we witnessed
two different transformative events in the last 13 to 15 years.
The Blackberry. Every Member of Congress' thumbs is a powerful
part of their hand now, and the Internet itself.
So rather than spend 5 minutes of my time on acronyms and
statistics, I thought I would look at a couple day-in-the-life
examples of a Member of Congress. So let's look at the typical
Thursday afternoon after last votes. Members are hurrying to
the airport, staff has prepared documents for them, and they
hand them on their way to the airport something that might look
like that. Now, of course every Member of Congress would rather
not get on the airplane with this, and rather have a device,
say this thick, to go with them. But just translating paper
into electronic form isn't really transformative, other than to
your chiropractic bill.
But you know what is transformative is, let's say in here
is a GAO report that you wanted to take a look at on the plane
flight home. Instead of looking at it here, you open it up in
an app. Let's look at one called iAnnotate. It is a PDF. You
open it up. And instead of just reading it and trying to type
notes in your Blackberry while you read it on your electronic
device balanced in your coach seat, you actually can edit it
with your fingertip right as you travel. You know, you see a
question here in the report, so you highlight it with your
finger. And you know, you are not sure where this goes, so you
send a note and you mark it red so that Ted, your legislative
director, can see it when it gets back to the office. And you
know, you have got some graphics and notes that you think you
should do when the next report comes out. And the beauty of
this is when you land, this copy, this container of this
information, is automatically synched up with your office back
in the district. And so Ted, your LD, can look at all the
questions in red and answer them in blue so that when you open
this document up again, you can not only see the questions you
asked, you can see the answers.
Let's look at another one, the hearing. We all know that in
front of you is folders and looseleaf binders and information
that has been put in place. But we also know what happens when
a vote happens. Let's say you are in another committee and
there is a markup. Well, it would be really nice for you to go
to that next markup and still keep track of what is going on in
the hearing you just left.
Well, with TVEyes, for example, which is not even an app--
this is a Web-based program that runs on Windows tablets and
iPhones and even Blackberry devices--you can see what is going
on and have an actual video image of what is going on in the
hearing.
But you know, that probably bothers your colleagues. So
instead, real-time transcript. You know, maybe this witness,
maybe he said something you weren't sure about, and you want to
ask him a follow-up question. Highlight it with your finger,
click e-mail and transcript, and the staff who is still in the
committee hearing can see the question you asked. And when you
show back up, you have got a follow-up question ready, with the
supporting documentation attached.
This is happening now. This can be done. But I think it is
very critical to look at what my colleague here, Mr.
Cunningham, has talked about, which is the ability to provide
all of this information with an infrastructure that is
enterprise-ready and secure.
Because I will give you another example. Let's step it up a
game. Let's say that Member on the Thursday trip that you went
back for the district work period, your first stop was actually
at an event for your constituents. And there are five members
that are going to be there, five people from your district who
are going to be there, that have had contact with your district
office. Imagine if you can walk in, know who they are, know who
talked to them in your office, the status of their request, and
change from those times when you have always had to say, ``We
will get back to you'' to saying, ``We are here for you now.''
I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Gingrey. Thank you, Mr. Reed.
[The statement of Mr. Reed follows:]

Mr. Gingrey. And I thank all three of the witnesses. We now
have time for committee members to ask questions of the three
witnesses. Each member is allotted 5 minutes to question you.
We help each member to track the time as well, where we use the
timing device on the witness table. We will alternate back and
forth between the majority and the minority. And I will begin
by recognizing myself for 5 minutes.
I am going to direct my first question to Mr. Bruce. I will
ask each of you a question. Try to keep your answers brief, I
have only got 5 minutes, because I have one last question that
I would like to maybe get a comment from all three of you.
First question, Mr. Bruce. Give one example of how
technology can increase practical transparency. That is not a
trick question. You might refer to Mr. Reed's posters. But in
regard to this idea of improving our technology and going
digital just as practically as we can, transparency of course
is a huge goal, as you know. And we are always looking for an
opportunity to make sure that things are transparent in a
bipartisan way and for our constituents. So that is why I asked
that question.
You know, let me move to this. In your testimony you talk
about how the Congressional Record Daily Digest is sometimes
too detailed, and other times not detailed enough. How could
users get just the right amount of information?
Mr. Bruce. Okay. Well, if we reconceived the Congressional
Daily Digest as a document that is linked out to other
information rather than existing in itself, it could be in its
root form, the form that is transmitted to you, a much more
compacted document, from which you could then click through to
detail on any matter--voting, for example--for which you wanted
detail, rather than having to read through it page by page. The
idea is to create summaries that are linked out to broader
bases of data that are of interest to the user. And you can
only obviously do that in digital form.
If you have ever worked with newspaper reporters, you know
they use AP pyramidal style. This is AP pyramidal style created
electronically. You start with the small lead and link out to
greater and greater levels of detail as the user requires.
Mr. Gingrey. Thank you.
Mr. Cunningham, we all read about hackers and data being
compromised. What is Microsoft--what is your company doing to
make information more secure?
Mr. Cunningham. Well, sir, first the foundational
component, Mr. Chairman, to any collaboration environment is a
shared work space. And those shared work spaces must have
controls placed upon them to provide access to the people--for
the people to have access to those documents, the people that
are working with you on any specific project. The controls are
placed into the system to give us capabilities to determine who
has accessed the document, who has modified what documents.
Interestingly, we are in a similar business, in that we are
in the intellectual property business. So these controls are
very important to us as well. And at the same time, we use a
technology called information rights management, which then
says if I distribute that electronically via e-mail, I have
controls available that restrict who can open the e-mail, who
can forward the e-mail, who can edit that, who can forward that
on to others.
So from every step, the security actually is part of the
document, part of the content itself, where we are validating
who accesses it, the network style they are accessing it
across, and what they are trying to do with that content.
Mr. Gingrey. Thank you, Mr. Cunningham.
Mr. Reed, this is a similar question, but more pertaining
to your testimony in regard to mobile devices. And by the way,
I think the last thing you mentioned, I don't know if I can
hold this up and show you, but we can actually look at this
monitor and tell whether or not you shaved this morning. We
also can follow our other committees. And that is a very good
point that you brought up.
But my question is security is, of course, a hugely
important issue. Mr. Cunningham touched on that. How can data
on these mobile applications be protected?
Mr. Reed. Well, I actually think that part of it is
understanding how our mobile devices actually work with the
kind of enterprise-grade infrastructure that Mr. Cunningham's
company is creating. We actually rely on them to provide a lot
of the backbone infrastructure for how we then contact a
product that the House has created. We tie into it, we make a
request for the information, and that information is given to
us and is securitized by the House and its enterprise-grade
infrastructure, given to us. We then display it. And the real
question is to make sure that our mobile devices don't create
new kinds of information silos.
So it will be very critical that as the House decides on
rules, how my mobile devices might interact with your
enterprise infrastructure, that you establish good rules for
our behavior as well as for the behavior of the enterprise-
grade stuff on the back end.
So I think that the first answer to the question is you
start with security by design and that you recognize that
although Congressman Walden's point about small business
behavior was critical, that the House is at the enterprise
level, and not strictly like a small business with only eight
employees, and that we need to respect that and build with that
in mind.
Mr. Gingrey. I see my time has expired, so I won't ask that
last question of all three of you. I will go ahead and defer to
my colleague from California, Ms. Lofgren, for her 5 minutes of
questioning.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I will be
relatively quick. I know votes are coming up soon. I think this
testimony has been very helpful. And I do appreciate each of
the witnesses as well as our colleagues who preceded you.
Listening to you and Mr. Reed, it was so fun to look at
your exhibits, and I think we all want them. I am mindful that
Members of Congress are elected by their constituents for a lot
of reasons, and rarely is it because of their capacity to be
technically proficient. So we are going to be able to move
forward as an institution only so far as we can move our
colleagues along. And I know, I am not going to mention any
names, some of our colleagues who are quite intimidated by
technology. I would say it is a minority at this point, but
they have just as much right as those of us who like technology
to participate in the legislative process.
So a component of this has to be dealing with the people
themselves. And if we can't get people to use it, we are not
going to be able to move there. I just think it is important,
before our colleagues start talking to us about this, that we
say that and we understand and know that.
That goes also to some extent for the population itself. I
mean about a quarter of the American population does not
currently have adequate access to the Internet. And they have
just as much right as Americans to know about what is going on
in their government as the people who do have access to the
Internet.
Now, we are making big strides, and we want to deploy
broadband, and certainly rural areas are most disadvantaged,
but there are inner-city areas as well, but I am mindful that
that element of our society needs to be included.
As we move forward, I am thinking about not just those
issues, but also some principles that need to be adopted. We
need to have open source. We need to have interoperable. We
need to have security. And understanding the security most--I
don't want to say that--what can we say that are not
classified? People are our weak link in cybersecurity. That
goes back to my initial statement, which is not every Member or
staffer is necessarily understanding the systems that they are
using. And that poses challenges to our cybersecurity
environment.
So I am wondering in view of your testimony, which is
really welcome, to aggressively move forward, how do you
incorporate these issues that I have just outlined? Or do you
think I have got them wrong?
Mr. Bruce. If I may, I think that the digital divide
problem that you are mentioning, first of all, the 23 percent
number that you mentioned is heavily skewed, as we know, both
toward the elderly and toward lower-income households. And it
may well be that the information needs of those people and
those households are equally definable.
It seems that that might separate out into two different
classes of problem. One are areas where as a matter of public
policy we want to have some sort of universal service mandate,
things that we want to just make generally available to people
probably through intermediaries.
Then there is also the need for targeted programs that gets
specific kind of information to specific populations that may
be Internet-disadvantaged. Public libraries do a great deal
along those lines.
Now, what doesn't make a whole lot of sense to me is to
imagine that the minimal number of printed copies that we are
now requiring to be generated as a statutory matter are going
to reach a population of 300 million people. I don't think they
do. But as long as we have digital information available, there
is the possibility of localized print on demand, which I think
holds a lot of promise for the sorts of problems you are
discussing.
Mr. Cunningham. Ms. Lofgren, if I could add as well, I
spent several years as a technical trainer myself. And when you
work for a company such as Microsoft, you quickly learn how
many of your friends are a little bit technically adept as
well, and family members, and those who are not.
One of the things that we have learned is that versus
presenting people with countless interfaces and applications,
if you can create some fashion of a standard tool, a standard
platform, a standard interface using these open standards that
you mentioned, but not present them with a different interface
and a different tool every time they need information to do
their job, they will proceed much faster.
The last thing I would like to mention is we certainly
participate and collaborate and leverage a lot of open source
at Microsoft as well. But I would like to mention and just toss
out that you can certainly be open source but be closed
platform. And that is certainly not what we want.
Interoperability is key to success in this model.
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Reed, did you want to comment quickly,
please?
Mr. Reed. Just quickly, I would say that in my written
testimony I talk about equity by design. And I think that
addresses what the Congressman has gone to. And I want to echo
what Mr. Cunningham said. I think that the design should be
goals-based rather than technology-based. And this is for terms
like ``open source,'' which has a broad meaning.
Last but not least, I say that we have to remember that
what I am doing here and what our folks are doing here is the
tail, and not the dog. So we need to remember that the tail
can't wag the dog here, the business of the House needs to be
the first and primary focus, and that we will provide that
which makes it better.
Mr. Gingrey. Thank you. And now we will turn to Mr. Nugent
for his questions.
Mr. Nugent. Mr. Cunningham, one of the questions, in
particularly some of the districts that do not have broadband
availability, how would we operate within that confine?
Mr. Cunningham. For those who do not have broadband that
are within the House themselves, but have access to the
infrastructure while they are here--I heard earlier about a
wireless network--there are tools which will give you the
capability to provide real-time synchronization of documents
and applications while you are here within the facility, even
if you don't know you need that document. Maybe you are working
on three projects, you are on multiple committees; all of that
information would be updated on your device before you go back
to the rural suburbs where I live, for example, and maybe don't
have that type of access. So the information would be there
when you want it on that device. And it can actually be very
slowly streamed in the background from the device.
If you do go back to your house, your location, and then
need to access or even update a very large document, that can
be done as a background process while you are still continuing
to use your computer for other tools.
Mr. Nugent. To Mr. Reed, every day I receive a stack of
correspondence that I have to read and then also change. The
staff writes a response, and then I will change it. So I was
quite intrigued by the iAnnotate ability, particularly if I had
an iPad, which I don't. I think you heard that, right? Because
it was always a question. You know, when you have that hard
copy, I can sit there and scratch through it, make a note. And
I was unaware of iAnnotate. Is that commercially available? I
mean is that a----
Mr. Reed. Yes. In fact, not to plug one specific product,
because we have got a lot of folks who do similar stuff, but
iAnnotate is actually a product that has been customized for
some city councils and some locations for exactly this purpose.
I mean, it obviously relies on the ability to securitize the
data on the back end. But as far as your ability to do exactly
what I showed you, I am happy to come into your office and give
you a demo, because it is pretty cool stuff.
Mr. Cunningham. Can I touch on that one just for a second,
sir?
Mr. Nugent. Yes.
Mr. Cunningham. Very similar controls also exist natively
in the Microsoft Word products, to be able to annotate, do the
yellow markup and the red markup, as was mentioned earlier; be
able to determine who is simultaneously editing a document;
look to see who those editors are; read all the revisions.
So there are also in many cases, as have been discussed
here today, opportunities to leverage tools which the House
already has and already has deployed to do these types of
things.
Mr. Nugent. As the ranking member had mentioned before, we
all have different skills when it comes to technology. The more
complicated, it won't be used. If it is simple for somebody
like me to utilize it, then it is more likely to be utilized.
But if it is complicated, it just makes it much more difficult.
So the seamlessness of it obviously is hugely important to the
end user.
I know one issue on security, I am still--I am always
concerned about security and how do we utilize that to make
sure that the documents that we are working on do not get
corrupted? And how do we know at the end of the day--I know
watermarks--how do we know at the end of the day that is the
correct document that we worked on? I mean what are the
security features?
Mr. Cunningham. So there are absolutely--there are
versioning features that you can use in the various products.
We can go back to a previous version of a document if you would
like to. But at the end of the day the real question becomes:
Are we using open standards as we transfer that document from
one device to another?
So as I was creating this testimony today, actually I used
a tool which is available on multiple platforms. That tool uses
standards-based such as XML and Open XML, which were mentioned
here earlier today, to make sure that as I edit that from my
iPad, my cell phone, my Windows PC, that document fidelity is
maintained. And it is making sure that we rely on those types
of standards and controls to make sure that we do not have
document fidelity issues.
Mr. Reed. I would say that I actually did exactly what he
said. So I wrote it in Word on a PC, and then I translated it--
I sent it over via Dropbox to my iPad, which is an Apple
product from a different company, and it is open and it shows
docx at the end. So I am using an open standard to move it
between multiple platforms, multiple devices, and through the
cloud. So exactly your question, I am doing it right here right
now.
Mr. Nugent. That was always a concern when you get into
closed systems, we are held hostage in regards to cost. So we
certainly want whatever we do need to be on open platform.
Thank you very much. I appreciate your testimony.
Mr. Gingrey. Thank you, Mr. Nugent.
I would like to now enter two documents into the hearing
record. The first is a statement from Chairman Dreier of the
Rules Committee.
The second is a statement from Chairman Hastings of the
Natural Resources Committee.
Hearing no objection to that, so ordered.
[The statement of Mr. Dreier follows:]

[The statement of Mr. Hastings of Washington follows:]

Mr. Gingrey. The Government Printing Office has provided
information that up to 70 percent of the costs of publications
is creating the PDF file prior to printing the first copy.
I would like to thank Chairman Dreier for submitting his
statement that describes the work of the Rules Committee to
automate its markup processes. This approach shows great
benefit for the Rules Committee, and we should examine how we
can apply this approach more generally in the House of
Representatives.
And I also would like to thank Chairman Hastings for his
statement describing the practical steps the Natural Resources
Committee uses to reduce the cost of producing hearings.
Committees should consider how to apply these lessons. And I
appreciate the unanimous consent to include these two
statements in the record.
I want to finally, of course, thank all of the witnesses on
the second panel, and for the members of the Oversight
Subcommittee of the Committee on House Administration for their
participation as well.
I think this has been a very, very good hearing, with a lot
of useful information. Be sure and leave your business cards
behind and your e-mail so we can contact you. We may very well
want all three of you in our respective offices to learn how to
better use some of this technology.
But, again, the purpose of the hearing is once again to
look for ways that we can in a very practical manner save money
for the taxpayer in regard to the Government Printing Office.
As I said in my earlier remarks, wonderful men and women,
Federal employees, many of whom have spent their entire
careers, as do other Federal employees in the many agencies,
over 60 of the Federal Government. But we have to--we have to
as an obligation to the taxpayer, to our constituents, when we
are sitting on $14.3 trillion worth of debt, long-term debt,
not accumulated overnight of course, several administrations
have their fingerprints on that--and Congresses I should say--
but it is time to stop. I mean we can't continue to spend 40
percent more than we take in in revenue. So that is really what
this is all about. And I appreciate the bipartisan spirit of
cooperation and testimony. And we are going to look for best
practices and make sure that we don't throw the baby out with
the bath water. I just had to use that expression. As an OB/GYN
for 31 years, I like that one.
Thank you all very much. This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:33 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


