- INSPECTOR GENERAL AUDIT OF THE HOUSE'S FISCAL YEAR 2009 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

INSPECTOR GENERAL AUDIT OF THE HOUSE'S FISCAL YEAR 2009 FINANCIAL
STATEMENTS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

of the

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Held in Washington, DC, May 26, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on House Administration

Available on the Internet:
http://www.gpoaccess.gov/congress/house/administration/index.html

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
67-642                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION

DANIEL E. LUNGREN, California, Chairman
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania,
PHIL GINGREY, M.D., Georgia            Ranking Minority Member
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               ZOE LOFGREN, California
TODD ROKITA, Indiana                 CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
RICHARD B. NUGENT, Florida

Professional Staff

Philip Kiko, Staff Director & General Counsel
Jamie Fleet, Minority Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Oversight

PHIL GINGREY, M.D., Georgia, Chairman
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               ZOE LOFGREN, California
RICHARD B. NUGENT, Florida           CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
TODD ROKITA, Indiana

INSPECTOR GENERAL AUDIT OF THE HOUSE'S FISCAL YEAR 2009 FINANCIAL
STATEMENTS

----------

THURSDAY, MAY 26, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight,
Committee on House Administration,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:37 a.m., in
room 1310, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Phil Gingrey
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Gingrey, Schock, Nugent, and
Lofgren.
Staff Present: Kimani Little, Parliamentarian; Joe Wallace,
Legislative Clerk; Yael Barash, Assistant Legislative Clerk;
Salley Wood, Communications Director; Linda Ulrich, Director of
Oversight; Reynold Schweickhardt, Oversight Staff; Katie Ryan,
Oversight Staff; Jamie Fleet, Minority Staff Director; Kyle
Andersen, Minority Press Secretary; Mike Harrison, Minority
Professional Staff; and Matt Pincus, Minority Professional
Staff.
Mr. Gingrey. I now call to order the Committee on House
Administration's Subcommittee on Oversight for today's
oversight hearing on the Inspector General's audit of the
House's 2009 financial statements. The hearing record will
remain open for 5 legislative days so that members may submit
any materials that they wish to be included therein.
A quorum is present, so we may proceed.
The Subcommittee on Oversight has the important task of
conducting vigorous and effective oversight of our legislative
agencies and their operations. As stewards of tax dollars, we
have no more important task than to make sure this House's
administrative conduct and business is performed with the
greatest efficiency, transparency, and ethical standards, which
is why I was extremely disappointed when I received the results
of the audit of fiscal year 2009.
As we will hear, the 2009 audit reports the demonstrable
problems at the CAO, created by its former leadership. Several
``material weaknesses''--that is a phrase--were reported due to
the lack of a management control program and ineffective
controls over information security. It also highlights
significant deficiencies in internal controls over financial
reporting and controls over the payroll process.
When this country is in financial dire straits, reports of
financial misfeasance are outrageous and simply unacceptable.
Fortunately, the management of the CAO has been
substantially improved, and we commend Mr. Strodel for his
dedication for improving the efficiency and management of the
CAO, Chief Administrative Office, and Officer; but we still
have a way to go. And I also want to commend the IG, the
Inspector General Theresa Grafenstine, for her commitment to
ensuring financial accountability within this institution.
I want to thank each of my colleagues for being here today.
And I would now like to recognize our ranking member of the
subcommittee, Congresswoman Zoe Lofgren, for the purpose of
providing an opening statement. Ranking Member Lofgren.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. As you have
indicated, the House of Representatives, like other government
agencies, gets its funding from the American people; and as
stewards of tax dollars, it is our responsibility to use the
funds responsibly and in a transparent manner. The public needs
to have faith in the accounting and record keeping done by
their government, and this is why the annual financial audits
that we do here in the House are important.
The 2009 financial statement audit report gave the House an
unqualified or clean opinion for its financial statements. An
unqualified or clean opinion means that the auditors found the
financial statements fairly represented the House's assets and
liabilities. It also means the financial practices used by the
House conform with generally accepted accounting principles.
This is the 12th year in a row that the House has received an
unqualified opinion on its financial audits. We should commend
the CAO and the IG's office for this positive track record.
What is not commendable are the four significant internal
control deficiencies that were highlighted in the 2009 audit
report. I will come back to these internal control issues
during the questioning period with the witnesses.
Perhaps the most troublesome information to come out of the
2009 financial audit was the apparent lack of cooperation and
misleading information coming from the former Chief
Administrative Officer and other senior CAO staff towards the
auditors, the IG's office, and even with this committee.
Let me try and outline some of the events that took place
just for the record.
The auditors first raised concerns about the 2009 financial
internal controls issues to the IG's office on January 15,
2010. The IG's office called a meeting with the auditors and
the CAO to request additional cooperation from the CAO's staff.
The Chief Administrative Officer was invited, but he did not
come to this meeting. He sent his staff in his place. In March
of 2010 an adverse opinion on the 2009 audit appeared likely
because of the continued lack of cooperation from the former
CAO, which had made it difficult for the auditor to review
necessary documents in a timely manner.
On the morning of March 22, 2010, the IG's office and the
auditor jointly briefed House Administration Democratic and
Republican staff on the problems they were encountering with
the CAO. In the afternoon of March 22, the House Administrative
Committee Staff Director had a meeting with the Chief
Administrative Officer. The Chief Administrative Officer's
statements at this meeting led the Staff Director to believe
that the CAO understood the serious nature of the situation and
would fully cooperate with the auditors.
On June 30, 2010, the IG and the auditor informed House
Administration Democratic and Republican staff that the House
would receive an adverse opinion on the internal control
portion of the financial statement for 2009. At that point,
then Chairman Brady called Mr. Lungren to let him know that we
would be meeting with the CAO. The following morning on July 1,
Chairman Brady, Representative Capuano and myself had a meeting
with the Chief Administrative Officer, Mr. Beard. Following the
meeting Mr. Beard announced his resignation.
On July 10, Dan Strodel was appointed as the new Chief
Administrative Officer. I look forward to hearing the testimony
of CAO Strodel and IG Grafenstine on the current working
relationship between the CAO and the IG's office. I also look
forward to hearing from them on what progress is being made in
the development of new internal controls for the House.
I yield back.
Mr. Gingrey. I thank the ranking member. Does any other
member wish to be recognized for the purpose of making an
opening statement?
I would now like to introduce our two witnesses. The
Honorable Theresa Grafenstine was appointed Inspector General
of the House on July 30, 2010. Ms. Grafenstine has been with
the House Office of the Inspector General since 1998, starting
as a staff level auditor and has served in each of the House
OIG, Office of Inspector General, organizational units. She led
the first-ever review of the House complex fire and emergency
response program as well as numerous security and internal
control assessments. Prior to joining the House OIG, Ms.
Grafenstine served in the Department of Defense's Office of
Inspector General. She has numerous certifications and is
active on numerous boards and committees related to auditing
governance and accounting.
Our second witness, the Honorable Dan Strodel, was sworn in
as Chief Administrative Officer, CAO, of the United States
House of Representatives on January 5, 2011. He also served as
the Chief Administrative Officer during the last 6 months of
2010. Mr. Strodel leads an organization created during the
104th Congress which has now more than 700 employees charged
with carrying out the administrative functions of the House,
including things such as operating budgets, financial
management, procurement, and payroll. Mr. Strodel has a wealth
of experience in this institution--over 26 years, I might say,
to be exact. He began in the Office of Finance under the Office
of the Clerk and has since then held positions with the United
States Capitol Police, the House and Senate Sergeant at Arms
and in other capacities within CAO. We thank both of you for
being here today.
As I mentioned in my opening statement, I was shocked to
read this report, and I am anxious to hear about the corrective
measures necessary to make sure that these systemic problems do
not reappear.
The committee has received your written testimonies. At the
appropriate time, I will recognize each of you for 5 minutes to
present a summary of that submission. And to help you keep
time, we have a timing device near the witness table--I think
right in front of you. The device will emit a green light for 4
minutes and then turn yellow, letting you know that just 1
minute remains. When the light turns red, it means your time
has expired. I probably won't hit the gavel quite as hard as I
did to convene us, but we will try to stay on time.
Inspector General, we will start with you, and you may
proceed.

STATEMENTS OF THE HON. THERESA GRAFENSTINE, INSPECTOR GENERAL,
UNITED STATES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES; AND THE HON. DAN
STRODEL, CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER, UNITED STATES HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES

STATEMENT OF THE HON. THERESA GRAFENSTINE

Ms. Grafenstine. Terrific. Thank you. Good morning,
Chairman Gingrey, Ranking Member Lofgren, and members of the
subcommittee. I am both pleased and honored to appear before
you today in my capacity as the Inspector General of the U.S.
House of Representatives. Thank you for this opportunity to
brief you on the results of the fiscal year 2009 financial
statement audit of the House. Since I have submitted my written
comments for the record, I will try to keep this brief.
The process of preparing financial statements instills
discipline in the financial recording and reporting processes.
Financial statements also provide transparency and
accountability and tell the public that the House can and does
accurately account for its financial activity.
The 2009 financial statement audit tells two stories. The
first is one of staff heroics, where a dedicated few put in an
amazing amount of effort and long hours to assure that the
House maintained its clean audit opinion. And for that reason I
can say, for the 12th year in a row, the House received an
unqualified or clean opinion on its financial statement.
Getting a clean opinion is a significant accomplishment,
given that this was the first year that the CAO prepared its
House financial statements in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles for Federal agencies, otherwise
known as FedGAAP. Understand that changing the basis in
accounting is a really big deal and requires a lot of effort.
FedGAAP also puts the House in alignment with government best
practices.
The second story is one of mismanagement, disengagement,
and at times obstruction. In contrast to the clean opinion that
the House received on its financial statement, the external
auditor expressed an adverse opinion on the CAO's internal
controls. So what does that mean in nonaccounting language? An
adverse opinion means that the CAO did not have effective
controls over financial reporting. Consequently, the CAO and,
therefore, the House is at greater risk of not detecting an
error in the financial statements or in the processing of
payroll, finding inaccuracies in payroll, and not catching
overpayments to vendors or not realizing that it is missing
assets.
So what did the external auditor find that led them to this
conclusion? Among a variety of control weaknesses they
identified two material weaknesses, the most severe. The
material weaknesses were the lack of an internal controls
program and ineffective controls over information technology,
or IT. While the absence of the formal internal control program
and the ineffective controls over IT are significant and
require management action and attention, I believe the
deteriorating control environment in the CAO and the lack of
action by management played a greater role in the House
receiving an adverse opinion on its internal controls in 2009.
Let me explain. For several years, the external auditor had
advised the CAO with increasing urgency and formality of the
need for an internal controls program. Despite their
concurrence with this recommendation, as of 2009 the CAO still
had not made any notable progress. Even more troubling was that
the CAO environment at the senior management level had become
one which was generally unsupportive of the financial statement
process, exhibiting disinterest, lack of cooperation, and even
obstruction to auditors' requests for information.
It is important to note that between these two stories that
are being told by the 2009 financial statement audit, the first
story on the clean opinion on the House financial statements is
more significant and fundamental. This should give the public
confidence that the House can and does accurately account for
its financial activities.
The second story, while dire, is one that can be corrected
through decisive actions and commitment. So what has the House
and the CAO done to correct these issues?
As Ms. Lofgren pointed out, in January of 2010, within days
of my being appointed by the then-acting Inspector General, the
external auditor informed me of their growing concerns about
the 2009 financial statements. I called an emergency meeting
with the external auditor, the former CAO, and all managers
associated with the financial statement process. I wanted to
make sure that we were all on the same page as to the
importance of the financial statements and to stress the need
for cooperation and participation. Although the former CAO did
not participate in this initial emergency meeting or any of the
weekly sessions held thereafter, all other senior CAO managers
did.
While this intervention helped to reemphasize the
importance of the financial statements and being responsive to
the external auditors' request, a lack of commitment and
participation was still pervasive. By the spring of 2010, it
appeared more likely that the House would receive either an
adverse opinion or a disclaimer because of scope limitations
and the inability for the auditor to get required information.
In the OIG's efforts to support the Committee on House
Administration's governance and oversight duties, the external
auditor and I jointly briefed the committee of this possibility
in March of 2010. After it became clear that the House would
receive an adverse opinion on its internal controls, the
external auditor and I again jointly briefed the Committee on
House Administration on June 30 of that same year.
On a bipartisan basis, the Committee on House
Administration took decisive and immediate actions to address
the control environment or tone at the top deficiencies. The
Committee on House Administration understood the seriousness of
these internal control issues.
The former CAO announced his resignation the following day
and a new CAO, Mr. Strodel, was appointed immediately
thereafter. As soon as Mr. Strodel was appointed, he made
sweeping changes, including the appointment of a director of
internal controls, creating a senior assessment team to oversee
the implementation of an internal control program, appointing a
new senior management team, one with a commitment to
transparency and accountability of House financial activity
through the issuance of reliable financial statements.
The Committee on House Administration's decisive actions,
combined with Mr. Strodel's leadership, have resulted in a
complete reversal in tone within the CAO and have contributed
to a much more effective and timely audit process during the
2010 audit cycle.
Before closing, I would like to give you a brief status on
where we are at in the 2010 and 2011 audits. In contrast to the
2009 cycle in which it took the CAO nearly 14 months to issue
finalized financial statements, they were able to do so in 2010
within 2 months after the fiscal year end. It is important to
note, however, despite all these significant changes that have
occurred since Mr. Strodel's appointment, the House will
receive an adverse opinion again in 2010. During an audit, the
controls that were in place during the period of review are
what are considered. Since many of these corrective actions did
not occur until July 2010, when Mr. Strodel was appointed,
there was not enough time to make those types of corrective
actions before the end of the fiscal year.
A robust control program will help to ensure processes are
repeatable and will enable the CAO to be proactive in
addressing issues rather than reactive. We also believe that
many of the IT control weaknesses will be addressed with the
internal controls program.
With that, I concede back. Sorry for running over.
Mr. Gingrey. I should have let you finish that last
sentence at least. But thank you. And of course, as you know,
your entire report is submitted for the record, and we
appreciate that.
We will now go ahead to our second witness Mr. Dan Strodel,
the Chief Administrative Officer.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DAN STRODEL

Mr. Strodel. Good morning, Chairman Gingrey, Ranking Member
Lofgren, Congressman Nugent. I am Dan Strodel, the Chief
Administrative Officer. And I will go as quickly as I can
through the summary. I know you will want to get quickly to
questions and you have other business for today.
The most important thing I want to start with is to
recognize the contributions that the Inspector General has
made, Terry Grafenstine, and the management advisories that she
has provided has helped me personally as well as the entire
House officer corps. As so we continue to work together, and it
is my hope to always remain on her good side.
With that said, when I reviewed the audit findings, the
independent report from Cotton & Company and the materials
provided by the Inspector General, there were some 21
recommendations. Whether they were determined to be material or
significant deficiencies, there was still a fairly large number
of findings. The lead finding was one material weakness, the
primary finding of a lack of an internal controls program. That
struck me because the following 20 were very specific and
ultimately provided a road map for us. I spent some time trying
to figure out, why is this the number one recommendation, and
why is the number one material weakness the lack of internal
controls program? That told me the primary driver to the
situation that evolved was the tone at the top of the
organization. There is a group of extremely professional
dedicated staff and, as the Inspector General referenced, who
have been on staff for a while, that have been through these
processes before, and were trying to continue to do good work.
However there seemed to be a disengagement. This struck me as
the long-term focus I have to make to begin to put in place the
structures that are going to help the organization evolve and
transform into a high-performing organization again. We can get
into more details about the particular internal controls, but
that is my primary point.
[The statement of Mr. Strodel follows:]

Mr. Gingrey. Have you completed your testimony?
Mr. Strodel. Yes, sir.
Mr. Gingrey. You surprised me. It is not very often that we
get someone that only takes half of his or her time. Certainly
we appreciate very much both witnesses' testimony.
Let me yield to myself for the first set of questions. We
will each take 5 minutes, and if we have more questions and
sufficient time, we will have a second round.
I will direct my first line of questioning to Ms.
Grafenstine. It took the previous CAO 14 months to prepare the
financial statements. How did his delay and deliberate
withholding of information, if it was deliberate withholding of
information, impact the overall cost of the audit? The outside
auditor cost.
Ms. Grafenstine. Yes. As you know, we do use external
auditors to manage the financial statement audit, and we
oversee their activity. It increased our efforts. We had a lot
of coordination done on the inside from the IG perspective. But
it did result in real additional modifications to contracts
where we would have to pay the external auditor additional
funds because it was consuming more of their time than
traditionally it would have consumed.
Mr. Gingrey. So the costs involved were more to not only
the Cotton firm, the outside auditor, but also led to more work
internally.
Ms. Grafenstine. Internally. So what that would do is, it
would detract from our internal resources, from being able to
focus on other areas of concerns in the House.
Mr. Gingrey. For that particular fiscal year, though, you
don't have a number, a dollar amount?
Ms. Grafenstine. I could definitely get you the extra
contract costs. But from an internal perspective, from the
opportunity cost aspect, I could probably impute that and get
that back to you for the record.
Mr. Gingrey. Well, if you would do that and submit it for
the record because I think it is important to know what we are
talking about in regard to an efficient operation versus an
inefficient operation. It leads to increase costs, obviously.
And thank you.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Gingrey. For the internal controls you have suggested,
how do you compare other industries and other government
entities to the internal control, or lack of, that exists
within CAO?
Ms. Grafenstine. If we compare ourselves to other
governmental entities, 2006 was when OMB's A-123 internal
controls program was put into place and became a requirement.
So the rest of the government would be significantly ahead of
us because they have been working on this for 5 years. So while
they may not necessarily all have perfect unqualified opinions
on their internal controls, they are still going to have more
solidified programs in place, just because they have been
working on it for about 5 years.
Mr. Gingrey. Thank you, Ms. Grafenstine. I will ask Mr.
Strodel in my next couple of minutes, it is referenced in the
Inspector General's report that minimal resources, staff, were
assigned to assist the financial reporting process. To correct
this problem, you are utilizing both consultants and staff. Do
you envision needing consultants indefinitely to maintain the
program? How do you plan to allocate resources in this area in
the future?
Mr. Strodel. The consultants, Chairman Gingrey, were
brought on to assist us in responding to that number one
recommendation and the material weakness, which was to
establish a robust internal controls program. The House went
from commercial GAAP, generally accepted accounting principles,
to what is referred to as FedGAAP during this time. FedGAAP
brings along with it additional requirements related to
internal controls, whether that is financial reporting or
information technology. There is a very clear path and a
guideline. There is actually a large document that provides
guidance on how to implement an internal controls program and
conduct a risk assessment under that program.
We decided to bring that function, that responsibility, to
the top of the organization, which includes all aspects of the
organization, including our counsel, HIR, the technical team,
assets, furnishings, and logistics, finance, and every part of
the organization that is applicable.
Mr. Gingrey. Let me interrupt you just for a second.
Mr. Strodel. Yes, sir.
Mr. Gingrey. Clear this up for me. Are you suggesting that
the government way of looking at things--the internal controls
I think you referred to as FedGAAP--is a better system than the
commercial way of doing things, commercial GAAP? The general
public would probably think that that sounds like an oxymoron.
Mr. Strodel. I was not suggesting that since the decision
was made beyond my involvement. It is this committee that sets
the rules, responsibilities and functions of the officers; and
how we are going to do our business. My point is that, whether
it is commercial GAAP or FedGAAP, you still have to do internal
controls. It should be a part of how you do your business.
There is a unique requirement on the government side, as you
have instructed us, with regard to transparency and providing
reliable financial reporting for the citizens, for the Members
of Congress, and for this committee. This is not as much a
recommendation of mine, but I think a collective decision.
Mr. Gingrey. Well, I have gone over my time. And I will
yield to the ranking member for her 5 minutes, plus. And
hopefully other members might want to further address this
particular issue. I wasn't suggesting that I thought that the
Federal Government was less efficient in that regard than the
commercial sector. It certainly shouldn't be, but it was a
general impression of the public, I think, that I was referring
to.
Ms. Lofgren.
Ms. Lofgren. First, before I ask any questions, let me
thank both of you for your service to the House. You are both
career professionals. You have worked here for many, many years
and are now leading your organizations. And I appreciate what
you do, the leadership that you have provided your team, and
the confidence that you will instill in the taxpayers by making
sure that identified problems get resolved and that we can move
forward with our heads held high.
Let me ask you, Mr. Strodel, in Ms. Grafenstine's
testimony, she stated that during the 2009 auditing process,
the CAO environment at the senior management level had become--
I think she said generally unsupportive of the financial
statement process and there had seemed to be disinterest and a
lack of cooperation.
Have you made any personnel changes at the senior
management level since becoming the CAO to make sure that we
have a responsive team and we are all over anything that has
been identified?
Mr. Strodel. Ranking Member Lofgren, my observations and
experience in not just reading the report but from my time
working for your committee, was that the direction of the
organization seemed to wander away from its core mission. As I
may have mentioned earlier, we are kind of the blue collar
officer corps. We are the people who move the furniture. We are
the people who pay the bills. We are the people who make sure
your computer is working. That is our core mission. That is
what we are focused on. It occurred to me that some of the
staff didn't understand that message and there was a
communication gap between our core mission and the direction we
were going.
Some individuals did move on; and throughout the fall, we
made some personnel changes. We have a new Chief Financial
Officer, Traci Beaubian, who has been with the House for a very
long time. We have a new Director of Audit, Bill Leibach, a new
HIR deputy, and other personnel changes. It is an evolution,
but we have begun.
Ms. Lofgren. Let me ask you, in the 2009 audit report, they
have identified these deficiencies, four of them which have
already been referenced. You outlined in your testimony some of
the progress that has been made in these areas. Do you think
all of these deficiencies will be rectified by the time of the
2011 audit?
Mr. Strodel. Ms. Lofgren, it is my hope and I think my
reputation is on the line at this point. I have been in the
position for 10 months. We have developed a senior assessment
team which includes a representative from Ms. Grafenstine's
office. Additionally all of our senior staff are engaged in the
process, meet on a monthly basis and hit our milestones. It is
not a stand-alone process. Once a year we don't bring out the
audit woman or man and then talk about it. It is a part of how
we are managing the organization. It is a part of, as Chairman
Gingrey mentioned, a disciplined management tool, and that is
how we intend to use it.
Ms. Lofgren. Very good. Are there any other issues related
to the House financial statements or internal control
procedures or the auditing process that you feel the committee
should be made known of at this time?
Mr. Strodel. It has always been my understanding and my
experience that the responsibilities, particularly of the CAO,
are delegations from this committee. In the past, you may
recall in the finance area, vouchers, which are reimbursements
for official expenses, were ultimately approved at the
committee level. House Information Resources used to be a
subcommittee of this committee. We feel a unique connection and
an added responsibility that we ensure the committee is aware
of what we are doing, that transparency is external, internal,
and also with the committee.
We need to continue internally coalescing as a management
and leadership group, and that will bring itself to bear with
our interaction with our stakeholders at your level and others
in the institution.
Ms. Lofgren. I guess we will have a second round. So I will
get to ask Ms. Grafenstine her questions at that time. But I
would also like to thank the staff of the House Administration
Committee. We work together on a bipartisan basis to try to
deal with issues about the House. It is like being mayor of the
city. And I know that the Members of the House may have
different philosophical views on policy issues, but our staff
works very closely together to deal with these issues. And I
would like to publicly thank them for their hard work and good
efforts as well.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gingrey. Thank you, Ms. Lofgren. We will now turn to
the gentleman from Illinois for his 5 minutes of questions, Mr.
Aaron Schock.
Mr. Schock. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you both for
your testimony and your work on behalf of the committee and the
Congress. I just have a couple of follow-up questions for Mr.
Strodel.
In your testimony, you referenced September 30 of this year
as a deadline for implementation of the internal control
recommendations. My question is whether or not you are on track
to meet that deadline and what conversations, if any, you have
had with the auditors to ensure that you are doing everything
necessary to obtain a clean opinion from them.
Mr. Strodel. Thank you, Mr. Schock. The short answer is, we
are on track, but I would like to provide additional
information. Our senior assessment team, which has been driving
this change and the effort to set milestones for hitting our
goals, has been working with a staff member from the Office of
Inspector General. Also, we have met from time to time, as
recently as this week, with the independent auditors at Cotton
and they are ready to start looking at our data. We are
focusing on providing a preliminary round of information to
them after June 30 so we can hit that September 30 target.
I would defer to Ms. Grafenstine, but I feel we are on
track.
Mr. Schock. Ms. Grafenstine, would you care to address
that?
Ms. Grafenstine. I can say that Mr. Strodel's group has put
a significant amount of time and attention on this, and I do
believe that they are on track.
Mr. Schock. Also, Mr. Strodel, in your testimony, you did
not address the significant deficiencies in the processing and
reporting of the payroll data. And I am just wondering, in the
report, it noted that payroll certifications were not
performed, which led to over- and underpayments. What are you
currently doing to fix that area of concern?
Mr. Strodel. Mr. Schock, the question related to one of the
significant deficiencies. There was a hierarchy of levels of
importance or emphasis on, whether it is material or a
significant deficiency. One was related to payroll. The House
is a unique environment. Where a typical Federal agency may
have one payroll office for the entire organization, we have
441 offices and 20-some committees that are essentially their
own business unit. We are centrally processing payroll on their
behalf. Each month, there is a certification process that the
Member, the committee chair, and so on, has to sign and submit
to us, certifying that those individuals are due pay. There is
a little bit of a difference in understanding the requirement
between the auditors and us regarding that unique environment.
It is hard to find a similar organization as it relates to
payroll processing. We have internal controls that aren't
necessarily typical in a Federal agency environment. Therefore,
we work with the auditors to show how our unique operating
environment works and the various types of internal controls in
our organization. The segregation of duties where a person
can't pay themselves through another Member's account is an
example of internal controls.
We do have internal controls that mitigate risk but the
concern was, they don't meet OMB's A-123 Internal Control
Program as it is laid out. This was a dialogue between us and
the auditors showing what we do have, which we hope will go
from a significant deficiency to a deficiency or go away
altogether.
Mr. Schock. Are there recommendations in how we do payroll
processing that you suggest different from the process now that
would lead to better controls?
Mr. Strodel. Slightly, yes. The verification and
certification processes, at the end of the period, need to have
tighter deadlines. During each monthly payroll cycle,
certifications should not go beyond the following month without
closing the process out. On our side, we must interact more
effectively with the Member offices and the other employing
authorities to make sure they understand the requirements and
that we are here to assist them in meeting these deadlines.
Mr. Schock. Okay. I understand that it may not be a similar
organization as most companies would be run, but I can't
imagine that it is that much different. I actually personally
sign my payroll certifications. I think it is requested that
Members do each month. And while we may all be individual
offices, there is one central payment processing point, and it
would seem to me that it is up to the Member on whether I make
a mistake on paying someone too much or too little. But based
on what I submit to you is how it should be paid. I guess I
question why the processing center would make a mistake based
on what I sign or don't sign.
Mr. Strodel. Sometimes errors are due to a delay in
receiving the certifications, either between us or the
employing entity. There are reconciliation processes that
happen during the pay period and those that follow the pay
period. The close-out and the reconciliation is done, in the
auditor's opinion, too far away from the actual event.
Sometimes it is an error on our side as well. It is that
reconciliation process where we can do a better job reaching
out to the Member office and making sure that certification
comes in on time.
Mr. Schock. Thank you.
Mr. Gingrey. Thank you, Mr. Schock. And now we will refer
to the gentleman from Florida for 5 minutes, Mr. Nugent.
Mr. Nugent. I would like to expand a little more to the
issue of the payroll issue. The process that we use today in
regards to payroll, have we looked at any other processes that
could speed that up for you in regards to automation?
Mr. Strodel. Mr. Nugent, the Lawson payroll system is what
we use. It is very effective. There are so many different
employing offices, and there is an education process on our
end--that means on the payroll end--for how payroll is
processed. This includes the forms required, and the cutoff
dates to have things in so they can be processed in that
particular pay period, in effect. Yes, is the short answer.
Prior to PeopleSoft, we had a mainframe-based system. The
House's monthly pay cycle is an exception based process. This
means once you put individuals on the payroll, they keep
getting paid until you tell us otherwise, whether it is an
increase, decrease, or removing those individuals from the
payroll. The control of these payroll actions and related to
Mr. Schock's question, rests entirely with the employing
entity, the 441 Members, committee chairs, and so on.
On a monthly basis, we are processing changes and all of
them come in ultimately manually. There are certainly
efficiencies we can make and it is something that we should
move slowly on. We implemented a new financial system for the
House called PeopleSoft Financials which interacts with Lawson.
We are moving forward with some efficiencies on the voucher,
the official expense reimbursement. Payroll is also an area we
want to work on with this committee to make sure that any
changes we make are good, in your opinion, for the House.
Mr. Nugent. With reference to internal controls, and
particularly on the general ledger aspect, where do we stand
today?
Mr. Strodel. Well, I am extremely glad our Chief Finance
Officer is here today, sir, Traci Beaubian.
Mr. Nugent. And that is a good answer.
Mr. Strodel. Traci, could you address that briefly?
Ms. Beaubian. We have made significant progress on the
general ledger accounts. To date we have identified a number of
transactions where we have changed the posting models and
associated general ledger accounts for proper financial
reporting. Additionally we have posted a number of entries
required for the upcoming financial statements for fiscal year
2011. We are on target for closing out many of the general
ledger-type issues.
Mr. Nugent. Well, as a past CEO of a government agency,
obviously the last thing you want to see is an adverse report
come back. And I would think that your Chief Financial Officer
is a key driver behind making sure that you get the information
that is necessary but also make sure of the internal controls.
And so that is one of the areas that is always of concern in
regards to the internal controls and the separation of duties
to make sure that you are not having people authorizing
payments that are also making a request for payment. And have
we addressed all that from the IG's perspective?
Ms. Grafenstine. Yes, sir. I do agree that that is very
important. And that is one of the basic things we look at.
Whether it is within Lawson or PeopleSoft, we would look at the
roles and responsibilities to make sure that there is adequate
segregation of duties. We didn't find any significant
deficiencies in either of those areas. The payroll deficiencies
that we did find pertained to the lack of offices submitting
those certifications in a timely manner.
Mr. Nugent. Do you have any recommendations on how you can
get offices to comply?
Ms. Grafenstine. There are rules that explicitly say that
Members and committees need to submit those payroll
certifications in a timely manner. I do see that as a big deal.
And I think with Mr. Strodel proactively reaching out through
the payroll counselors and giving folks a reminder--because
they do get distracted because they are working on legislation.
But if they reach out proactively and remind them, I think that
that may help to improve your overall situation because when
you look at the House financials, personnel costs are our
biggest expense. So those payroll certifications are our
biggest control over that.
Mr. Nugent. I just want to take this opportunity again to
thank both of you for trying to right the ship. I understand
that we are going to wind up with a possible adverse. But that
is okay as long as we show that we are making progress to
reverse that so our next audit will be crystal clean. That is
our hope.
Mr. Gingrey. I thank the gentleman from Florida for his
questions. And that essentially completes the first round. It
went quickly. And we actually have a few more questions. So we
will start a second round and, again, allow each of the Members
up to 5 minutes of questioning. And I will yield to myself the
first 5 minutes.
Ms. Grafenstine, as a result of the fiscal year 2009 audit,
we know that the House did not have effective internal controls
in place for financial reporting. That is a compelling factor
behind why it took 14 months to do something that should have
taken no longer than--you said I think 3 months. Without an
internal control program, there is no reasonable assurance that
the House's financial statements can be complete or accurate.
That is why an adverse rating was assigned on the internal
controls related to financial reporting.
Here is my question, and this seems a little
counterintuitive: How can the financial statements themselves
receive what I now know about a ``clean opinion'' while the
internal controls receive an adverse opinion? Can you elaborate
on that and help explain that to the members?
Ms. Grafenstine. Yes, I can. And I do agree that it would
seem counterintuitive, sir, that you could have a clean opinion
on the financials while receiving an adverse on the internal
controls. How they differ is that with the financial
statements, you can tick and tie all the numbers. You can trace
them back and realize that they are, through substantive
testing, making sure that the numbers are supported. It just
takes a whole lot longer because you can't rely on the internal
controls. If adequate internal controls were in place,
typically they would find the mistakes and there would be some
type of monitoring process in place where they would detect the
mistakes and then fix them. But because they didn't have those
processes in place, you have to do a lot more testing to
validate the numbers that they are, in fact, correct.
So that was one of the other reasons why it extended the
amount of time and effort, from an audit perspective, added
testing and increasing contract costs and those sorts of
things, to make sure that we could validate the numbers from
the financial statements.
Mr. Gingrey. Let me shift to the Chief Administrative
Officer, Mr. Strodel. I wanted to just ask you some factual
questions. How many employees are actually under your
supervision within the office?
Mr. Strodel. In the entire Office of the Chief
Administrative Officer, currently there are 684 people onboard.
Mr. Gingrey. And how does that compare to how that trended
over the past several years?
Mr. Strodel. In the last 5 years, that is an increase of I
would say approximately 10 percent.
Mr. Gingrey. Would you say today that you are right sized
with regard to the number of folks that you have?
Mr. Strodel. I would say that I think we are soon to be
right sized by the budget cut that is coming. I wouldn't
necessarily agree with it, but we are going to have to live
with it, sir. In returning to our core mission, we are looking
at what it is that we do and how we do it.
Mr. Gingrey. Yeah. Well, you have said, of course, that
your reputation is on the line. All of our reputations are on
the line every day when we come to work. But I certainly
understand what you are referring to based on the past
performance in the office that you hold, the position that you
hold. Clearly the budget cuts are tough on everybody. But with
$1.6 trillion and 40 percent borrowed money every year, you can
understand--I think everybody can understand it is time to do a
little belt-tightening.
The other thing I wanted to ask you, although you have 600-
plus folks that work for you, that work directly for you at the
management level, operational level. But you have many, many
more folks that work for the House of Representatives.
Do you have an idea of what that total number is that you
have jurisdiction over?
Mr. Strodel. Well, the entire House population is a little
over 10,000. This includes members of your staff, for example,
here and in the district, the committee staffs, the entire
House population and payroll community, if that is responsive.
Mr. Gingrey. That is exactly what I was talking about. And
the reason I ask that question is because I think that it is
really important for us to understand the scope of your
operation. This is my ninth year, my fifth term. And you know,
the choosing of a Chief Administrative Officer or Clerk of the
House or Sergeant at Arms or Parliamentarian, you know, these
things, you just don't pay a lot of attention to. At least I
didn't. But all of a sudden, in this position as chairman of
the Subcommittee on Oversight of the House Administration
Committee, it comes home to you, and you realize this is one
heck of an operation to control and to do it right.
So I share with my colleagues in commending both of you for
the great job that you are doing in this short period of time.
But you have a huge challenge going forward to get everything--
well, to get the House in order. Well, thank you.
My time has expired, and I will yield to the ranking
member, Ms. Lofgren.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just wanted to ask
a couple of quick questions for the IG. In your written
testimony, you reference that during the 2009 auditing process,
the CAO environment at the senior management level had been
kind of unsupportive and disinterested and not very
cooperative, and you made the changes. Do you feel these
attitudes of a lack of cooperation exist today in the CAO's
office?
Ms. Grafenstine. Absolutely not. It was night and day, the
complete sweeping changes that occurred since last summer with
the amount of cooperation and the commitment and the focus on
not only with the financial statement process but overall, the
internal control program which impacts--that is a broader
program. That is going to hit IT. It is going to hit
procurement. It is going to hit all facets of CAO operations.
It is completely reversed.
Ms. Lofgren. You pointed out also in your testimony that
despite the changes that had been made by Mr. Strodel, the
adverse opinion on internal controls was made part of the audit
because he came in late into the process. I know you probably
can't say for sure, but with the changes you have seen so far
that have been made in the CAO's office, do you have any
confidence that the internal control deficiencies will be
resolved for the 2011 audit?
Ms. Grafenstine. I believe that they are on track. However,
since it is the external auditor's opinion, I wouldn't be able
to make assurances on their behalf. But I do believe that the
CAO is doing everything that is possible to make sure that they
do meet that deadline.
Ms. Lofgren. We are kind of a unique environment here. The
Members of the House have our own staffs, and we can all think
of some of our colleagues who aren't the most cooperative,
might not get things in on time, might think that they don't
need to, and certainly Mr. Strodel has to deal with that. We
answer to our constituents, not to the CAO. So it is a
difficult environment, and some of the Members sometimes make
it more difficult. Certainly no one sitting here in this room
today. But I do commend you. And I guess the only thing is that
the chairman and ranking member sometimes are called upon to
assist with difficult Members. So I know that Mr. Lungren and
Mr. Brady stand ready to assist you in those circumstances as
well so that we can have a smoothly operated system here.
And with that, I don't have additional questions, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Gingrey. Thank you, Ms. Lofgren. I yield now to the
gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Schock.
Mr. Schock. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A couple of follow-up
questions. First, just going back to my original question about
the payroll reporting, one suggestion I might have is that we
move towards an electronic system where you would have a secure
entrance point for either myself or an assigned staff person
that you can update payrolls as necessary. But the idea of me
physically signing a piece of paper that then has to travel to
an office in the 21st century seems a bit outdated. And I would
think electronically, it would make your lives a lot easier
from a payroll standpoint for mistakes not to happen. So for
what it is worth.
Second, you had mentioned--and Ms. Lofgren's comments had
made reference to the fact that there had been several months
between the time at which we recognized there was a problem
with the previous CAO and the point at which there was a
resignation. I am just wondering if the two of you could speak
to that and if there are certain things that this committee
could be doing it ensure that something like that doesn't
happen down the road.
Ms. Grafenstine. I was not privy to the behind-the-scenes
communications with the former CAO and the committee. However,
from my perspective, it would seem that they were providing him
constructive feedback in trying to get his team on board. It
just didn't seem to have a lasting effect. So we were keeping
the committee up to date on what was going on with the audit.
But again, as soon as it became clear that we had reached the
point of no return, it was swift and immediate. And with the
former CAO resigning, that is not going to be the first path,
the first option that a committee would take. They obviously
wanted to make sure that he had as much time to readjust the
course.
Mr. Strodel. If I could just add a few points. There were
other areas of CAO that I think at the time were also suffering
from that sense of disengagement. In particular in the finance
area, where I used to work, there were problems. There were
delays in processing vouchers. Some vouchers were even lost and
the IG provided some information about this issue. The
financial audit wasn't a stand-alone issue. I think there were
others that were percolating that came to a head around that
time. That is where I saw this issue, again, the core mission
seemed to be not the priority.
Ms. Grafenstine. I would agree with that. It was not the
priority.
Mr. Schock. Thank you. That is all.
Mr. Gingrey. I thank you, Mr. Schock. The chairman now will
yield to the gentleman from Florida for an additional 5
minutes, Mr. Nugent.
Mr. Nugent. I appreciate Mr. Schock's comments and
reference to the automated payroll system. That is what I was
leading up to in that questioning that I had. I think it would
be an improvement across the board, particularly in timeliness.
What is the overall amount of money that moves through the
CAO?
Mr. Strodel. Congressman Nugent, the House appropriation is
approximately $1.3 billion annually. In addition to that, there
are also revolving funds that receive moneys. So it is close to
1.5 billion, 1.4, 1.5 that moves through the system. If that
gives you a sense of the scope of it.
I also wanted to follow up on your point and Mr. Schock's
as well. In moving towards electronic and other efficiencies,
the PeopleSoft System, the financial system that was
implemented this past October, replaced a legacy system that
was about 15 years old. That was a massive undertaking, and
several years in the process. What it has brought us and what
we hope to continue to do is more electronic processing. We are
moving forward in the area of vouchers, those official
reimbursements, where the financial points of contact in
offices in the future and the not so distant future, can access
the financial system and see where a voucher is in the
disbursement process on a particular date. Whereas before
offices did not see it come through the system during the give
or take 7 day process until disbursement. There is a pilot
currently being conducted.
That is an example of where we have made that leap. We have
efficiencies and we think there will be more capabilities down
the road, even where member offices can be the ones to submit
that voucher on line electronically. There is a movement in
working with the committee--again, perhaps too slow for some--
to make sure that this is the right way to go and that it is
ready to be rolled out.
On the payroll side, the Lawson System can be linked to
PeopleSoft, the financial engine, but it is something that I
would want to work with the committee and go very slow. I would
rather it be pushed than kicked. I think we can get there, but
I would rather go methodically.
Mr. Nugent. I would appreciate that you keep us informed on
all those avenues with regards to upgrading and the ability to
do it electronically across the board. So any help that we can
give you in regards to working with other Members, that is I
believe part of our responsibility, not just to lay it back on
you, but also as this committee we can do things to help
educate Members to make sure we are working as a team because
the amount of dollars that are going through your office are--
it is a staggering amount of money and it certainly is one that
requires excellent controls. So anything that we can do to
assist in that, particularly I am sure your Finance Director
would appreciate that, to help in that regard.
One last thing. The reference to controls as it relates to
IT, where do we stand?
Mr. Strodel. The two material weaknesses--one was having an
overall program for internal controls and then, second, and
very detailed, I think there were 12 to 15 specific
recommendations as it related to IT and finance security.
Working with the senior assessment team, Mr. Leibach and our
outside consultants, we developed milestones along the way that
our group, including 5 or 6 senior leaders in HIR, the House
Information Resources Division, are engaged in their specific
areas of particularly developing system security plans, for
example, in the IT area. Again, we are on target. This
information is going to be presented to the outside auditors
soon after June 30th. We are to the point where we are ready to
provide this preliminary documentation and information to them.
Mr. Nugent. One last question, and this one is probably
going to be difficult. The sense of the prior CAO, what
priorities did he lay out for your office or was that muddled?
Mr. Strodel. I am not really sure.
Mr. Nugent. That is a good answer. So obviously it was
somewhat muddled.
Mr. Strodel. I must say being a little further away from it
and not working directly at the time, I am not sure.
Mr. Nugent. Okay. That was probably an unfair question to
ask, but it is one that needed to be asked. Thank you very much
for both of your testimonies.
Mr. Gingrey. I thank the gentleman. And I don't think it
was necessarily an unfair question, but definitely a tough
question, and obviously our two witnesses have given us good
testimony today regarding their concerns and our concerns. I
wasn't on the committee in the 111th and I wasn't on the
committee when the previous Chief Administrative Officer was
hired and would like to commend the former majority for having
the insight and the good judgment to make obviously a needed
change, whether it was because of misfeasance or malfeasance. I
don't guess that is digging up bones and we don't really need
to do that.
But this has been a good opportunity for we members, we new
members in particular, to get a real in depth understanding of
both the breadth and the depth of the job that you have and we
appreciate very much you being here.
I might ask one real quick last of Mr. Strodel. I think you
said in the aggregate, your budget was about $1.5 billion. How
much of that or what percentage of that is personnel expense,
and does it include the Office of the Inspector General?
Mr. Strodel. The figure I was referring to about the 1.4 to
the $1.5 billion was the entire House. As it relates to the
Chief Administrative Officer's office, our entire budget was
$130 million until the CR brought it down to 127, and I imagine
it is going further down.
Mr. Gingrey. Okay. Thank you very much. I want to ask the
committee unanimous consent to enter the following document
into the hearing record. The document is the United States
House of Representatives audit report which you have been
talking about, audit of the financial statements for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2009. Without objection to the
request, it is so ordered.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Gingrey. I want to thank the witnesses for their
testimony and all of the members for their participation and
now I adjourn the subcommittee.
[Whereupon, at 10:40 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

