- ELECTION ASSISTANCE COMMISSION OPERATIONS AND 2012 BUDGET PROPOSAL

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ELECTION ASSISTANCE COMMISSION OPERATIONS AND 2012 BUDGET PROPOSAL

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ELECTIONS

of the

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Held in Washington, DC, March 17, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on House Administration

Available on the Internet:
http://www.gpoaccess.gov/congress/house/administration/index.html

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
67-268                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION

DANIEL E. LUNGREN, California, Chairman
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania,
PHIL GINGREY, M.D., Georgia            Ranking Minority Member
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               ZOE LOFGREN, California
TODD ROKITA, Indiana                 CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
RICHARD B. NUGENT, Florida

Professional Staff

Philip Kiko, Staff Director & General Counsel
Jamie Fleet, Minority Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Elections

GREGG HARPER, Mississippi, Chairman
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
RICHARD B. NUGENT, Florida           ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania
TODD ROKITA, Indiana

ELECTION ASSISTANCE COMMISSION OPERATIONS AND 2012 BUDGET PROPOSAL

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 17, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Elections,
Committee on House Administration,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11:00 a.m., in
room 1310, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Gregg Harper
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Harper, Nugent, Rokita, Brady, and
Gonzalez.
Staff Present: Phil Kiko, Staff Director/General Counsel;
Peter Schalestock, Deputy General Counsel; Kimani Little,
Parliamentarian; Joe Wallace, Legislative Clerk; Yael Barash,
Assistant Legislative Clerk; Salley Wood, Communications
Director; Bob Sensenbrenner, Elections Counsel; Karin Moore,
Elections Counsel; Jamie Fleet, Minority Staff Director; Kyle
Andersen, Minority Press Secretary; Khalil Abboud, Minority
Elections Staff; and Thomas Hicks, Minority Elections Counsel.
Mr. Harper. I now call to order the Committee on House
Administration Subcommittee on Elections for today's oversight
hearing on the Election Assistance Commission. The hearing
record will remain open for 5 legislative days so that members
may submit any materials that they wish to be included therein.
A quorum is present, so we may proceed. And as we start,
thank you for being patient as we had to work through that
first series of votes. The Subcommittee on Elections has the
important task of overseeing Federal elections and considering
legislative means to improve and protect the integrity of our
electoral system.
The Help America Vote Act, passed in 2002, improved our
Nation's Federal elections systems and processes by requiring
updated voting equipment and standardizing election-related
procedures across the country. The legislation also established
the Election Assistance Commission to assist States in their
obligation to meet the requirements of HAVA.
Now in the ninth year of existence, nearly a decade after
the passage of HAVA, the EAC is here to discuss its ongoing
efforts to fulfill its legislative mission as well as its
budget request for fiscal year 2012. I also want to discuss the
EAC's mission, how it is accomplishing its directives and what
more needs to be done to achieve these goals. Given that our
recent CRs and the President's budget proposal for fiscal years
2010, 2011, and 2012 all zeroed out the requirements payments
function of the EAC, how has its core mission changed?
As many of you know, I have serious doubts about the
Commission's purpose given that most States have met the major
requirements of HAVA and little funding remains to be
disbursed, which is why I recently introduced H.R. 672 to
eliminate the Commission. At a time of $1.5 trillion deficits,
a $14.3 trillion debt and a Federal discretionary spending
budget which has increased enormously in the last 2 years,
spending money on the EAC is very difficult to justify.
In front of us today, though, are two charts that I think
will point out some of the more glaring problems in the
Commission. The first shows the very steep increase in staff
since the legislative cap was removed in 2007. This increase
came without an increase in the authority or responsibilities
set out in HAVA.
The other chart shows the EAC's fiscal year 2012 budget
request by category with 51 percent devoted to management cost.
I don't know how to justify an agency with $5.4 million in
overhead to support programs totaling $3.5 million. These are
both serious concerns of mine and something I hope our
presenters will address in their testimony and in response to
the questions today.
Nevertheless, until and unless H.R. 672 is enacted, the EAC
is still obligated to assist States with compliance to HAVA,
and this subcommittee is obligated to exercise its oversight
responsibilities. Therefore, I welcome today's oversight
hearing and look forward to discussing the EAC's mission,
mandate and budget request. My colleagues and I are committed
to rigorous oversight, and I want to thank each of them for
being here.
I would like now to recognize my colleague, Mr. Brady, the
ranking member of the committee and this subcommittee, for the
purpose of providing an opening statement.
Mr. Brady.
Mr. Brady. Thank you. And I want to thank the chairman for
calling this very important hearing on the Election Assistance
Commission and the 2012 budget request. It is our hope that we
can learn from our witnesses steps the agency will take to
maximize its use of valuable taxpayer resources and to ensure
that the EAC is able to fully carry out its important mission.
The EAC was created in 2002 when Congress enacted the Help
America Vote Act. The bipartisan legislation developed
mandatory minimum standards for States to apply an election
administration. Under the provision of that law, the EAC is
charged with assisting States with the implementation and
enforcement of these standards. While I acknowledge that the
Commission has seen its share of administrative challenges,
these issues I believe are fixable.
The EAC is the only Federal agency created exclusively for
the purpose of aiding State and local elected officials with
their responsibilities to administrate Federal elections. At
first, that help came in the form of money, later in standards,
as well as machine certifications and now information sharing
and best practices, as well as monitoring the money and the
standards.
It is my understanding that the chairman is planning to
hold a number of hearings in the future devoted to reform. Last
year we were able to work in a bipartisan manner on military
voting and ballot tracking. I hope that that will continue, and
I look forward to hearing from all of our witnesses.
Mr. Harper. Does any other member wish to be recognized for
the purpose of making an opening statement?
Mr. Gonzalez. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Harper. Yes, sir. Please proceed.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you very much. And I appreciate you
holding the hearing, Mr. Chairman.
I guess my only observation would be being here at the
inception and the adoption of the legislation that created the
Commission, of course we had great hopes and we understood the
great need for the Commission. I will be honest with you, there
were aspects of it I did not appreciate. We had a debate. We
lost. But, overall, what it was attempting to accomplish--and I
believe we have been on the road and have made significant
progress in lending assistance to our local election officials.
The backdrop is a bill that obviously is out there that
would dismantle and incorporate the Commission in other
agencies or entities. I would oppose that bill. I would hope
that we will be able--and I want to listen. I want to keep an
open mind to everything that the chairman and other members may
have to point out regarding areas of improvement, because I
think we all can agree we can always do a better job, whether
it is an individual Member of Congress or whether any
commission or any other committee. But that is what I would
hope, that we are on the road to improve that which we do but
not necessarily dismantle and replace by simply getting it
subsumed by other agencies that are out there that have their
own issues, by the way. And if they were here before us, we
probably would have charts indicating certain shortcomings.
So let us start the debate. Keep an open mind. And I look
forward to the testimony. And I apologize. A member of my staff
will be here. I apologize to my colleagues and to the chairman,
but I have to chair a meeting at 11:30. So I will be excusing
myself a little earlier than I would like. But again, thank you
for the courtesy and I yield back.
Mr. Harper. Thank you. I would like now to introduce our
witnesses. The Honorable Donetta Davidson is a Commissioner on
the EAC. Ms. Davidson was nominated by President Bush and
confirmed by unanimous consent in the Senate in 2005. She was
appointed to a second term in October of 2008. She has served
as vice chair and chair of the EAC, as well as on its Technical
Guidelines Development Committee. Ms. Davidson has extensive
experience in election administration. She has been a county
clerk recorder, the Director of Elections for the Colorado
Department of State and Colorado Secretary of State. Ms.
Davidson has served on the Federal Election Commission's
advisory panel and the board of directors of the Help America
Vote Foundation. She has been President of the National
Association of Secretaries of State and President of the
National Association of State Election Directors.
The Honorable Gineen Bresso is a Commissioner on the EAC, a
former chair of EAC. She was nominated by President Bush and
confirmed by the Senate in 2008. Prior to service on the EAC,
Ms. Bresso was Minority Elections Counsel for this committee,
the Committee on House Administration, Policy Advisor to former
Governor Ehrlich and Attorney Advisor for the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office. She holds a juris doctorate from Western New
England College School of Law and clerked for the Maryland
Court of Special Appeals.
Mr. Thomas Wilkey is the Executive Director of the EAC, a
position he has held since 2005. He joined the Erie County
Board of Elections as an election clerk, served as Senior
Election Deputy, served on New York State Board of Elections,
was involved in New York's Voting System Certification Program,
served on the New York State Board of Elections from 1992 to
2003 and was the Executive Director in 2003. Mr. Wilkey has
been Secretary, Treasurer, Vice President and President of the
National Association of State Election Directors, served on the
FEC's Voting System Standards Committee, has served on numerous
commissions related to studying election reform and helped in
developing the Help America Vote Act of 2002.
Ms. Alice Miller is the Chief Operating Officer of the EAC.
She oversees the day-to-day operations involving voting systems
testing and certification, administration and human resources,
information technology and research, and programs and policy.
Prior to joining the EAC, Ms. Miller was the Executive Director
of the District of Columbia Board of Elections and Ethics.
During her 12-year tenure, she was responsible for overseeing
and managing all aspects of their elections. She also served as
the board's General Counsel from 1996 to 1997. Ms. Miller holds
a juris doctorate degree from Northeastern University School of
Law.
Ms. Annette Lafferty is the EAC's first Chief Financial
Officer. Since 2009, she has overseen the day-to-day financial
operations, including grants management, accounting, budget and
procurement. Ms. Lafferty has been in Federal financial
management for over 15 years at the U.S. Department of
Education, the Federal Aviation Administration, and the
Corporation for National and Community Service. She has also
worked as a contractor at the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development and the General Services Administration. Ms.
Lafferty holds a master of business administration in finance
and investments from the George Washington University and a
master of arts in psychology from Marymount University.
It is our understanding that Mr. Wilkey will provide
testimony on behalf of himself, Ms. Miller, and Ms. Lafferty.
That being said, we appreciate all of you being here today. The
committee has received written testimony from each of you. At
the appropriate time, I will recognize each of you for 5
minutes to present a summary of that submission.
To help you keep that time, we have a timing device near
the witness table. The device will emit a green light for 4
minutes and will turn yellow when 1 minute remains. When the
light turns red, it means your time has expired.
Commissioner Davidson, we will begin with you. You may
proceed.

STATEMENTS OF THE HON. DONETTA DAVIDSON, COMMISSIONER, U.S.
ELECTION ASSISTANCE COMMISSION; THE HONORABLE GINEEN BRESSO,
COMMISSIONER, U.S. ELECTION ASSISTANCE COMMISSION; THOMAS
WILKEY, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, U.S. ELECTION ASSISTANCE
COMMISSION; ALICE MILLER, CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER, U.S.
ELECTION ASSISTANCE COMMISSION; AND ANNETTE LAFFERTY, CHIEF
FINANCIAL OFFICER, U.S. ELECTION ASSISTANCE COMMISSION

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DONETTA DAVIDSON

Ms. Davidson. Good morning, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Brady. I thank you for inviting me to be with you today. My
name is Donetta Davidson. And as the chair said, I have a
lifelong election experience. I won't repeat any of it. But I
did serve at the same time as Congressman Rokita for part of my
term, which was an honor.
Today I will speak to you primarily about EAC's work to
test and certify voting systems, an area I have focused on
since my arrival to the Commission. In the Help America Vote
Act, it instructs EAC to establish a voting, testing and
certification program. This program is voluntary. However, it
provides valuable information to election officials throughout
the Nation regardless of whether they participate. And the
value comes from a unique role EAC assumes testing voting
systems to high standards and also making that information
available to election officials and the public and notifying
the public up front when we discover an issue.
EAC's commitment to high standards and transparency on how
voting systems are certified provides the following benefits.
EAC saves States money and time. It offers a comprehensive
testing program that thoroughly tests voting systems. The
baseline information allows States to limit their testing to
individual State requirements. Even partial use of the EAC
program has potential to eliminate duplicate testing and save
States millions of dollars as well as 6 to 12 months of testing
time.
EAC holds voting system manufacturers accountable in two
main ways, with a tough, thorough testing process; test plans
must be approved before testing processes can even begin. Once
voting systems have been certified, manufacturers must adhere
to the EAC quality monitoring program, which requires
manufacturers to report issues happening in the field. EAC also
investigates issues experienced with our certified systems and
notifies both public and election officials.
We operate in the sunshine. Accountability, transparency,
and public confidence are crucial to the success of this
program. That is why the methods used in accrediting
laboratories and certifying voting systems are available to the
public. Issues discussed and discovered during testing or in
the field are proactively communicated to election officials
and the general public.
EAC delivers information about certification and testing to
election officials and the public in several ways. Information
is automatically delivered to you if you sign up for the
program alert, including those about voting systems. A
quarterly report for voting system testing and certification, a
newsletter is also provided with technical updates, and
information is included in our weekly e-mail alerts to
stakeholders, which includes Congress.
As a former local and State Election Director, I expressly
appreciate the EAC's understanding that tough standards and the
public notifications are equally important. And not only share
the information, but present it in plain language so that it is
accessible and understandable to everyone.
EAC.gov provides a wealth of information about voting
systems, everything from the original test plan to any anomaly
report we may have issued about the system. And just as
important, EAC brings a perspective of election officials to
the process. We know that the work we do to develop voting
system guidelines and certify voting systems must be applicable
in the real world of elections. The best solution and
technology won't help if they are too expensive or time
consuming for locals to implement.
I have watched the evolution of this program since my
arrival at the EAC, and at that time no voting systems had a
certification by the Federal Government. Today, we have four
voting systems and two modifications that have been certified.
And we are working with jurisdictions throughout the Nation,
sharing information on how to make voting systems operate more
effectively. This combination, with election officials and the
experts nationwide in our network, of support informing and
sharing exactly what has happened is definitely what we think
HAVA envisioned.
Commissioner Bresso will now tell you more about EAC's
clearinghouse and the efforts to gather and share ideas and
solutions in elections.
Thank you again for asking me to testify, and I am pleased
to answer any questions.
[The statement of Ms. Davidson follows:]

Mr. Harper. Thank you, Commissioner Davidson. Commissioner
Bresso.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. GINEEN BRESSO

Ms. Bresso. Good morning, Chair Harper, Ranking Member
Brady and other members of the subcommittee, and I want to
thank you for asking me to be with you today.
One of the roles I have as an EAC Commissioner is to
collect and share best practices from the field of elections,
and I truly feel that the best ideas come directly from
election officials. During my tenure at EAC, I have traveled
across the country and witnessed many innovative and creative
approaches in election administration, especially regarding the
integration of technology into the administration of elections.
I welcome this opportunity to tell you more about some of what
I have seen.
Some of the practices I have witnessed in different States
include the use of electronic poll books to check in voters,
systems which offer all voters, in addition to military and
overseas voters, the ability to track the status of their
absentee ballot electronically, election offices that use
technology to provide greater access to election night
operations and the robust use of social media to communicate
with voters and the news media about polling place hours, wait
times and closures.
EAC has taken the lead in collecting these innovative and
modern solutions and providing this information to election
officials and the general public in a central location on our
Website. The cooperation and feedback we get from election
officials all across the country allows EAC to fulfill this
important informational clearinghouse role.
We have different avenues available which allow us to
leverage these resources. As the designated Federal officer for
the EAC Standards Board, I have a built-in group of election
officials willing to share their insight and ideas. The most
recent Standards Board meeting featured panel discussions on
cost-saving initiatives, commercial off-the-shelf hardware
challenges, implementing the Military and Overseas Voter
Empowerment Act, and how local media and election officials can
work together to communicate with voters.
In an effort to utilize technology and save taxpayer
dollars, I also worked with the membership of the Standards
Board to conduct their summer 2010 meeting in a virtual format
rather than in person. While it may not be recommended or
effective to have virtual meetings in all instances, this
format was successful, cost effective, and is a viable
alternative for other meetings and programs in the future.
Contingency planning in elections is crucial. When I was
chair, I observed that many local governments were preparing
for the flu season, particularly with the threat of H1N1. I
requested and received preventative plans which included
commonsense ideas, like placing hand sanitizers in polling
places, backup staffing strategies and coordination with local
health departments. These contingency plans and others are
posted on eac.gov.
During this past Federal election cycle, I continue to take
the best ideas from the field and to highlight them after
observing the primaries in Maryland and D.C. and early voting
in Georgia and Florida. For example, Maryland conducts parallel
testing, which is a process that duplicates a portion of the
election under conditions similar to the polling place. It
informs election officials that the voting machines are working
the way they should in the field and can also indicate whether
malicious code has been introduced. EAC is in the final stages
of a video about parallel testing, which is an example of a
process that can increase voter confidence.
The District of Columbia opened up election night
operations to the public. They could view the tabulation
process and get updates in person or by video feed. The State
of Georgia provides excellent customer service by providing
many on-line features for voters, including the military and
those overseas. Georgia's My Vote Page allows for the tracking
of absentee ballot status, verification of registration status
and the viewing of sample ballots.
In Florida, I saw a great community partnership like Move
the Vote, which is a partnership between Clay County and the
area realtors to help residents register to vote or update
their status. And in my home county of Palm Beach, the
supervisor of elections had volunteers from local scout troops
at the warehouse to help bring in bags of ballots with memory
cards and sort them according to precinct.
These are just a few examples that election officials can
look to and determine if a same or similar practice could be
applied for the benefit of voters in their community. All of
the innovations and practices I observed are available on
eac.gov.
EAC also plans to provide an on-line forum for seasoned and
new election officials to exchange ideas and solutions. Helping
election officials at both the State and local levels connect
will create a network of experts who can support each other and
achieve their goal of providing service to voters.
I will continue to encourage EAC stakeholders, especially
election officials, to share their innovations and help EAC
promote a national dialogue of how election officials can
continue to serve voters during difficult budget times.
Thank you for asking me to be here today and I welcome any
questions you may have.
[The statement of Ms. Bresso follows:]

Mr. Harper. Thank you. Now I will recognize Mr. Wilkey for
the purposes of his statement.

STATEMENT OF THOMAS WILKEY

Mr. Wilkey. Good morning, Chair Harper, Ranking Member
Brady, and subcommittee members. Thank you again for asking me
to be with you today.
The U.S. Election Assistance Commission is a small Federal
agency with a big mission to improve the Federal administration
of elections. EAC has a dual role. We provide resources to help
States make improvements, and we assist election officials
throughout the Nation, empower voters through access,
collaboration and information.
Today I will briefly discuss our fiscal year 2012 budget
and how we execute it to achieve our mission. The EAC's fiscal
year 2012 budget request is $13,715,665, which includes $3.25
million for the National Institute of Standards and Technology.
These funds are used to develop the voting system guidelines,
the accreditation of voting system test laboratories, a uniform
suite of test methods, and our work to improve services for
military and overseas voters.
EAC's operating budget will be used to support these
additional initiatives: More information for the national
clearinghouse on elections; projects include an on-line
information exchange tool for election officials, most
interactive features like blogs to directly interact with
election officials and voters; and the use of social media like
Twitter to get the word out about issues relating to voting
supports; fully execute our nationwide voting system
certification and testing program. This includes expanding new
efforts to track issues for EAC certified systems in the field,
establishing a communications network with election officials
using similar systems, and gathering and posting information
about voting system performance submitted by election
officials. And throughout 2012, EAC will continue to provide
resources on a national platform to discuss issues that could
impact the election, like the use of commercial off-the-shelf
software and hardware, the lifecycle of voting systems, and how
to effectively communicate the vote results and information
about the election process to voters, with a particular focus
on modern communication methods.
We have research coming in a few months about how, where
and when Americans voted in 2010, including the latest, most
comprehensive data about the ballot request and return rate for
overseas and military voters. That will give us an initial
indication about the impact of the MOVE Act.
I know that some members of this committee think that the
EAC has outlived its usefulness. I respectfully disagree. In
fact, in this challenging budget climate, local election
officials have an even greater need for EAC's resources and
support, and here is why. Local election officials do not have
the resources to get the training, stay current on voting
technology, and buy new voting or registration equipment. Local
election officials cannot afford to go to conferences where
solutions and best practices are shared. States and locals
benefit from the EAC's tough certification program, saving
millions of dollars in testing time. Voting machine
manufacturers are held accountable so that election officials
and voters are assured of reliable systems. Mr. Chairman, EAC
provides all of these valuable services to election officials
throughout the Nation at a very low cost to the Federal
Government. And while I may disagree with those who question
EAC's value, I respect and share their deep concern about the
budget challenges our Nation faces at every level of
government. Every one has more to do with less, and the EAC is
no exception. We are cutting back, too, and working harder than
ever to become even more lean and efficient but still provide
excellent customer service and support the taxpayers, election
officials and voters throughout the Nation.
Elections are better because of EAC and what we do. But we
can always do better and we will. I am very proud of the EAC,
our employees, and the thousands of election officials we serve
every day. In my 42 years in elections at the local, State and
Federal level, I have seen tremendous changes. This is
especially true in the last 10 years, since the 2000 election.
There is an understanding now that elections are hard work on
the part of our dedicated election administrators throughout
the Nation at every level. Voting machines don't last forever.
Technology is now a part of the process, and there is more
scrutiny than ever. EAC's role is to support these hard working
public servants, especially at the local level, and not with
money, but to serve as their backbone of solutions, ideas and
ways to improve customer service for all voters.
I thank you for asking me here today and I look forward to
your questions.
[The statement of Mr. Wilkey follows:]

Mr. Harper. I thank each of you for your statements. We now
have time for committee members to ask questions of the
witnesses. Each member is allotted 5 minutes to question the
witnesses. To help each member track the time, we will use the
timing device on the witness table, and we will alternate back
and forth between the majority and the minority. To begin with,
I recognize myself for 5 minutes.
And my first question that I have will be for Commissioners
Davidson and Bresso. One of the responsibilities given to the
Commissioners in the EAC roles and responsibilities policy is
to approve the annual budget request. The transmittal for the
2012 request was signed by Mr. Wilkey, which I understand has
to do with not having a quorum of Commissioners. Would each
Commissioner please tell us whether or not you agree with the
request as submitted and why?
Ms. Davidson. With the letter that was attached to it, and
knowing that the staff is looking at how we can save money and
reporting back to the Commissioners, I agreed with the budget.
It is down to $13 million. I don't have the last part of the
figures. But quite a cut. That includes the 3\1/2\ million for
NIST, or 3.25 I think it is now for NIST, the National
Institute for Standards and Technology. So that is quite a
reduction and obviously we know that we need to take that
further--the staff has talked about, and I am sure that they
will add to this, working closer with the small agency
community, all the other agencies to see if we can't share some
of our responsibilities because obviously in the Federal
Government--the requirements are far different than any other
place. Coming from a State, I can tell you they are different
from the States.
Mr. Harper. Since we don't have a lot of time, if I can get
Commissioner Bresso's input on that.
Ms. Bresso. No, I do not support the budget. I believe the
budget spends too much money on the bureaucratic infrastructure
and not enough on agency activities and programs that assist
State and local election officials and benefit voters. I
believe that the EAC needs to be a good steward of Federal
funds and to spend taxpayer dollars in an efficient and
effective manner, and I don't believe this budget supports that
goal.
Mr. Harper. Thank you. And, Ms. Lafferty, if I could ask
you a question. The chart that is before you, which is based on
the totals of my category from the budget request, shows the
EAC proposing to spend 51.7 percent of its budget on
management. I just need you to help us justify a management
budget of $5.4 million to manage programs that total just $3.4
million. That seems really out of kilter, and I would just like
your explanation on that.
Ms. Lafferty. Chairman Harper, thank you for giving me the
opportunity to discuss our presentation of the budget. The
budget is aligned with the five goals of our strategic plans.
The first four are our programs that come out of the Help
America Vote Act. Goal 5 is actually manage, not management. It
is to achieve organizational and management excellence. About
half of that 51 percent is for statutory positions and the
staff that supports those positions, four Commissioners, the
General Counsel and the Executive Director. So about 27 percent
is pure administrative cost to support the agency, such as the
rent and about 12 administrative personnel.
Mr. Harper. Let us talk for just a minute about one of the
items in your budget request that has a line item for travel of
$684,000. The request identifies $7,000 for communications
travel and I believe $202,000 for testing and certification
travel. Tell me what the other $475,000 is for on the travel
request. I believe the total is a little over $684,000.
Ms. Lafferty. Our Inspector General's budget is included
within this travel budget. He is not a separate line item or a
separate appropriation. Part of that is for him.
Mr. Harper. But not $475,000.
Ms. Lafferty. No. About $100,000 is for the Commissioners'
travel, and I would be very happy to provide you with the
detailed breakout.
Mr. Harper. If you wouldn't mind, we would appreciate you
providing that to the committee.
Ms. Miller, a question for you. According to the agency's
budget request, in one recent year, you spent $182,000 on
personal computers, which my math as best I can tell works out
to about $3,600 per employee. I need to know what kind of
personal computers cost $3,600 a person. Can you explain that
purchase of $182,000?
Ms. Miller. Those were not personal--those were for--we
completely reassessed our whole infrastructure, technology
infrastructure and individual laptops which the agency staff
was using, which they have had since the beginning of the
agency, were replaced with desktop tower computers. So that was
for the whole agency and part of the IT infrastructure
adjustment.
Mr. Harper. Could you provide me with some additional
information on that? And I will now recognize Ranking Member
Brady for questions.
Mr. Brady. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My question would be to
either of the Commissioners or maybe both. In 2009, the
Government Accountability Office reported they found 72 percent
of our polling places surveyed on election day to have
impediments to private and dependent voters and for people with
disabilities. In 2009 and 2010, this Congress appropriated $7
million to research and develop ways to improve the
accessibility for those voters. 2\1/2\ years later, the EAC
still has not selected researchers to do this essential work.
On March 1, 2011, the Commission received a number of proposals
to do the research.
My question is, why is it taking so long with so many
polling places still inaccessible and when will the researchers
be selected? Will they have the funds to start doing their work
when they are selected?
Ms. Davidson. I can start with the question. Thank you. One
of the reasons why is, States are definitely always having to
change their polling locations and they have to meet the
accessibility requirements, but many times they are public
buildings, whether they are churches or whatever, if they are
old buildings, they are not meeting the needs of accessibility.
The States have to report that to us each year. And part of
HAVA is to make that definitely--all of their precincts
successful. What has taken place since we have had some,
really, problems with our schools, the school districts are
cutting off a lot of the States from their ability to use the
school districts. So they are having trouble finding locations
which are accessible, knowing what we hear from the Secretary
of State as well as our locals.
Mr. Brady. When is this study going to start? The $7
million we gave you, when are you going to start that research?
Is that the research that you are giving me now? That the
schools--in the city from where I am from, the schools have to
allow us to use them for polling places. That doesn't mean it
is true all over the country, but I know in Philadelphia they
have to. They are public buildings. But still, when is the
research going to start?
Ms. Bresso. We had an RFP out for the $7 million accessible
technology grant, which the focus was on improvements to actual
voting systems for accessibility. And that is currently under
an independent peer review process.
As far as polling place setup, the EAC does offer election
management guidelines and quick starts on how to set up polling
places, particularly for accessibility purposes.
Mr. Brady. You still have the $7 million?
Ms. Bresso. Yes. The $7 million is still at EAC, yes.
Mr. Brady. One more little quick question. I guess it is
not even a question. It might be an observation. I heard
everybody here mention the social media. That causes a little
problem for me and I think--I am not speaking for the
chairman--not this chairman--the chairman of the full
committee. I know this causes a problem for him. Because my
granddaughters help me with my social media a whole lot and I
would hate to have to rely on them to tell me when the polling
places are open or not open. But I think that it could very
easily be accessed by people that could give out bad
information. And I know you can't certify any social media, but
I would hope that you don't play too much of a role, put too
much respect into what they do because they can--I know in one
instance from Chairman Lungren that they could declare his
opponent as winning halfway through the race and it wasn't even
over yet; the polling places weren't closed. And that can cause
a lot of mischief.
I understand it is the way of the world. Probably not my
world yet, but it is the way of the world. But I just hope you
won't put too much emphasis on our social media to give out
information for people that are trying to vote and, most
importantly, where they are voting. So just look into that,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Brady. I will now recognize the
gentleman from Indiana, Mr. Rokita, for questions.
Mr. Rokita. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
holding this hearing. And I thank the witnesses for attending
today. I will say for those who will read this record later
that in my former public role I was Indiana Secretary of State
for 8 years. And first of all, I was part of a leadership team
in 2005 in that organization that proposed a successful
resolution to sunset the EAC and then was part of a unanimous
group of Secretaries of State from across the Nation that
renewed that resolution in 2010.
Having said that, I know each one of the folks before us,
maybe except for Annette, Ms. Lafferty. Excuse me. And I want
the record to reflect that my questions simply reflect the
agency that they work in and what the role of Federal
Government should be. I personally enjoy each one of the
witnesses and their personal friendship. In fact, I am
personally friends with two of them here. One of them I
consider my second mother. I won't say which one.
Ms. Davidson. I think it is obvious.
Mr. Rokita. It is not Wilkey, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Brady. You can get into a major problem.
Mr. Rokita. Right. So having said that and getting all of
that on the record, looking at some of the data here and
looking at your budget, some questions have been asked already.
But I would like to know perhaps from Ms. Bresso, why does an
agency of 50 people need 11 chief officers and directors?
Ms. Bresso. I don't believe the agency does and I am
certainly committed to working with staff here to see where we
can make consolidations with positions and experience and cost
savings.
Mr. Rokita. Thank you. Does anyone on the panel disagree
with that? The record reflects no one nodding in the
affirmative.
On April 14, 2005, a written testimony before the House
appropriations subcommittee, the EAC Commissioner said at that
time, quote, with a staff of only 22 persons, EAC efficiently
executes its duties and responsibilities. Have the duties and
responsibilities of the EAC increased since 2005 to justify the
staff more than doubling? Ms. Davidson?
Ms. Davidson. I think when that was stated, one of the
things that has shown in our audit that came down was they were
getting a lot of information out to the States and the locals,
but they hadn't met any of the Federal requirements of anything
that they needed to do and the record will show that in our
hearings later. We worked really hard up front to meet the
needs of getting the money out to the States and doing things
like that. But we did not have any of our procedures and
policies in place for the Federal Government.
Mr. Rokita. So it would be fair that the 2005 testimony was
a little bit of a misspeak? You are either doing your duties in
2005 or not.
Ms. Davidson. Yes. I think that in 2005 when they
testified, I think they thought that they were reaching that
goal. But as we found out when we got audited and we had
received about 82 infractions, that we found that we hadn't met
the Federal requirements, it was only meeting our State and
local requirements.
Mr. Rokita. Thank you. Under EAC's rules and
responsibilities policy, do the Commissioners have authority
over the number of positions of EAC staff and their titles and
responsibilities, setting the salaries; and if not, who does?
Donetta, since I cut you off, I will let you continue on
with answering that.
Ms. Davidson. No, the Commissioners do not have authority.
That has been assigned to the Executive Director. Even in HAVA,
he has the power of hiring staff. But I think if you ask the
staff that, they can tell you what their plans are in the
future.
Mr. Rokita. Thank you. Commissioner Bresso, do you have a
response to that?
Ms. Bresso. No. I was just going to agree that the only
authority commissioners have for hiring are the two statutory
positions, the General Counsel and the Executive Director.
Mr. Rokita. Is this a good way to run a ship? Is this a
good way to run an agency?
Ms. Bresso. No, I do not believe. I believe the
commissioners should have more authority.
Mr. Rokita. Thank you. Mr. Wilkey, seeing as there is a
little bit of time left, can you cite the part of the
Constitution that suggests the Federal Government should
involve itself with local election officials? You mentioned
local election officials not being able to go to conferences
and things. I have been to a lot of those, and they come and
they come to the bar afterwards. I know this. So tell me where
in the Constitution--because we have a House rule now where we
have to cite to the Constitution. So if this agency was to
start off tomorrow and we were to file a bill, what part of the
Constitution allows for this agency to interact with local
election officials?
Mr. Wilkey. I am not a constitutional expert. So I couldn't
quote that part of the Constitution. But what I can say is that
a lot of the support that we give and that we get back are from
local election officials. I think you yourself know having
served as Secretary of State. While we had a role, and I served
at the State level also, the real nitty gritty work of
elections is done at the local level and it is there that we
have tried our very best through our 19 sets of management
guidelines, being assessed on a daily basis, the things that we
are doing in our certification program that directly impact
local election administrators. And I would believe that if they
had the opportunity to appear before the committee, that many
of them would certainly recognize that they receive a great
deal of information from us and a great deal of support from
us.
Mr. Harper. At this time, I will recognize the gentleman
from Texas, Mr. Gonzalez, for questions.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Wilkey, Ms. Miller, Ms. Lafferty, obviously there is
disagreement as to whether this is the kind of budget that all
commissioners would approve of. So I am just wondering, what
goes into the budget-making process over at the Commission?
Whose opinion, suggestions, recommendations do you seek? And
whoever is in the best position to answer that.
Mr. Wilkey. Congressman, our budget process starts as all
Federal agencies, usually year round. We have already put our
2012 budget request to bed by September. We will also already
be talking about 2013. We sit and work with all of our
divisions within our agency to develop our budget. Certainly
that budget proposal is normally given to our commissioners for
approval, but as was indicated in earlier testimony, this year
was a little different because we don't have a quorum. And so I
indicated in my cover letter to the various appropriations
committees that we were unable at this time to present a formal
budget because of the lack of a quorum on the Commission. But
when the Commission is reconstituted fully, we will certainly
bring this back to them. Because once we get a budget, the
second step is doing an implementation plan for the money that
we receive once the budget is finalized. And that
implementation plan will not only set the goals for the agency,
but also show the intent of the commissioners and where they
want to go.
Mr. Gonzalez. Let me ask you, Mr. Wilkey, because I may be
missing something in the process, protocol, maybe legalities or
whatever. Because you don't have a quorum, does that mean that
Commissioner Bresso or Commissioner Davidson doesn't have any
input at all as you go through the budgetary process?
Mr. Wilkey. I don't believe so. And I think--and I know
that Commissioner Bresso has expressed her opinion and I
respect that. We have had many discussions about it and
hopefully, and hopefully soon if we get a full Commission, we
will go back to them. Hopefully at that point, we will also
have a budget for the remainder of the fiscal year and then we
can adopt--I can ask the commissioners to adopt an
implementation plan that they see fits their needs.
Let me also, if I may, point out something that I alluded
to in my testimony for you at the beginning of this hearing. I
recognize that we need to become leaner. That is a goal I think
that every agency in the Federal Government needs to be looking
at. I talk to local and State election officials every day and
listen to their situations where they are losing 20, 30, even
in some cases I have heard 50 percent of their budget. And so
we must also make ourselves leaner and still be able to meet
our mandates under the Help America Vote Act. Many of those
mandates are Federal regulations that we need to comply with.
That takes up a great deal of our time. And I am hopeful that
in looking across the board that Congress will look at that
because we have to meet the same regulations, FISMA, right down
the line, as the big boys do, which means we have to have
additional staff to be able to meet those regulations.
Let me also point out that, and I think Commissioner
Davidson alluded to this, that we have a very close association
and work closely with the Small Agency Council. They are a
group of small agencies similar to us in size. There aren't
that many of them. But, yeah, we work to share in this
situation many training opportunities. And as a resource to
bounce issues off of one another, how do you handle this, how
do you do this, I think that that relationship needs to be
increased. I think we need to look at ways that we can share
more resources. For example, just recently we had a vacancy in
our procurement office. We chose not to fill that vacancy but
instead to reach out to the Small Agency Council and see if
they could help us in any way. And as a result of that, we are
now going to be sharing a procurement officer with another
small agency. I think there are excellent opportunities to be
able to do that. So I have asked our CFO, our General Counsel,
who has a wealth of experience coming from many years at OPM,
and our CFO, our Chief Financial Officer, to work with me in
taking a look at the agency as a whole, see what our mission
is, see what we need to accomplish by statute and the good work
that we want to continue to do for our State and locals, and
find ways that we can reduce the cost, reduce the size of the
number of personnel that we have and still be able to meet
those obligations. And I think that we can do that if we are
able to share resources with other agencies who are obviously
going to have the same fiscal mandates as we do. And I think
that--and hopefully that Congress will take a look at that and
perhaps even make some incentives to small agencies to be able
to do that.
Mr. Gonzalez. And my time is up. I have exceeded it. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Harper. Thank you. I will now recognize Mr. Nugent, the
gentleman from Florida, for questions.
Mr. Nugent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
commissioners and staff for being here. Mr. Wilkey, can you
answer a question for me, particularly as it relates to former
military, National Guard, Reserve members, how many do you have
on the staff of EAC?
Mr. Wilkey. Until recently, I believe we had one and that
was the procurement officer that just left us for another job
and a warmer climate down in North Carolina.
Mr. Nugent. So what steps are you going to take to recruit
additional former military or currently reservists?
Mr. Wilkey. Certainly we have as part of our recruitment
process for any position that comes vacant a recruitment effort
that covers all areas, not only the disability community, the
minority community and all of the other communities as well.
Now, as I indicated in my earlier testimony just a few seconds
ago, it is not likely that we are going to have that many
positions open in the future. I have instituted a hiring freeze
a couple of months ago and that any position that becomes
vacant now will be looked at very carefully to see if there are
other persons on staff that can do that or, as I previously
mentioned, we can outsource it or work with another small
agency or another agency to accomplish that goal. So we don't
offer many opportunities now to fill positions in the near
future.
Mr. Nugent. It just seems like a rather small number if all
you had was one. Obviously in your responsibility--particularly
as it relates to military voting overseas, is that correct?
Mr. Wilkey. That is correct, although I think the bulk of
that work is done by the Federal Voting Assistance Program, and
I know that they have many former military personnel working
for them as well as I believe some detailees. I cannot say that
for sure.
Mr. Nugent. Do you believe that they bring value,
reservists and former military? Do you believe they bring value
to your organization?
Mr. Wilkey. Absolutely. I think any people that have had
that type of experience would bring valuable service. We
certainly were very sad to lose our procurement officer because
he brought a lot of that experience to his work in dealing with
contracts. And so we were very happy to have him with us and
sorry to see him go.
Mr. Nugent. One of the things I read is that your last or
your latest General Counsel hiring process, he asserted in a
written statement that he was asked questions by former
Commissioner Hillman in his interview that were an attempt to
use his military service as a negative in the employment
selection process by pointing out the potential for short-term
and long-term absence as a reservist. If this is true, it may
amount obviously to a violation of the Uniform Services
Employment and Re-employment Rights Act. Is there a pending
investigation or claim that you know of?
Mr. Wilkey. There is a pending claim, Congressman, and we
recently received some further information on that. The
commissioners are looking at that now. They will be consulting
with their counsel and since it is a confidential matter, we
certainly would be glad to brief any member of the committee or
brief committee staff on whatever information we can provide to
them.
Mr. Nugent. I am certainly concerned as a father of three
currently serving military officers in the United States Army,
I am a little concerned that that questioning would even go to
that direction, much less the fact that you only had one prior
service. One of the things that when these kids are serving
overseas and they come back to this country for employment,
their military service is supposed to mean something. And I
would love to have any input from any commissioners on that,
also, if you would like.
Ms. Davidson. I feel that, like our Executive Director
said, if you would like to be briefed, I would be more than
happy to talk with you in private. I just think that right now
with it being under review that it is best that we don't bring
it up in a public forum.
Mr. Nugent. I understand. We are going to request through
letter to you with regards to the information that we would
like to have presented back to us, Mr. Chairman, if you don't
mind. And we would like to have you send us any related
documents that we may request. I am a little concerned about
the fact and go back to a prior--another conversation that you
had and particularly Commissioner Bresso in the fact that you
don't actually consult--I mean, you have a quorum--you have
four members; is that correct? And to have a quorum, you have
to have how many present?
Ms. Bresso. You have to have three, three of the four.
Mr. Nugent. But I am surprised you don't talk to, since you
have such a small number, that you don't talk to your
commissioners in regards to the actual budget process to get
input. Particularly when you have a small agency of 50
employees. And I ran an agency of 500. So I am a little
dismayed by the fact on the input aspect of it. But we are
going to be asking those questions in a written format to you.
So we appreciate your response. Thank you.
Mr. Harper. This time I would like to introduce into the
record the resolution from the National Association of
Secretaries of State which was adopted on February 6, 2005 and
was renewed at the 2010 summer conference in July 20, 2010,
which recommended that the EAC could be eliminated.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Harper. Also, I will introduce into the record a copy
of the letter from the Social Security Administration dated
October 13, 2010, which indicated that the agency, EAC, had
failed to do its statutorily required report which is now more
than 5 years past due.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Harper. And then also I will introduce into the record
the Office of Special Counsel report discussing the settlement
of the political discrimination case, which is dated December
2, 2009, which covers an issue that we have obviously covered
in the previous term in hearings in here. But this covers a
matter that resulted in the government being sued and paying
out a settlement. And this is a report that we would submit to
the record. Is there any objection to that? That is without
objection.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Harper. And I will recognize--and I also have one other
report, which would be the IG report on one of my favorite
topics, the purchase of the shirts and sweatshirts that were
purchased. And in that report also it recognizes that there
were 263 shirts remaining in inventory and that is something
that you, Mr. Wilkey, you and I discussed in a previous
hearing. So I won't beat a dead horse on that, but I would
submit that also in the record. And that is also without
objection.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Harper. I will now recognize Ranking Member Brady.
Mr. Brady. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I ask unanimous consent
to include the following in the record: A letter to the
National Institute of Standards and Technology from me
regarding H.R. 672 and the reply; a letter to the FEC from me
regarding H.R. 672 and the reply; a letter from Leadership
Conference of Civil and Human Rights to the President regarding
the appointment of commissioners to EAC; letters from CCD
regarding the EAC and voters with disabilities; a letter from
the Public Citizens regarding staffing and funding of the EAC;
a letter from the American Association of People with
Disabilities regarding this hearing. And I thank you for having
this hearing, Mr. Chairman. I also thank the witnesses for
participating.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Harper. Thank you very much, Mr. Brady. I would ask,
Mr. Wilkey, if you could in writing inform us of the
whereabouts of those shirts just for my curiosity if you don't
mind.
Mr. Wilkey. I would be happy to do so, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Harper. And I thank the witnesses for appearing today
and for the members' participation. I now adjourn the
subcommittee.
[The information follows:]

[Whereupon, at 12:00 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


