- IMPROVING BROADBAND DEPLOYMENT: SOLUTIONS FOR RURAL AMERICA

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

IMPROVING BROADBAND DEPLOYMENT: SOLUTIONS FOR RURAL AMERICA

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ENERGY, AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
JUNE 22, 2017

__________

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 115-026
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
25-857 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2017

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
ROD BLUM, Iowa
JAMES COMER, Kentucky
JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, Puerto Rico
DON BACON, Nebraska
BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
ROGER MARSHALL, Kansas
RON ESTES, Kansas
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
DWIGHT EVANS, Pennsylvania
STEPHANIE MURPHY, Florida
AL LAWSON, JR., Florida
YVETTE CLARK, New York
JUDY CHU, California
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
VACANT

Kevin Fitzpatrick, Majority Staff Director
Jan Oliver, Majority Deputy Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Adam Minehardt, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Rod Blum....................................................     1
Hon. Brad Schneider..............................................     2

WITNESSES

Mr. Mike Romano, Senior Vice President, Industry Affairs &
Business Development, NTCA--The Rural Broadband Association,
Arlington, VA..................................................     5
Mr. Dave Osborn, CEO, VTX1, Raymondville, TX, testifying on
behalf of the Western Telecommunications Alliance..............     7
Mr. Tim Donovan, Senior Vice President, Legislative Affairs,
Competitive Carriers Association, Washington, DC...............     8
Mr. Chris Allendorf, Vice President of External Relations and
General Counsel, Jo-Carroll Energy, Inc. (NFP), Elizabeth, IL..    10

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Mr. Mike Romano, Senior Vice President, Industry Affairs &
Business Development, NTCA--The Rural Broadband
Association, Arlington, VA.................................    28
Mr. Dave Osborn, CEO, VTX1, Raymondville, TX, testifying on
behalf of the Western Telecommunications Alliance..........    48
Mr. Tim Donovan, Senior Vice President, Legislative Affairs,
Competitive Carriers Association, Washington, DC...........    60
Mr. Chris Allendorf, Vice President of External Relations and
General Counsel, Jo-Carroll Energy, Inc. (NFP), Elizabeth,
IL.........................................................    69
Questions and Answers for the Record:
Question from Hon. Don Bacon to Mike Romano..................    77
Question from Hon. Don Bacon to Dave Osborn..................    79
Question from Hon. Don Bacon to Tim Donovan..................    82
Question from Hon. Don Bacon to Chris Allendorf..............    84
Additional Material for the Record:
None.

IMPROVING BROADBAND DEPLOYMENT: SOLUTIONS FOR RURAL AMERICA

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 22, 2017

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Subcommittee on Agriculture, Energy, and Trade,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
Room 2360, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Rod Blum
[chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Blum, Chabot, King, Leutkemeyer,
Comer, Bacon, and Schneider.
Chairman BLUM. Good morning. I call this hearing to order.
Thank you for all being here today as we assess how our
Nation is doing at building out broadband services to our rural
areas. And do not let lack of attendance here indicate to you
in any way lack of interest. As Ranking Member Schneider and I
were just saying, it is a very, very busy day and a lot of
things going on this morning. So everybody, maybe more so than
usual, is being pulled in multiple directions. But rest assured
it is a very serious issue. And I am from a rural district and
it is talked about every time I am back in the State of Iowa.
As we have all witnessed in the last decade, modern
communications technology has provided endless opportunities to
small businesses, and particularly new and exciting ones to
small firms located in rural America. The growth of the
telecommunications industry and the advances in the way we
communicate with each other in recent history has been nothing
less than astonishing.
Because of this rapid advancement, we have seen a
revolution of sorts for small businesses as well. Small firms
can communicate now with potential buyers around the world.
Family farmers are using wireless technologies to monitor and
maximize their crop production. Entrepreneurs can launch a
website or an application from their living room or from just
about anywhere. I own a small technology company and we sell
around the world, and we could not do it without the internet.
And with the use of now commonplace smartphones, we can accept
payments from just about anywhere there is a wireless signal.
Most importantly, these new technologies provide the gateway
and opportunity for economic growth and job creation,
particularly in rural areas.
One of the most important tools the internet offers to
small business is the ability to access the national and global
electronic marketplace. From 2005 to 2015, electronic commerce
in the United States, also known as online sales, grew from
$291 billion to $342 billion. It is an average increase of 15.3
percent from 2012 to 2015. Phenomenal growth. And this will not
slow down anytime soon; I am sure you would agree.
Our small businesses, particularly ones in rural areas,
depend on new telecommunications technologies to compete across
town and across the globe. Our witnesses today represent a
critical part of the infrastructure that allows them to do just
that. The Nation's small telecommunications providers are the
ones that traditionally supply the bulk of broadband services
to the most rural parts of America, and that is no easy task.
For instance, it is certainly worth the investment when you
connect broadband to a densely populated urban area with homes,
apartments, businesses, and people all converging in a
relatively small area. It is not uncommon to have hundreds, if
not thousands, of potential subscribers in a 1 square mile
area. In rural areas, where family farms dot the landscape,
acres and acres and acres apart from each other, in towns with
populations of 300 representing the center of the community,
the bang for the investment buck is not quite as large.
Unfortunately, the simple geographic fact of population density
has led to a rather large disparity of 39 percent of our rural
Americans not having access to high-speed telecommunications
capacity--39 percent--compared to only 4 percent of Americans
who live in urban areas. We have been making progress over the
past few years, but more needs to be done to put rural America
on par with urban America.
This issue is a double-edged sword in that we have small
telecommunications companies serving the greater rural, small
business sector at large with no small responsibility. We here
in Congress must ensure that our Federal Government's
regulatory regime is supporting and fostering growth in the
telecommunications industry, not penalizing and limiting it, as
we have seen in recent years. We have a new administration and
new leadership at the Federal Communications Commission, or the
FCC as most of us know it by, and other regulatory bodies that
have a significant say about how and when broadband services
can be delivered to rural areas in the United States. And I
remain hopeful for continued, positive change.
Again, I want to thank everyone for being here,
particularly our panelists. And I now yield to our ranking
member, Mr. Schneider, for his opening remarks.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to welcome
the chairman of the overall Small Business Committee, Mr.
Chabot. I'm pleased to join you both at this very important
hearing today.
Technology is a major contributor to the U.S. economy and
the engine for modern American economic growth. Last year
alone, the internet created 10.4 million jobs across all 50
States and contributed to 6 percent of the total U.S. GDP, 1.2
trillion dollars. At a time when technology holds the key to
remaining competitive in a globalized economy, it is worrisome
that the United States is ranked number 16 in the world in
broadband access. Let me repeat that, the United States is
ranked 16th in the world in broadband access.
For those of us fortunate enough to have access to
broadband, we have seen the benefits of technology and how it
affects our daily lives. From being able to make decisions
based on real-time data, to being able to work remotely from
any location, internet access has changed the face of business.
Yet 34 million Americans still lack access to high-speed
internet, 39 percent of which live in rural communities. This
is simply unacceptable.
Even though broadband subscriptions have progressively
increased, rural and low-income community access is being
outpaced by the rest of the country due to a lack of network
deployment. Unfortunately, the digital divide may further widen
without adequate support for broadband deployment. The truth is
that expanding access in hard-to-reach and sparsely populated
areas usually comes with a high price tag and significant
challenges.
The government plays a large role in ensuring all Americans
have access to 21st century technology, and that is why we are
holding this hearing, to learn just how we in Congress can
improve broadband adoption. Eliminating the digital divide will
not only assist rural communities; it will help our Nation's
job creators. By enabling small business access to the global
electronic marketplace, we encourage job creation and
innovation. Thus far, Federal loan and grant programs have
helped rural communities gain access to high-speed internet,
but we need to do more. Substantial and direct funding to
improve broadband nationally is critical to enabling both small
telecom carriers and small consumers to thrive.
In the wake of a larger infrastructure package, we have an
enormous opportunity to upgrade America's digital blueprint. We
must harness the potential of robust technologies and find the
sweet spot between government oversight and technological
advancements, all without hindering business opportunities.
I look forward to today's discussion on improving broadband
access in order to strengthen rural communities and small
businesses. The insights gathered today will allow us to
evaluate the performance of the FCC and supporting network
deployment.
I would like to thank all of the witnesses for being here
today and providing us your insight. And with that I yield
back. Thank you.
Chairman BLUM. I would now like to explain opening
statements, how that works and timing.
If Committee members have an opening statement prepared, I
ask that it be submitted for the record.
I would like to take a moment to explain once again the
timing lights for you. You will each have 5 minutes to deliver
your testimony. The light will start out as green. When you
have 1 minute remaining, it will turn to yellow. And finally,
at the end of your 5 minutes, it will turn to red. And we ask
that you please try to the best of your ability adhere to that
timeframe.
Now I would like to introduce our distinguished panel
today. Our first witness today is Mike Romano, Senior Vice
President of Industry Affairs and Business Development for
NTCA, the Rural Broadband Association. In his role, he directs
public policy, government affairs, business opportunities, and
community initiatives for the nearly 850 small rural
telecommunications providers it serves. Mr. Romano previously
worked with the Bingham McCutcheon Law Firm and has had a
diverse range of position within the telecommunications
industry, including Founding Vice President and General Counsel
of GTT Communications, following a merger between Global
Internetworking, Inc., and European Technologies and
Telecommunications. He has also held various positions with
America on Line and Level 3 Communications. Thank you for being
here with us today, Mr. Romano.
Our next witness is Dave Osborn, CEO of VTX1 in
Raymondville, Texas, testifying on behalf of the WTA, Advocates
for Rural Broadband. Mr. Osborn has been in his current
position for 12 years, prior to which he had already worked in
the telecommunications industry, holding various positions with
multiple companies for more than 4 decades. Mr. Osborn began
his career in the industry in 1970 with Southwestern Bell in
Dallas, Texas, eventually climbing the corporate ladder to find
himself at AT&T's corporate headquarters in Morristown, New
Jersey, in the mid-1980s. He is now at his current position at
VTX1 and also sits on the board of directors of the WTA. Thank
you for being here with us today, Mr. Osborn.
Up next is Tim Donovan, Senior Vice President of
Legislative Affairs for the Competitive Carriers Association,
otherwise known as the CCA. We have a lot of acronyms in
Washington, D.C., that is for sure. Mr. Donovan previously
served as Manager of Government Affairs for the Direct
Marketing Association, where he is responsible for supporting
the advocacy goals of the direct marketing community. In his
current capacity, Mr. Donovan is tasked with presenting the
association's legislative advocacy before policymakers on
issues impacting wireless telecommunications providers,
including broadband deployment, universal service, access to
spectrum, devices, broadband policy, roaming, and other issues
that affect the policy of these carriers. Does everyone
understand all of that? Thank you for being here with us today,
Mr. Donovan.
And now I yield to Ranking Member Schneider for their
introduction of our final witness.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Thank you. It is my pleasure to introduce
Mr. Chris Allendorf. Mr. Allendorf has served as the vice
president of external relations and general counsel for Jo-
Carroll Energy since 2015. Joe-Carroll Electric Cooperative is
located in my home State of Illinois and was founded with the
goal of bringing electricity to rural residents not reached by
investor-owned utilities. Since then, the cooperative has
transformed to meet the needs of rural communities in modern
times by providing other essential services, including
broadband internet. Mr. Allendorf has transitioned from
corporate counsel to other roles in the cooperative. As general
counsel, Mr. Allendorf oversees legal and regulatory matters
involving the cooperative's three business areas: electric,
natural gas, and broadband internet. Mr. Allendorf also
oversees the cooperative's economic development initiatives.
Mr. Allendorf holds a B.S. degree from Western Illinois
University and received his J.D. from Northern Illinois
University in 2012. Mr. Allendorf is a lifelong resident of
rural northwest Illinois. He also serves on the Board of the
Galena Area Chamber of Commerce and the Tri-County Economic
Development Alliance. Welcome, Mr. Allendorf.
Chairman BLUM. Very good. Very good. Thank you, Mr.
Schneider.
And now I would like to recognize our first witness, Mike
Romano, for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF MIKE ROMANO, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, INDUSTRY
AFFAIRS & BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT, NTCA--THE RURAL BROADBAND
ASSOCIATION; DAVE OSBORN, CEO, VTX1; TIM DONOVAN, SENIOR VICE
PRESIDENT, LEGISLATIVE AFFAIRS COMPETITIVE CARRIERS
ASSOCIATION; CHRIS ALLENDORF, VICE PRESIDENT OF EXTERNAL
RELATIONS AND GENERAL COUNSEL, JO-CARROLL ENERGY, INC.(NFP)

STATEMENT OF MIKE ROMANO

Mr. ROMANO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Schneider, and members of the Subcommittee for the chance to
testify on the importance of rural broadband to the U.S.
economy and how sound policies can promote the deployment and
sustainability of broadband in rural America.
NTCA's 850 members are small businesses, most based in the
rural communities they serve. They rose to the original
challenge of unserved areas, answering the call and getting
telephone service at the time to rural America. Today, these
small businesses and cooperatives deliver cutting-edge
broadband critical to the well-being of rural America,
translating into economic development and job creation. And the
payback of these investments comes in economic activity that
accrues mostly to the benefit of urban areas.
Small rural carriers have led the charge in deploying
future-proof networks, with 71 percent of their customers
having access to 25 megabits down speed that the FCC has
defined as the access standard today.
But there is much more to do. With the remaining customers
being harder to reach and with many rural areas served by other
providers suffering from an even greater lack of access and
even where networks are built, the job is not done. It is not
just about the one-time act of getting broadband out there; it
makes little sense to declare victory if the service is too
expensive or if the network cannot keep pace with consumer
demand.
Unfortunately, the business of rural broadband is hardly a
money-making proposition. Distance, density, and topography
undercut the business case in rural America. This is why direct
support from the High Cost Universal Service Fund is essential.
Without sufficient USF, it is difficult, if not impossible, to
justify rural broadband loans or to charge reasonable rates for
rural service. USF is perhaps the best example of a public-
private partnership in the broadband space, having helped to
justify construction loans and private network investments that
total tens of billions of dollars today.
But the USF program has been badly damaged. While the FCC
took much-needed steps to update the program last year, the
reforms also revealed more clearly than ever how insufficient
the Universal Service Fund is. A flat budget in place since
2011 that is now enforced by a firm control will deny $173
million in USF support for small rural carriers over the next
12 months. That is $173 million for broadband investments
already made, forcing them to respond by hiking rural consumer
rates, cutting jobs, and slamming the brakes on future
investments. The fact that the budget control changes
unpredictably only further undermines their ability to borrow
or invest in long-term network assets.
A survey that NTCA just completed and that we will actually
be releasing today indicates that two-thirds of our members are
pulling back on investments because of this problem,
translating potentially to hundreds of millions of dollars in
suspended investments and possibly hundreds of thousands of
rural Americans locked in at lower speeds.
Tack on another $110 million in shortfalls to fund a
support model the FCC developed last year and this translates
to lower speeds, higher prices, and less broadband network
expansion across 40 percent of the U.S. landmass. This outcome
undermines the great progress that has been enabled and
achieved by these small companies leveraging the universal
service program to date. It is contrary to the universal
service mandates of current law. Fortunately, 170 members of
Congress, including members of this Subcommittee, have already
expressed concern to the FCC about how this affects rural
consumers and communities, particularly prices for rural
broadband that can remain twice as high as what urban consumers
and businesses pay, if not even higher.
We hold out hope, just like our members do, in continuing
to try to build where they can, that Congress and the FCC will
work together to make sure the promise of last year's USF
reforms will be realized by the millions of Americans who badly
need them to work.
Given these impacts and the sustainability and
effectiveness of the USF program is a top priority, but there
are other issues of importance, too. For example, as
policymakers consider promoting infrastructure deployment,
streamlining and standardizing access to Federal lands would
help greatly, especially for small businesses that lack the
staff and resources to navigate multiple layers of Federal
agency process.
Right size regulation is important, too. A survey NTCA did
in 2016 showed that our small business members have only 40
employees on average, but face just under 600 hours of burden,
73 workdays per year in Federal telecom regulatory reporting.
We need to strike a better balance between heavy-handed
regulation, and, on the other hand, a complete lack of rules of
the road that could put important goals, like universal service
and interconnection at risk.
Finally, better compliance across Federal agencies with the
Regulatory Flexibility Act could help, too. All too often,
agencies undertake cursory RFA analyses that do not recognize
the realities of operating as a small business. We see great
promise in several bills that the Full House has taken up, and
we are eager to see those bills provide the guidance necessary
to improve the RFA process and result in savings for small
companies.
We look forward to working with you on these important
public policy initiatives and building upon the many successes
these small businesses have had to date in deploying broadband
in rural America.
Thank you again for holding this hearing, and I look
forward to your questions.
Chairman BLUM. Thank you, Mr. Romano.
I would like to recognize our next witness now, Mr. Osborn.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAVE OSBORN

Mr. OSBORN. Thank you, Chairman Blum, Ranking Member
Schneider, and members of the Subcommittee. I appreciate the
opportunity to testify today on improving broadband deployment
in rural America.
I am the chief executive officer for the VTX1 Companies, a
rural telecommunications provider based in Raymondville, Texas.
Detailed information on my company and my personal work history
have been submitted with my written testimony. Today I am
representing our national association, WTA, Advocates for Rural
Broadband, on whose board of directors I serve.
I intend to focus on three main areas where I think
Congress can work with the regulators to facilitate broadband
deployment in rural America.
First is universal service policy. Without the support we,
and other rural telecom providers, receive from the Fund, our
cooperative members would never be able to afford the services
we provide. For many years, the FCC has tried to modernize the
Universal Service Fund, first with the National Broadband Plan
in 2010, which recommended freezing support at 2010 funding
levels. These reform efforts culminated in a March 2016 order,
which resulted in companies like ours seeing their support
reduced because of a budget reflecting the 2010 funding levels.
We believe this approach attacks the problem from the wrong
angle. Instead of setting the goal for broadband in rural
America and attempting to determine what it would cost, the FCC
has set an outdated budget and essentially said, ``See what you
can do with this.''
Our Federal USF from last year is down approximately a half
a million dollars, with greater reductions anticipated in light
of the caps and constraints the FCC has placed on the high-cost
fund. These Federal support reductions have reduced our capital
expansion within our Valley Telephone service areas and slowed
the conversation to fiber optic. It is important to upgrade our
networks to fiber because a fiber network will have a service
life several times that of a copper one and the maintenance
costs of a fiber network are much less than with copper.
Additionally, serving the needs of cellular carriers with their
forthcoming 5G LTE traffic will be very important. Instead of
caps and cuts, the USF high cost program needs at least an
inflationary adjustment so that high-quality broadband can be
pushed further into rural America.
Second is streamlining our permitting processes for
existing rights of way. Congress should review and reform the
permitting process for access to Federal lands and other right-
of-ways. We wait several months and spend many thousands of
dollars on projects for environmental, archaeological, and
historical preservation reviews. Many have little value.
For example, in 2010, VTX1 received a Broadband Technology
Opportunity Program, BTOP, grant to construct a fiber-optic
infrastructure for our universities. Our shovel-ready project
had to wait 9 months to get environmental approvals needed to
bore underneath the gravel right-of-way along two U.S. Federal
highways.
Third, regulatory reporting burdens. We are concerned with
the increased quantity of reporting obligations and burdens
placed upon us involving regulatory reporting to the FCC, USAC,
NECA, and other Federal agencies when the recovery of these
costs has been capped. VTXI performed a detailed wage analysis
in 2016 and found that we spend around 3,200 hours completing
just the Federal reporting requirements placed upon us. This
costs us about $100,000 a year in wages and another $50,000 a
year in benefit costs alone, with none of these dollars being
recovered by any Federal support. A copy of our spreadsheet and
study with our wage analysis is attached to my written
testimony.
Our conclusions are straightforward. First, the high-cost
fund component of Federal USF needs to continue in remote-
serving areas in the rural communities, as well as having a
cost-of-living escalator to keep the fund viable during periods
of inflation. An increase in high-cost fund money should be
considered as well to speed up broadband deployment.
Second, permitting timelines should be greatly reduced in
areas and the long roads where the land has been previously and
continuously disturbed.
Third, regulatory reporting should be streamlined and
limited to items that have a significant, measurable benefit to
broadband deployment in America.
That concludes my testimony. I await your questions. Thank
you.
Chairman BLUM. Thank you, Mr. Osborn.
Next, I would like to recognize Mr. Donovan, for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TIM DONOVAN

Mr. DONOVAN. Thank you, Chairman Blum, Ranking Member
Schneider, and members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for
inviting me to testify about improving mobile broadband
deployment in rural America.
This hearing is timely, Mr. Chairman, following the
President's emphasis on rural broadband in your district
yesterday. It is great to hear that you were able to join in
person in 5G meetings at the White House today.
CCA represents nearly 100 wireless carriers and nearly 150
vendors and suppliers. The vast majority of CCA's members are
small businesses whose employees are the same consumers that
live and work in the communities they serve.
Mobile broadband use continues to increase exponentially.
Ericsson recently forecasted a greater than five time increase
in mobile data consumption over the next 5 years. Yet, a
persistent digital divide continues to plague certain rural
areas, leaving a subset of the Nation trailing behind their
urban counterparts on the road to 5G, including small
businesses and entrepreneurs.
As FCC Chairman Pai noted last week, we do not bemoan the
digital divide because some people cannot play games like Candy
Crush. Internet connectivity is vital to full participation in
modern life, and as he articulated at the inaugural Rural
Prosperity Task Force meeting, these policies are important for
demonstrating that the Federal Government cares about rural
America.
Access to mobile broadband is not only a telecommunications
issue; it is a jobs issue, an education issue, public health
and safety issue, and an issue of America's competitiveness on
the international stage. Simply put, the future of rural
economic, and so, small business growth, and leading the world
in 5G is directly tied to the availability of mobile broadband.
CCA's members are proud to serve rural and remote parts of
the country with the latest mobile broadband technologies. That
means preserving and expanding 4G LTE today and upgrading to
5G.
Policymakers can support rural broadband deployment through
three key issues. First, the FCC plans to distribute nearly $5
billion for mobile deployment over the next decade through the
Mobility Fund. But before the final eligible areas are set, we
need better data. The current data is not standardized, nor
useful, for determining where coverage gaps persist. Carriers
know this, Congress has recognized this, and the FCC's website
even acknowledges it.
It boils down to coverage, and you know better than anyone
else where in your district you have coverage and where you do
not, but bad data means that your district could be ineligible
for support through the Mobility Fund. And as an accurate
coverage picture is developed, policymakers should ensure that
the Fund is sized to preserve and expand mobile broadband
ubiquitously and ultimately meet Congress's mandate.
Second, carriers must navigate a regulatory maze to deploy
broadband infrastructure, meaning the towers, base stations,
antennas, and wires, that are the skeleton for mobile service.
It is critical to support carriers' abilities to expand and
densify their networks for uses like precision agriculture, an
important technology for this Subcommittee; telework
opportunities and economic growth for America's small
employers. Yet the obstacles continue to multiply. In fact,
each step on the chart you have before you highlights potential
costs and delays for businesses.
The bottom line is this: if we want to expand broadband
throughout rural America and connect small entrepreneurs to the
global economy, siting processes must be streamlined at the
local, State, and Federal Government levels. The same
regulations for 400-foot towers should not apply to modern
small cells.
This Committee should be a leader to ensure that policies
enhance small businesses who have limited resources. To that
end, the FCC deserves credit for establishing the Broadband
Deployment Advisory Committee in which CCA participants. This
stakeholder group should work alongside Congress to produce
uniform policies that advance infrastructure deployment.
Finally, spectrum is the lifeblood of wireless networks,
meaning that carriers must have access to low-, mid-, and high-
frequency bands. In addition to deploying physical cells,
carriers can enhance their network capacity by adding to their
spectrum portfolios. The FCC recently completed the first-ever
incentive auction where carriers bid nearly $20 billion for 600
megahertz band spectrum voluntarily relinquished by
broadcasters. Around 30 of the winning bidders are CCA members.
Now, the FCC must act expeditiously to repack the band and make
the spectrum available to the winning carriers so they can put
their investment to use now and certainly before the 39-month
transition deadline.
Carriers need greater access to spectrum at all frequencies
to continue to innovate and invest in mobile solutions. While
low-band spectrum is necessary to address network coverage
gaps, especially in rural America, the capacity needed for 5G
and next generation technologies, which will be the foundation
for transformative services, requires the use of mid- and high-
band spectrum resources as well. Small businesses in rural
American can no longer afford to be on the fringe of the
industry's shift to next generation networks, and policymakers
are at the helm of this transition and can ensure that
consumers in unserved and underserved areas are part of the 5G
world.
Policies established by Congress and implemented by the FCC
determine whether small businesses in rural America have access
to the latest services or are left behind modern mobile
economy. Competitive carriers want to be part of the solution.
Thank you again for holding today's hearing. And I welcome
any questions.
Chairman BLUM. Thank you, Mr. Donovan.
I now recognize Mr. Allendorf for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CHRIS ALLENDORF

Mr. ALLENDORF. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Schneider, and members of the Committee, for the opportunity to
address you regarding Jo-Carroll Energy's experience with rural
broadband deployment.
Our company was founded as an electric cooperative in 1939
as a result of the Rural Electrification Act. Today, we are a
natural gas, broadband, and electric cooperative serving
thousands of rural accounts across northwest Illinois. We are
part of a broader electric cooperative industry that serves
more than 40 million members nationwide over lines that cover
more than half of our Nation. Most of these members and lines
are in rural America. Rural utility cooperatives are not-for-
profit, private businesses that operate under democratic
principles serving our members at cost.
The goal of the REA was to bring electricity to rural
Americans to ensure they enjoyed the same quality of life as
those in urban areas when others could not see a business case
to do so. There is a similar situation happening right now with
broadband in rural America. We serve fewer customers spread out
over greater distances than more urban investor-owned
utilities. Low customer density is important to keep in mind
when considering large scale deployment of broadband in rural
America.
In 2009, Jo-Carroll began providing internet access to our
members from a fixed wireless broadband system that we were
utilizing for our electric and gas operations. Our hope was to
bring higher speed broadband to rural subscribers than what was
available, if anything, by leveraging our existing
infrastructure. Our topography is challenging. We cover the
highest terrain in Illinois down to river basins and all of it
through dense forests.
We have not been able to reach as many people as we had
hoped or offer the speeds that they need. Later, we transferred
our internal network to fiber due to the need for reliable,
high speed broadband for our utility operations. Fiber provided
low latency and consistent high speeds unaffected by our
topography. Most importantly for us, it is scalable to meet our
future utility demands.
We sought to provide the same benefits to our members. Cost
prohibited us from rolling out fiber to our entire service
area, so we identified Galena, Illinois, as an ideal site for a
fiber pilot project. It is a rural town of 3,500 amid farmland
near the Mississippi. It is the second-most visited tourist
attraction in Illinois after Chicago. That has created a robust
hospitality and retail sector. Galena faces the same challenges
as other rural areas regarding access to broadband. Service was
only provided by cable companies or telcos over aging copper
lines. Speed and reliability were big issues.
Completed in 2016, our fiber project utilized existing
overhead and underground utility infrastructure. Our take rate
is over 60 percent among businesses in the project area. I have
provided a few testimonials, but in summary, fiber has allowed
businesses in the area to be more productive, more efficient,
and increase sales; therefore, creating the potential to expand
their business. It is now common to see merchants in Galena
using mobile Bill Pay and other productivity applications which
were not options before fiber broadband.
For rural residents, high-speed broadband is not just about
pastimes like Netflix, but more importantly, it is about a
chance at a better living. Small businesses and farms are able
to engage in commerce beyond their local area, which is a
necessity in our global economy. It means rural students have
the same access to high-quality education as their urban peers.
It is critical for rural hospitals and clinics to provide
modern patient care, and with experience in economic
development, I can say it is one of the first things that
businesses look at when deciding to locate in our area.
Studies have shown that greater broadband connection in
rural areas result in higher income and lower unemployment.
Without reliable broadband, these businesses and farms are at a
competitive disadvantage. It has become as much of a necessity
as the gas and electric services that we provide.
The President's stated goal of a large infrastructure
program is laudable, but we need broadband as much, if not
more, than roads and bridges in rural America. Rural broadband
access needs a place of special importance in these
discussions.
Chairman Pai comes from a small Kansas town, and he has
stated that government needs to rewrite regulations to cut red
tape. He has created the Broadband Deployment Committee
presumably to do just that. As you consider proposals to spur
broadband deployment, we believe that all potential providers,
including electric cooperatives, should be eligible to
participate in open and inclusive processes to compete for
funding opportunities. We urge policymakers to consider the
scope of capital needed to bring broadband to rural America.
Along with our density challenges, access to capital is a major
issues for a small company like us. We need more grant funding
to make large-scale deployment viable in rural areas.
Bringing electricity to rural America was a task of epic
proportion and our success in doing so has been called one of
America's greatest achievements over the last 80 years. The
government created a strong, lasting partnership with rural
cooperatives to accomplish that goal, which resulted in the
same high quality of life for all Americans, regardless of
economics and location. Jo-Carroll has seen that broadband
access is essential for the continued success and well-being of
rural America. It is our hope that Congress and this
administration will build upon that partnership with support
for the no less audacious goal of providing rural Americans
with access to broadband service.
Thank you for your time.
Chairman BLUM. Thank you, Mr. Allendorf.
I am going to recognize myself for 5 minutes of questions
and answers.
The first question I have is, anyone on the panel can jump
in, but as a technological, somewhat neophyte, I am continually
amazed at the capacity of the system or the pipeline--I do not
know if I am using the right terms. I live in a rural area and
we have Netflix, we have Hulu, we have some of these other
downloadable, on-demand services coming via the pipeline out
there. My question is, reaching the capacity of what it can
handle, is that an issue that we are bumping up against
continually? And the second part of the question is, is it an
even bigger issue in rural areas, this capacity, as more people
want to download TV services like Netflix and Hulu? Whoever
wants to jump in. And please keep it in terms I can understand.
Mr. ROMANO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will take a first
crack at that.
Chairman BLUM. Is your microphone on?
Mr. ROMANO. It should be. It is.
Chairman BLUM. All right.
Mr. ROMANO. There we go. So thank you. So the challenge we
face is there is this tension between getting service to areas
that are unserved and making sure that services are sufficient
and robust enough to meet the challenges of broadband over the
long haul. And that is a tension. It is a tough choice. It is
not an easy one for policymakers or industry to work through.
However, I think what you raise is a good point. As we are
looking at this as an infrastructure challenge, one of the
things we have to think about is building--these are assets
that are intended to last for decades. And so if I were
building a road and I had anticipated a level of traffic that
was going to be coming across that road over the life of that
asset, I would not build it as a two-lane road and then a few
years come back and make it a four-lane road, then an eight-
lane road. I would have to go through all the permitting that
CCA's chart I think demonstrates well, all over again. You
would have to go through all these different challenges. So
building a network upfront for anticipated demand over the life
of that asset, we would submit, represents the most efficient
use of resources to handle the kinds of capacity demands that
you are expecting both now and into the future. Designing a
network for 10-1, for example, when you know that just a few
years ago it was 4-1 was the speed that was used and today is
25-3 going to 100 megabits or a gigabit worth of speed and
capacity over the use of that network, that sort of challenge
is something that you have to engineer a network for up front
to handle not only video and Netflix and things like that, but
distance learning, telemedicine, all these applications that
depend upon a robust network to make sure that you are going to
attract healthcare, education, high commerce businesses to
these communities.
Chairman BLUM. In your analogy, it probably makes it
tougher because that eight-lane highway you mentioned has not
been invented yet. So you have to design a system, if you are
trying to design it for 15 years from now and things have not
even been invented that are going to be here 10 years from now,
7 years from now, 12 years from now, correct? I mean, it is a
heck of a challenge.
Mr. ROMANO. It is. It is. One of the benefits, I think, of
some of the systems we are moving towards with both fiber and
5G, which I see as actually very integrated pieces of the
puzzle because 5G is driven in large part, the capacity of the
promise of 5G is driven by a densified fiber network. If you
have fiber and you are moving towards 5G, you are starting to
build for the ability to adjust, upgrade the network, scale it
over time to respond to the kinds of demands. So you may not
have invented that electronics yet that will deliver the speeds
that we might see in the future, but you have at least laid the
groundwork, the foundation to scale it for the things that
might come to be in the best position to answer those calls.
Mr. ALLENDORF. Yes, Mr. Chairman. We need fiber as a
building block to all of these technologies that are being
talked about today, like 5G. Rural areas simply do not have the
infrastructure to utilize these technologies, like 5G. And as
we have seen firsthand, we need a robust fiber infrastructure
to, as Mr. Romano made the analogy, plan for the future and be
able to handle the demands that will come from that. We have
seen that firsthand.
Chairman BLUM. The future is fiber? Is it ever going to get
to the point where we do not need something buried under the
ground? Where we do not even need the fiber? Or is that, well--
--
Mr. ALLENDORF. It is hard to imagine that, but----
Chairman BLUM. It is.
Mr. ALLENDORF. The future is, in part, built on fiber. I
will say that.
Mr. DONOVAN. The consumer is not going to plug into
something is where the future is going. The delivery vehicle is
going to be wireless. And to add capacity to wireless network
it is twofold. It is building more towers, and that is where
all of the challenges and red tape in deploying the
infrastructure are a big issue, but it is also adding spectrum
to your network.
And for your question on rural areas specifically, that is
why this incentive auction spectrum is so important. It covers
a very long distance. Think wherever you could pick up a
broadcast TV signal, that is the same bandwidth that has been
repurposed for wireless use. That is going to be 5G in rural
areas. We need to make sure that carriers that bid and won that
spectrum can put it to use to serve your constituents.
Chairman BLUM. How much was raised in that auction?
Mr. DONOVAN. Nearly $20 billion. So about $10 billion of
that goes to the Treasury for deficit reduction. About $12
billion went to the broadcasters to compensate them for moving
off the spectrum.
Chairman BLUM. You just answered my next question. Thank
you very much.
My time is up. And, oh, go ahead, Mr. Osborn.
Mr. OSBORN. I was just going to make a point. You mentioned
what do you do when you run out of bandwidth? At any given time
of day, we run between 40 and 50 percent of our traffic is
either Netflix or Amazon Prime. The internet is not about email
anymore; it is about video. And video takes massive amounts of
bandwidth, particularly when everyone does it at the same time.
We buy more. We have between three and five upstream tier one
internet providers that we connect to so that we are never
down, but we are selling 10 times what we did 5 years ago.
When I took this job in 2005, a meg and a half of internet
was a big deal. That was big stuff. We offer gigabit service in
our fiber exchanges. That is a thousandfold and they are
talking petabyte for fiber in 2020, and I thought, wait a
minute, something is missing. Terabyte. What happened to
terabyte? They are skipping that. So this 25-3, my god, we can
do that with a tin can and a string.
It is fiber. Fiber. The capacities of fiber are unknown.
You ask any engineer and they will tell you they do not know
what the capacities are; they are that vast. Wireless is
applied physics, and when you take that down and say no matter
how fast the wireless go, theoretically, the fiber will always
go faster. So we see it as both. We offer fixed wireless
service, and we can give up to 50 megabits on wireless with a
dish on top of your roof. But we see it as the future of both.
We need the wireless to reach customers that it is not
economical to build to, and they need us to transport these
huge amounts of data because 5G LTE is going to have, depending
on how far you are from the tower, up to a gigabyte worth of
service. That is huge. Absolutely huge.
Chairman BLUM. Tin can and a string. Now it is something I
can understand. Thank you for bringing it down to my level and
probably a few folks out there as well. Thank you so much.
I would now like to recognize our ranking member, Mr.
Schneider, from Illinois. You have 5 minutes.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Thank you. And again, thank you to the
witnesses for our insightful testimony.
Mr. Romano, you used the term that I want to focus on a
little bit which is future proof, because the rate of
technology is changing, and Mr. Osborn, you just touched on
something. There is a leapfrog effect. Well, it is not really a
leapfrog. Going from mega to giga to peta, skipping tera. Just
the pace is so fast. Fiber is a connection, but we need to have
the ability to keep it up to date across the rural communities.
We're talking 5G. What is the life expectancy of each
generation? Because we've already gone through 1, 2, 3, and 4G?
Mr. ROMANO. Yeah. This is the thing, especially, both on
the wireline and the wireless side, I think we are seeing
massive amounts of disruption and the technology, the
electronics change, the uses of the spectrum change in a way
that could not be predicted years ago. I mean, think about it.
You know, 15 years ago, actually, I worked at America On Line.
AOL used to get those disks, right? I mean, things moved by DVD
and CD at that point. Now we are moving at a pace that is
unimaginable.
But I think to your question, we cannot anticipate exactly
what will come, but I know that 5G--we have not even seen what
5G is yet. The standards for it are still being developed.
People are talking about deploying 5G. They are kind of
guessing and marketing what 5G is, but we actually do not know
what those standards are. The best thing we can do is get
networks into place that are scalable. If we have a limited,
finite pool of resources, what is the best use we can make of
those resources? We could try to spread them thinly and hope
that the networks we build will keep up, or we could try to
think through how do we make the best use of these so that over
time those networks where they are built, they are not just
there for the one time act of getting broadband there; it is
keeping it there and keeping it useful and enabling 5G,
enabling terabyte service, and greater over time.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Real briefly, just because we're so tight on
time, Mr. Donovan, you used a word that caught my attention
which is densify. As we move to these next generations, does it
mean that we are going to have to increasingly densify the
modular parts of the networks, the towers, everything else?
Mr. DONOVAN. Yes. So thank you for the question.
Densification means bringing the transmitters for the wireless
network closer to where the users are. So it is a lot fewer of
the 400-, 500-foot towers and more and more cell sites that
are, you know, about this big that you could put up on the side
of a building, on existing light poles, and using existing
infrastructure. That is what is going to be a big part of 5G,
to fill up on kind of the generational shifts in wireless
technology. You know, 5G is not a replacement for 4G services,
and that is why it is so important that we have a base layer of
4G rolled out today while industry is still working on the
standards for 5G. In rural areas, there are still 2G networks
that are operational because people are still using those. So
it is not that one technology replaces the other; it is that we
keep evolving and adding on top. And it is important for rural
America to keep up with their Gs if we want to keep giving them
the latest services.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. And let me just add to that as we broadly
think about rural America. It is the breadbasket of our
country. It provides a vast quantity of our food. It is where
we are developing new technologies. It's not that these are
backwaters. It defines who we are as a country.
And Mr. Allendorf, I want to turn to you because you grew
up where you work. You've seen the impact of broadband. Can you
tell us a little bit about some of the effects you've seen and
the opportunities created by bringing broadband to a community
like where you live?
Mr. ALLENDORF. I did not have experience with broadband
until I went to college in the early 2000s. Before that we had
dial-up. And so getting to college and seeing what broadband
can do for the first time was pretty eye-opening.
What we have seen is, anecdotally, businesses are able to
do more with the resources they have at hand. They are able to
utilize productivity software, like I mentioned. It has really
enabled them to truly compete in a global economy. You know,
they do not have to drive to the nearest really good site for a
broadband connection to transact business or something like
that. And it has just increased their productivity overall. And
so the effects that we have seen, especially in our fiber pilot
project area are immense compared to what was there before. And
I would say that they did not know what they had until they had
it because it was not an option before. And now that they do
they are finding new and creative ways to be more productive.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. As my time winds down, not having broadband
until college, I will tell you I got to college with card
decks. So you can overcome these challenges in life. But that
is the rate of our technology.
I will also share that I, early in my career, worked on
developing software, initially for the oil and gas industry. We
migrated it to agriculture into these rural communities. This
was back in the 1980s. We saw the revolutionary impact it was
having then. Today, with broadband, as you well know, these
communities, to be able to bring technology for agriculture,
for medicine, for education, distance learning, the future is
unlimited. But it cannot be unlimited unless we provide the
resources to these communities.
So thank you very much. And with that I yield back.
Chairman BLUM. Thank you.
Now I would like to recognize the gentleman from Kentucky,
Mr. Comer, for 5 minutes.
Mr. COMER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I represent a very rural district in Kentucky. It is a very
poor district. We have a very high Medicaid population. I want
to see people get off Medicaid and get into the workforce. To
do that in my rural district, we are going to have to create an
environment where we can attract better paying jobs that
provide benefits. One of the biggest issues for me as a
freshman member of Congress is to try to help improve broadband
in my rural district, so I am very interested in this subject.
Mr. Allendorf, since your primary focus has been delivering
electricity, can you talk a little bit about the regulatory
obstacles that other folks on the panel may not have when
building out their broadband capacity? Because we are going to
have to do that I would assume through the electric
cooperatives and the rural electric cooperatives in our
district.
Mr. ALLENDORF. First let me say that with our fiber
project, we were able to utilize existing infrastructure much
more than we were with fixed wireless solutions. So it requires
less permitting, which is always a concern, both locally and
from the State. So being able to use our overhead and
underground infrastructure is a huge benefit.
Regulatory challenges we face, pole attachments, something
that always comes up, that is an issue. There is a Federal case
out of Missouri that dealt with pole attachments for fiber use
by a cooperative. I believe that is currently on appeal. We are
anxiously waiting to see what the result of that is to see what
barriers there may be going forward to deploying broadband over
our existing infrastructure.
Mr. COMER. Okay. Mr. Donovan, what kinds of reforms could
help alter the outlook for a company interested in deploying
broadband?
Mr. DONOVAN. Thank you for the question.
You know, in Kentucky, carriers like Bluegrass Wireless and
Appalachian Wireless----
Mr. COMER. My cellular carrier.
Mr. DONOVAN. That is a great company out of Elizabethtown
there. We are proud to have them as a member.
One challenge that wireless carriers are facing now is the
FCC's mobility fund has a lot of opportunity in making
resources available to make that last piece, the economic case,
to serve these rural areas. The biggest problem we have right
now is the data. The map that they show on their website
overstates coverage. And you have to take my word for it. It
says at the bottom, ``These coverage calculations have certain
limitations that result in overstatement of the extent of
mobile coverage.'' Looking at it quickly, it looks like all of
Iowa, most of Illinois, most of Kentucky, on down the line, are
fully served. I think you know that is probably not the case or
else we would not be here today talking about how we can get
service out there.
Before we decide how $5 billion is going to be spent over
the next decade and lock those areas out, we need to make sure
that we are acting on sound data so that the unserved parts of
your district are eligible to bid in that auction and gain
support.
Mr. COMER. If Congress moves on an infrastructure bill with
money for broadband, should that money go through the high-cost
fund or through other programs or agencies such as RUS or NTI?
Mr. DONOVAN. So we have structures that are put in place
through the FCC, like the Mobility Fund. I think there is
unanimous agreement of the panel that USF is not fully funded
today, so this could be a great opportunity to plus that up.
The thing to also consider is making sure that however the
funds go out, that carriers that are receiving those can have
some long-term certainty that those are going to be available,
that you are not subjected to some of the fits and starts of
the appropriations process moving forward.
Mr. COMER. Okay. Very good.
Mr. Romano, one last question here for you. Would it be
better to get everybody connected even if it is at lower
speeds? Or should we focus on the future and invest more in
developed technology? What is the right balance on that?
Mr. ROMANO. Thank you, Mr. Comer. That is the challenge
that we face, as I mentioned earlier, the tension that we face
between trying to get as many of the unserved covered as
possible. However, if you are building a dirt road to everybody
when you think you are going to have a lot of traffic there,
you are potentially wasting resources. So we think it is best
to try to strike a balance where you look to get the most
future proof networks you can. Aim for the highest networks you
can to as many people as possible. It may take a little bit of
time, but the more we build for the future, the more we are
going to attract the kinds of jobs and businesses that you were
talking about. Somebody is not going to relocate a plant to a
district connected to DSL.
Mr. COMER. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman BLUM. Thank you, Mr. Comer.
I would now like to recognize for 5 minutes the gentleman
from Missouri, Mr. Luetkemeyer, who is also the Vice Chairman
of our full Small Business Committee. You are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to
the guests who are here today.
Like the other members of the Committee, I come from a
very, very rural part of my State. In fact, I always tell
people I live so far out that I am in the middle of nowhere,
but when you get there you are finally somewhere. So when I
have discussions with telecom companies, I always tell them,
you know what? I live so far back, if you can get me broadband
and that sort of stuff, then you come talk to me. Until then, I
have got a lot of constituents who have got problems. If you
cannot serve me and them, we do not need to talk. So this is a
very, very important hearing, and I appreciate the chairman's
indulgence here.
Also, in my county, our county seat sits right square in
the middle of our county, and until about a year ago it did not
even have cell phone service. Can you imagine that? We did not
even have cell phone service in our county seat. So the
sheriff, obviously, he had no ability to contact his deputies
on a regular cell phone and had to find other ways to
communicate with them with his other phones, which is fine,
but, I mean, it just shows the difficulty that some of us in
the rural parts of the country live through.
So I guess my question would be to each of you, what can we
do as a Committee to help promote or do whatever we need to do
to help all of you provide the broadband and the
telecommunications services that our people, our businesses,
our health providers in our part of the world need to be able
to do their job and protect our citizens? And I guess the first
question is how do you speed up the regulations? And I know
more money is always added. But when you do that, I want to
know how do you estimate the return on your investment? Because
I can tell you, you know, I grew up a long, long time ago. I
remember the old TV show, ``Get Smart.'' And the guy had a
phone in his shoe and today I have got two phones sitting right
here that when I grew up that was a fantasy. How can you have a
phone without a line to connect it to the rest of the world?
And yet today it is a convenience we cannot live without.
So I understand the difficulty that you have in predicting
the future, which you talked about, and how you make that
investment, how you figure out that return investment. If you
could kind of go into some of that, I would appreciate it.
And then I would like to go to Mr. Donovan, I believe, with
regards to the data. So let me stop and let you answer some
questions.
Mr. DONOVAN. Thank you. It sounds like the county seat
would be a perfect place for some small cells to go up on some
of the existing poles build out service in there. The problem
in these rural areas, as this Committee knows, is the margins
are already very tight for small carriers to serve them. And
the opportunity costs of fees that you pay to site them,
especially on small cells, if it is the same fees you are
paying to build a massive tower, it could be enough to make it
so it is no longer economical to provide that service. So
anything we can do to streamline the process to get some of
those fees in line is going to help us be able to expand
service in areas like that.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Okay. How do you figure your return on
your investment? How do you work the numbers on that? Do you
figure 5 years, 10 years, 15, 20, 25? What kind of timeframe do
you look at when you figure out the return on your investment?
Mr. DONOVAN. So it does vary carrier to carrier. One thing
that is exciting in the wireless world is that the future
customers may not be, yourself sitting here with two phones,
two lines of service, but it could be your tractor in the
field, each head of cattle that is out there that is being
remotely monitored, you know, there is a new internet of
things, customers that are changing the equation that you do
for your cost-benefit analysis, but that is only going to
happen if we have the networks in place to support that.
Otherwise, the investment is going to flow elsewhere. If you do
not streamline how we can invest in those areas, then those
areas are going to miss and it is going to go to places that it
is easier to make those deployments.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Does anybody else want to comment? Mr.
Romano?
Mr. ROMANO. Yes. I will jump in. Thank you. Thank you,
Congressman.
So I think the challenge, or one of the things I think the
panel has in common actually, is we all represent or all are
associated with community-based providers. So one of the things
that is interesting when you look at ROIs, if you live in that
community, if you are based in that community, you have a
different view perhaps of ROI than if you are investing from
far away because if you are investing from far away or you have
allegiance or you have fiduciary duties to faraway
shareholders, that creates a very different circumstance than
when, you know, you have got to get your money out because you
have got capital in. In this case, some of these loans these
folks are taking out are 20-year loans, so, therefore, the ROI
is very different. They are also, again, headquartered in the
community. They might be cooperatives that actually their
members are their owners.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Okay. One more quick question before I
lose my time here.
Mr. Donovan, you talked about the study to make sure that
you have the data there to be able to make sure you disburse
funds where it is needed. Number one, who does the study? And
number two, who pays for it?
Mr. DONOVAN. Thank you. So the data, it is required by the
FCC to be submitted by carriers. So far, so good. The problem
is the FCC does not tell carriers how to standardize that data.
So you could have one carrier that is reporting at a signal
strength that varies dramatically from another carrier. The
calculation that they do, we will not go into----
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. So you need some better direction from the
FCC then on the reporting of this data, is that what you need?
Mr. DONOVAN. We need to make it standardized.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Standardized. Okay. Very good.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it. I yield back.
Chairman BLUM. Thank you, Mr. Luetkemeyer.
I now recognize the gentleman from the great State of Iowa
for 5 minutes, Mr. King.
Mr. KING. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you holding
this hearing and taking the lead on this issue. I was just
listening to the remarks of my friend, the neighbor to the
south, Mr. Luetkemeyer, whose district I have visited and he
lives in the middle of nowhere and I live in the center of the
hub of the wheel in the middle of nowhere. I have cell phone
coverage; he does not. And so I am sitting here listening
thinking why is that the case for me and not for Mr.
Luetkemeyer and many of his constituents?
One is hills. The degree of difficulty is a lot greater if
you have got hoops and valleys rather than the flatter
countryside that predominates a lot of the great State of Iowa.
That is part of it.
But another part of it, I think, and I wanted to ask the
question, whoever wants to volunteer to answer it, is that in
Iowa we had, the last time I kept track, about 142 independent
telcos. And I know that they are more personally connected with
their customers than the more remote larger companies. And the
map says that Iowa is in pretty good shape. There are
exceptions there. Mr. Donovan, you pointed that out. But how
much impact has it had to have a large number of competitive
independent telcos that are neighborhood telephone companies
using everything they can to make that pipe as big as possible
for the long-term future of their neighbors and relatives?
Mr. DONOVAN. It is critically important, Congressman. And
like my colleague, Mr. Romano, mentioned, being in the
community makes a difference as you make decisions about where
you are going to invest and where you are going to serve. When
you have to see your consumers, not just in the office when
they come to your store, but in the grocery store and around
the community. So that changes how you make your investment
decisions.
One success story in Iowa is that rural carriers like
iWireless have been able to band together some of those
smaller, independent operators so that you can have some scale,
so that you can gain access to buy devices. If you do not get
to some of those scale levels, like across many issues for
small businesses, if you cannot deliver enough scale, then you
cannot get access to economically priced resources that you
need. For wireless service, that is the devices. It is the
network infrastructure. It is the things you have to build to
provide that service.
Mr. KING. And so at least in my theory, if other States
were beneficiaries of a lot more competitive, a lot of times
family-owned telcos, we might have seen a better buildout here
on broadband.
So the resources have been there for everybody equally? Was
that true?
Mr. DONOVAN. Not always the case, unfortunately. In the
wireless world, so spectrum is our primary resource. You are
not making any more of them. You need to get it from license
from the government. Different spectrum bands are made
available differently. One thing that is important for small
businesses, if the license size is not sufficiently small for a
small business to be able to bid on it, win it, and provide
service, then they are not going to be able to get access to
that critical resource and they will not be able to provide
service.
Mr. KING. And the license size applies. And then also the
ability to have the infrastructure built that can handle the
capacity into the future. A narrative popped into my head when
I heard that. As I recall, I had a construction office in town
for a number of years and it was fed by a 3/4-inch water line
underneath the highway, a very wide highway with a long boring
project to replace it. I went to the city and said I cannot
provide water out of my place to the blacksmith who is next
door to me and he is trapped if I do not get it to him. We need
to expand this water line. I made a powerful case they should
do that.
I finally sold them on the idea and they let me go up to 1-
inch from 3/4. So I finally, out of frustration, said I will
put the water line in, and I bought the 2-inch line and now
everybody is living happily ever after on that one. That is how
I equate with what you are talking about. Let's, well,
overbuild this because the actual cost of the equipment is
minimal in comparison to the cost of the labor to do the
installation process.
I wanted to turn to Mr. Romano and give you an opportunity
to say whatever you need to say, but I also have a question. I
have some neighbors, and myself included, that use cell phone
boosters in our homes. Is there a future for that or are they
minimal in their ability to have impact?
Mr. ROMANO. No, I think they will have impact. Wireless and
wired services are I think, in many respects, complementary
both at the network level and the access level. You know, a lot
of times you see people talk about how much mobile data
consumption there is. People are using tablets more to connect
to devices. A lot of times those mobile tablet devices are
actually, in fact, hopping onto a wired network, a Wi-Fi
network. These are complementary integrated networks that are
going to need each other, I think, to thrive and survive and
serve the needs of a community like you are talking about.
I did want to come back to the one point you made about
local community interest, ownership, family-owned businesses,
cooperatives working together. We have actually started an
initiative with a number of folks trying to get telcos and
electric co-ops who have a shared interest in serving these
communities together. Bring broadband expertise together with
the assets, the community interest of the electric cooperatives
and municipalities, and tribal entities even. Think about
different ways of tackling these so we can make the most
efficient, most effective use of resources on the ground level.
Mr. KING. To anybody that wants to answer this, is it our
future that everybody in America eventually will have access,
not only in the undefined broadband is for me, I did not hear
that, but is there a future that we will be able to do
livestream HD anywhere, anytime, for anybody with a cell phone
or sitting in their home with their television? Is that where
we are going to end up with an unlimited capacity beyond our
imagination? Today, I should say, not unlimited, to go beyond
that if need be?
Mr. ROMANO. It could be, but what you are going to need is
the small cell deployment that is robust enough, fed by fiber
networks that are robust enough, and spectrum assets that are
robust enough to hit those small cells. Again, while I say it
is all integrated, but it could be there. But you are going to
need those small cells every few hundred feet, which is a big
challenge in rural America, with robust enough spectrum or
fiber capacity behind them to feed the kind of demands that you
are talking about. But that is the dream at least.
Mr. KING. We can get there. And they would have loved to
have this on Apollo 13.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the hearing, and I yield back
the balance of my time.
Chairman BLUM. Thank you, Mr. King.
I would like to start the second round of questioning, if I
could.
Somebody mentioned having, I guess, transmitters on phone
poles, telephone poles. It kind of reminds me of the concept of
the democratization of electrical grid, that if each home in
America, or particularly in rural America, could generate our
own electricity, we could sell some of that electricity back to
the power companies. In essence, we would be democratizing the
electrical grid. This concept fascinates me. Could this
possibly be an answer in rural America for wireless is to have
every farm, every home, my home for example could not only
receive, but could also maybe send, transmit to the next home--
not back to the tower, but to the next home--and we would have
this interrelated network? Because I have heard of this very
thing for aircraft. And if every aircraft that is in the air,
we know their position, and if they can communicate with each
other, then we have this grid. And so there would be no dark
spots or black spots over the ocean, for example, that
currently we cannot capture with radar. It fascinates me the
concept. Could you comment on that?
Mr. DONOVAN. Absolutely, Mr. Chairman. And you are right,
that we are going to need the cell sites brought that close to
you so you can have that kind of mesh network that does not
have any gaps. The problem right now----
Chairman BLUM. Mesh network? Is that what that is called,
mesh network?
Mr. DONOVAN. That is. It is mesh networking. But right now
you probably are not going to go through the process to work
with a carrier to put up a cell site on the side of your house
if it means that you are going to have to do a new
environmental review to see whether you disturbed anything when
you built that house, to go through a new historical review. We
need to cut through some of that.
Chairman BLUM. Remove the word ``probably.''
Mr. DONOVAN. Well, exactly. And that means that you will
not have that cell site available. So we need----
Chairman BLUM. Well, today, in today's environment. That is
what it would entail?
Mr. DONOVAN. That is right. You would have to go through
every step of this in order to put that cell site up on the
side of your building.
Chairman BLUM. But a fascinating concept nonetheless?
Mr. DONOVAN. Absolutely. And the densification that we need
to provide that service going forward.
Chairman BLUM. And my second and last question is for Mr.
Osborn. And Mr. Donovan just mentioned the regulations.
Regulatory burden is a big topic in Washington, D.C.
I would like to ask you, Mr. Osborn, with the change in
leadership at the FCC with Chairman Pai coming in, have you
seen any indications that the FCC is serious about reducing the
regulatory burden in this industry, particularly as it relates
to rural areas?
Mr. OSBORN. Yes, we have. The first few months have been
very encouraging. What Chairman Pai seems to be very sensitive
to is the red tape and the regulations. And I mentioned the
permitting process that we were involved with, and understand
there is a Bill S604 that would essentially give a categorical
exclusion to environmentals along operational rights of way.
That type of legislation would help quite a bit in removing
some of the regulatory issues that I call environmental
regulatory. But that would speed things up greatly, reduce
cost, and I think make things more efficient in laying fiber.
Once you lay fiber, it is there forever. We lay our fiber
in double plow ducts, undisturbed. We go down as far as we can,
6 feet, 8 feet if we can, and we run it. Once it is there, we
can replace it without having to dig. So that investment, we
can look at that as a 20-year rate of return. We have to
replace the electronics every 3 to 5 years. So that is the one
where we have got to get our money out of that quickly. The
wireless, the same thing.
So the rate of returns that we are trying to work toward
varies largely by the technology. But the regulatory issues
more faces with the terrestrial piece of it. I mentioned the
reports that we have to do. If we saw value in this, I think it
would be different.
Mapping is a big part of our business. We have maps of
everything in our serving area. It is about 10,000 square miles
of serving areas. And to deal with the FCC's requirements to go
down to the census block, I can show you those census blocks in
my map. I should not have to do a separate report and
essentially duplicate what I have paid hundreds of thousands of
dollars for in a software system to come up with a report. I
have the information; all they have to do is ask for it. And
that would help greatly in terms of moving things along.
Chairman BLUM. Thank you very much.
I would now like to recognize the gentleman from the great
State of Nebraska, Mr. Bacon, for 5 minutes.
Mr. BACON. Thank you. I apologize for coming in just a
little bit late, but two other simultaneous meetings. So I am
running around.
I used to be raised on a farm until 1985, joined the Air
Force, but my main problem of getting some kind of linkage
prior to 1985 was finding that AM radio so I could listen to
the Chicago Cubs play at 120. In the military, too, we are
starting to do every aircraft, you know, receiving and sending
various links. And what has impressed me is now I am out of the
Air Force and I am starting with the ag community again, and
talking to my family, it is just so impressive that all the new
combines, all the new tractors all have these links. Our
irritation systems are doing the same. Just phenomenal.
And you may have already mentioned this, and I may have
missed it, so I apologize if you did, what is the actual scope
of investment that we need nationwide to field this the way we
want to? And I will just open it up to whoever can respond.
Mr. OSBORN. Thank you, Congressman. It is an evolving
level. We need to make sure we are keeping up with everything,
but you hit on an important point. There has been a lot of talk
in D.C. recently about connected cars. Well, on farms we have
had those for a while. They are combines and they are tractors,
but they are using those connections. So Cost Quest has done
one model of what it would take to have wireless coverage
across the country to power all those things and they came in
at about $25 billion.
Mr. BACON. Twenty-five billion?
Mr. OSBORN. With a B. With about another billion in
operational costs once you have it built just to keep it going
in areas that private capital will not sustain.
Mr. BACON. And that gives us the capability for all of our
newest equipment to be able to communicate with maintenance
facilities? And so, I mean, all that networking that is going
on. So you would get that capability. What other capability
would that provide our agriculture?
Mr. OSBORN. So the combines, the tractors are connected.
You know their maintenance schedules. They tell you before they
break down that you need to get someone out there. You can more
efficiently use resources. You know, what fields need water?
What needs what going on? But you also have real-time
connections to markets and you know when it is time to harvest
certain amounts of the yields. So your productivity goes up
overall as well as profitability of the farm.
Mr. BACON. Right. I think that is incredible.
Are there certain portions for our country right now that
need this more than others? Are there areas that are more
advanced? Is there some portions of the country that were
falling behind?
Mr. OSBORN. You know, I think for different use cases, we
need this nationwide. You probably are not going to be using a
tractor on a mountain, but you still are going to want to be
connected so you can take part in other educational and
business opportunities.
Mr. BACON. Okay. Thank you very much. I appreciate the
time. And I can just second the importance of it because my
family that is still involved in the farming, when you go out
there and they are using a GPS. I had the most curveous rows
when I was a 16-year-old out there. Now you do not have to
drive it at all. It is perfectly straight.
Well, thank you so much. I yield back.
Chairman BLUM. Thank you, Mr. Bacon.
I now recognize our ranking member, Mr. Schneider, from
Illinois, for 5 minutes.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Thank you. And I will not be long and take
the full time. I just want to wrap up on a couple of things.
You do use tractors on a mountain. I grew up in Colorado.
Ski areas are, seriously, using those for maintaining their
slopes during the winter. So this is something that affects us
all across the country.
And Mr. Donovan, I will go back to something else you said.
You talked about the idea, the Internet of things they did.
Every head of cattle will have a device that is sending back
information about that individual cattle, which means their
food will be healthier, our cost to produce that food will be
lower, and the impact it has, again, across the whole Nation.
So I really just want to give each of you a last chance for
a reflective comment, perhaps. As we talk about providing rural
communities with broadband access, which was the subject of
this meeting, this is something that I believe really is of
national interest. It don't affect just our rural communities;
it affects all of us regardless of where we live. And so start
with you, Mr. Romano, just a last word of why this is important
to our Nation and why it deserves a national investment.
Mr. ROMANO. Thank you, Congressman.
The Hudson Institute did a study a couple of years ago
showing that the payback from investment in rural broadband,
just from the active investment in rural broadband, not the
follow-on effects of rural broadband, were $24.1 billion in
2015 to the national economy with much of that accruing back to
urban areas actually because of the vendors and contractors
that are hired to build this stuff and the tower manufacturers
and what have you. So there is that direct impact.
There is the indirect impact, of course, of the mission of
universal service first sort of thought of last century and
embodied in different forms throughout, but the network effect
in our country is stronger and better and more efficient and
effective if every American is connected. And that is one of
the things that I think is important in the concept of
universal service. We have a lot of folks who focus on let us
connect this type of institution, this type of customer, this
type of user. We need community-wide access to all of them. To
focus on any one type of user and silo it in that way I think
undercuts the notion of universal service. We should be asking
the folks who are out there building to build to every user,
irrespective of what kind of user they are, so that everybody
gets the benefit of that network effect, which is why we are
building these networks in the first place.
Mr. OSBORN. Thank you. Just a quick word on the Hudson
Institute study. It did not come as a great surprise to us
because we have communities where it is an hour, hour and a
half to the nearest Walmart, hour and a half to the nearest
Best Buy, you name it. So boy, you can get on there to go to
Amazon. Two days, right? And buy and purchase. So rather than
run into town, people, that is how they do their commerce is
get on that internet and make purchases. And that adds up.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. I am going to date myself. I used to work at
Sears Catalogue.
Mr. OSBORN. Oh, my. You get it. You totally get it. You
totally get it.
The other topic, though, you know, we are part of a world
economy and somebody mentioned we are number 16. I think that
is pitiful.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. That was me.
Mr. OSBORN. Of course, number 1 through 15, the
telecommunications infrastructure is probably owned by the
government. That is the common model. The U.S. is the exception
to that with the formation of AT&T 100 years ago. If we are
going to be competitive with India, with China, with the rest
of the world, we are going to have to kick it up a notch and we
are going to have to bite the bullet and put some money in it,
not just in rural. But you are going to have to put the money
everywhere and get us competitive. And it needs to flow out to
the rural areas because they are doing some important stuff.
That is where food, water, and oil come from that we need.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Fair point.
Mr. Donovan?
Mr. DONOVAN. Well, I have to associate myself with my
colleague's comments on the economic impact. It is incredible
to see what a multiplier it is bringing broadband services out
to these areas.
I guess Congress got it right, you know, directing the FCC
that we will have policies for reasonable comparable----
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Will you just repeat that again?
Mr. DONOVAN. On Universal Service Fund, in 1996, Congress
got it right directing the FCC to have reasonably comparable
services and an evolving standard in urban and rural areas. We
need to make sure we are putting policies in place to make sure
that that is the case on the ground.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. And the last word to you, Mr. Allendorf?
Mr. ALLENDORF. Thank you, Congressman.
Building on Mr. Donovan's comments, Congress got it right
with rural electrification as well. And it is going to take
that kind of commitment from Congress, from the administration,
to bring broadband to rural areas. And it is going to take
partnerships with many different industries to do that. And I
would encourage that kind of broad thinking as you have done
today in achieving rural broadband deployment. Thank you.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Great. Thank you. I'm going to steal a few
extra seconds if that's okay just to reflect on your comments,
because I think as we are here talking about what broadband can
do and the comments you made, three things jump out at me. If
we get this right again, we can grow our economy. At a time of
great division in our country, broadband can unite us. And it
is necessary, Mr. Osborn, what you said. If we are going to as
a Nation lead the world, lead the world economically in a
global economy, lead the world with information, lead the world
with our values, this is a step towards that. So I just want to
thank the witnesses again and thank the chairman for having
this hearing. Thanks very much.
Chairman BLUM. Thank you, Mr. Schneider. I noticed today
you mentioned you used to carry around punch cards and worked
for Sears Catalogue. So I must say I think you are younger
looking than obviously you are. But thanks for sharing that
with us. It makes me feel better.
I would now like to recognize Mr. Luetkemeyer for 5 minutes
from Missouri.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. I am fine.
Chairman BLUM. Fine? Are there any further questions anyone
has?
If not, then I would like to thank each of our panelists
for taking the time today to testify. It is truly fascinating.
As this hearing comes to a close, I hope that we have
opened some eyes--certainly have opened mine--and educated a
few folks about how important advanced telecommunication
services are to our Nation's rural small businesses and how
important it is to create a positive regulatory environment for
the businesses represented on our panel. I am heartened to hear
that the FCC has begun to make things a little more user-
friendly for folks like our witnesses today, but more must be
done. These small businesses are ready, willing, able, and
frankly, itching, to get out there and build these networks, if
only Washington, D.C., would get out of their way.
I ask unanimous consent that members have 5 legislative
days to submit statements and supporting materials for the
record.
And without objection, so ordered.
And we are adjourned. Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 11:17 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Statement of Dave Osborn

Chief Executive Officer

VTX1 Companies

Before the House Small Business Committee on

Subcommittee on Agriculture, Energy and Trade

June 22, 2017

Chairman Blum, Ranking Member Schneider, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today on
the important topic of improving broadband deployment in rural
America.

Introduction

I am the Chief Executive Officer of the VTX1 Companies, a
rural telecommunications provider based in Raymondville, Texas,
which is about 35 miles north of the US border with Mexico on
US-69E. I have served in this position for over 12 years, and
prior to that worked for several large telecommunications
equipment manufacturers. My beginning in the industry dates
back to July, 1970, when I started with Southwestern Bell in
downtown Dallas, Texas. I progressed with them in jobs of
increasing responsibility in Dallas, St. Louis, Ft. Worth,
Kansas City, Houston, and finally Morristown, NJ, at AT&T's
company headquarters. Thirty plus years later, after leaving
AT&T in the mid-1980s, I now reside in the Texas Rio Grande
Valley in my current position. Today, I am representing WTA -
Advocates for Rural Broadband, a national trade association, on
whose board of directors I serve.

VTX1 got its start as Valley Telephone Cooperative, Inc.,
or ``VTCI'', in April 1952, when a group of local farmers and
ranchers formed a non-profit telephone cooperative under the
Texas Telephone Cooperative Act of 1946. They did so because
Southwestern Bell and General Telephone of the Southwest, GTE,
had refused to bring telephone service out to the rural south
Texas communities due to the enormous expense of doing so. With
the help of several loans from the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, our cooperative finally began providing service in
1957 after laying cables and establishing equipment switching
centers. We began with four brand new ``exchanges'', or
geographic service areas, and grew by continued construction
and by purchasing exchanges from General Telephone. By 1979, we
had 17 exchanges within 19 counties in deep South Texas that
comprised a total of 7,300 square miles. Our current density is
only .7 access lines per square mile which is one of our
state's lowest density ratios.

In the late 1980's, VTCI saw an opportunity with
transporting long distance up from Mexico and back and
partnered with AT&T in this endeavor. An unregulated, for-
profit, subsidiary VTX Communications, LLC, was formed in
December, 1987, to provide carrier transport services for
almost a dozen Mexican carriers through fiber-optic bridge
crossings at Laredo and Hidalgo, Texas. Long distance service
was added around 1991, fixed-wireless broadband service in
2004, then finally television entertainment service in 2005.
VTX Telecom, LLC, a for-profit subsidiary, was formed in
December 2000, after the Telecommunications Act of 1996 was
signed into law to provide telephone, and now internet and
television service to underserved communities outside of the
VTCI communities. VTX Telecom receives a nominal amount of
Federal support (i.e., federal Universal Service Fund (FUSF)
support) and some Texas USF funds (TUSF); VTX Communications is
not eligible to receive either FUSF or TUSF because, as stated
above, it is an unregulated entity. The primary recipient of
FUSF support is the original cooperative entity, Valley
Telephone Cooperative. Utilizing a very complex accounting
system of cross charges for work-time and other expenses, we
are able to run our company efficiently as a single entity, and
to avoid confusing customers with all the different company
names, we took the name VTX1 Companies in 2012.

Through expansion, diversification, and acquisitions, VTX1
now provides broadband internet access, television, security,
and voice telephone service to approximately 16,000 residents,
businesses, schools, libraries, government buildings, and other
anchor institutions in a 10,000 square mile service area--the
boundary is loosely defined by Laredo, San Antonio, Corpus
Christi, and Brownsville, Texas. We have just under 200
employees, around 120 buildings and around 150 service trucks
and vehicles. Our impact on the South Texas economy is
significant.

Solutions for Rural America

I intend to focus on three main areas where I think
Congress can work with regulators to encourage broadband
deployment in rural America.

1. Universal Service Policy

Serving rural America is incredibly costly, and we couldn't
do it in the rural areas we serve without the federal Universal
Service Fund (USF). The principle of universal service, that
every American, regardless of where he or she lives, should
have access to communications technology, has its roots in the
Communications Act of 1934. The USF, as we know it today, was
created by the Telecommunications Act of 1996. Without the
support we and other rural telecommunications providers receive
from the fund, our cooperative members would never be able to
afford the services we provide. According to the Telecom Act,
USF support is supposed to be ``predictable and sufficient'' to
the task of providing ``advanced telecommunications and
information services...in all regions of the Nation.''
Unfortunately, the principle of sufficiency seems to become
less and less important to federal policymakers over time.

For the past several years, the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) has labored to modernize USF, most recently
after the release of the National Broadband Plan in 2010, which
recommended freezing support for small, rural broadband
providers at 2010 funding levels. The reform efforts culminated
in an Order in March of 2016, which has resulted in companies
similarly situated to VTX1 seeing their support reduced because
of a budget target reflecting 2011 funding levels.
Incidentally, the 2011 support levels were based on support for
voice networks as opposed to broadband networks, which is what
the reformed USF would focus on post-2011. This approach
attacks the problem of getting broadband to rural America from
the wrong angle. Instead of setting a goal for broadband in
rural America and attempting to determine what that would cost,
the FCC has arbitrarily set a budget and essentially said ``see
what you can do with this.''

So far, VTX1's USF reimbursement from mid-2016 to June 2017
is down approximately a half million dollars on an annualized
basis with grater reductions anticipated in light of the caps
and constraints the FCC has placed on the overall High Cost
Fund to stay under its self-imposed budget cap. This despite
the fact that we have had to increase our fiber to the home
investments in fiber, electronics and maintenance fees to meet
the FCC's goals of no less than 10 mbps down with a preferred
25 mbps down broadband service. In the last two and a half
years, VTCI has spent almost $27 million in capital expense
(CAPEX) dollars that had been previously committed to as part
of our five-year CAPEX plan to bring high-speed broadband
service to our rural cooperative members. These federal support
reductions have now reduced our capital expansion within our
VTCI service areas and slowed the conversion to fiber-optic
technology. It is important, and necessary, to upgrade all
terrestrial networks to fiber because, while it does cost money
to upgrade to a fiber-optic infrastructure, a fiber-optic
network will have a service life several times longer than that
of a copper one--plus the maintenance costs of a fiber-optic
network are much less than a copper infrastructure.
Additionally, serving the needs of our national cellular
companies to ``backhaul'' their soon to be deployed 5G LTE
traffic from their towers to their regional switching centers
will be very important. Because of the speeds involved,
cellular carriers will be hard pressed to backhaul their
traffic by radio technology alone.

Instead of caps and cuts to support, the High Cost Program
within USF needs to be fully funded so that carriers can
upgrade their networks to deploy broadband further throughout
their service territories. If that cannot be done at the very
least an inflationary adjustment to the High Cost Program is
warranted so that high-quality broadband can be pushed further
out into rural America. If the country wants to get serious
about catching up with the rest of the world's broadband
deployment, the High Cost Program support should actually be
increased.

2. Streamlining the Permitting Process for Existing Rights
of Way

If Congress wants to improve the efficiency by which USF
dollars are put to use, it should review and reform the
permitting process for access to federal lands and other rights
of way. Small companies like mine wait years and spend hundreds
of thousands of dollars per project on environmental,
archaeological, and historical preservation reviews. It is not
uncommon for small companies like mine to experience delays of
up to 18 to 24 month in getting broadband projects going
because of these types of review. This is particularly
problematic in parts of the country that have shorter
construction seasons than Texas.

While some of these reviews are necessary and important,
particularly when it comes to previously undisturbed ground, it
makes little sense to require extensive reviews for projects
that make use of existing and operational rights-of-way. I'll
share an anecdote from my own experience, which is not
atypical.

VTX1 received both a Broadband Initiatives Program (BIP)
loan/grant combination from the Department of Commerce and a
Broadband Technology Opportunity Program (BTOP) grant from the
Department of Agriculture to construct a fiber-optic
infrastructure as part of the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act (ARRA) stimulus program. The intent of these
projects was to be shovel-ready, and ours was but for the fact
that we had to wait nine months for our environmental reviews
needed to bore underground within 20 feet of ``center line''
along a U.S. federal highway.

Obtaining environmental permits to use rights-of-way that
have been and are continually being disturbed should be fast-
tracked for approval.

3. Regulatory Reporting Burdens

We continue to be concerned with the increased quantity of
reporting obligations and reporting burdens placed upon us
involving regulatory reporting to the FCC, the Universal
Service Administrative Company (USAC), and the National
Exchange Carriers Association (NECA) and other federal agencies
when the recovery of those costs has been capped by not only
the FCC's Corporate Operations cap but the maximum $250 per
line per month cap. VTCI performed a detailed labor study in
2016 and found that we spend around 3,200 hours completing just
the federal reporting requirements placed on us. This costs us
about $100,000 a year in wages and another $50,000 a year in
benefit costs alone with none of these dollars being recovered
by any federal support. A copy of our spreadsheet showing the
regulatory burden wage analysis is attached. Total benefit cost
was estimated at fifty percent of wage cost. While we recognize
the need to justify all of our support expenditures and
requests, we believe the FCC must take all necessary steps to
ensure that high cost rural companies such as VTCI are allowed
to recover every dollar of these regulatory burden expenditures
from the high cost support mechanisms. Without such assurances,
small rural companies such as ours may very well be squeezed by
having ever increasing reporting requirements while receiving
ever smaller support due to caps and constraints on the high
cost fund.

Conclusion

Our conclusions are straightforward:

The High Cost Fund component of Federal USF
needs to continue in remote rural serving areas as well
as having a cost of living escalator to keep the fund
viable during periods of inflation. An increase in High
Cost Fund monies should be considered as well to speed
up broadband deployment;

Permitting timelines should be greatly
reduced in areas and along roads where the land has
been previously and continuously disturbed;

Regulatory reporting should be streamlined
and limited to items that have a significant,
measurable impact on broadband deployment in America.

This concludes my testimony. Thank you for your attention
and I look forward to answering any questions you may have.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Improving Broadband Deployment: Solutions for Rural America

Testimony of Tim Donovan

Senior Vice President, Legislative Affairs

Competitive Carriers Association

before the

United States House of Representatives Committee on Small
Business

Subcommittee on Agriculture, Energy, and Trade

June 22, 2017
Chairman Blum, Ranking Member Schneider, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to testify about
improving broadband deployment in rural and remote areas and
its impact on small businesses throughout the United States.

I am testifying on behalf of Competitive Carriers
Association (``CCA''), the nation's leading association of
competitive wireless carriers. CCA is made up of nearly 100
carrier members ranging from small, rural providers serving
fewer than 5,000 customers to regional and national providers
serving millions of customers. CCA also represents nearly 150
associate members--small businesses, vendors, and suppliers
that serve carriers of all sizes. The vast majority of CCA's
members are small businesses.

Consumer demand for mobile broadband has increased
exponentially, and studies show it will continue to grow at an
astounding rate. For example, Ericsson's latest Mobility Report
forecasts a greater than five-time increase in mobile data
consumption over the next five years. To meet these demands,
Congress and the Federal Communications Commission (``FCC'' or
``Commission'') must tackle broadband deployment challenges
today to meet needs of our connected economy.

A persistent digital divide continues to plague certain
rural areas that remain less likely to have access to, or
choices for, broadband, smartphones, and other devices. Pew
Research Center reports that ``[d]espite recent gains in
digital technology adoption, rural adults remain less likely
than urban and suburban adults to have and use these
technologies. For example, rural Americans are 7 to 12
percentage points less likely than those in urban and suburban
areas to say they have a smartphone, traditional computer or
tablet computer.'' As a result, while rural areas may be more
connected today than in the past, substantial segments of rural
America still lack the infrastructure needed for high-speed
internet, and the service deployed in these areas may be slower
than that of their urban counterparts. Policymakers must
therefore implement targeted policies to ensure that even the
most remote Americans remain connected in today's mobile world.

Last week, FCC Chairman Pai participated in the inaugural
Rural Prosperity Task Force meeting, where he outlined the
importance of policies that support broadband availability in
rural areas. As he articulated, providing connectivity
nationwide is at the core of why the FCC was created in 1934.
Chairman Pai shared examples of economic growth powered by
broadband with the task force, including remote monitoring in a
meat processing plant in Nebraska, cattle feed lot monitoring
in Kansas, connected combines in Maryland, and healthcare,
education, and job creation advances all made possible by
broadband.

These examples are not purely anecdotal. The Hudson
Institute recently found that the investments and ongoing
operations of small rural broadband businesses contribute $24.1
billion annually to the nation's gross domestic product, with
66 percent ($15.9 billion) of that amount benefiting urban
areas. The same report also found that an estimated 70,000 jobs
can be attributed directly to economic activity of small, rural
broadband providers, underscoring how broadband is an important
driver of job growth. A separate report found that when a
county gains access to broadband, there is approximately a 1.8
percentage point increase in the employment rate, with larger
affects in rural areas. In testimony before a Senate
subcommittee last year, a Mississippi farmer estimated a
minimum ``10-15% loss of efficiency when connections are
disrupted'' for their machines alone. New telehealth services
can save a rural hospital more than $100,000 a year in
healthcare and community costs. Secondary education, technical
training, and even university degrees are available online, but
only accessible for Americans with broadband services that
support delivery of materials and facilitate interactive
classes. It's clear: the future of rural economic and small
business growth is directly tied to the availability of mobile
broadband.

It is not just important for today's economy; mobile
broadband is vital to tomorrow's economic development through
next generation or 5G services and the Internet of Things
(``IoT''). The majority of CCA's members live and work in the
communities they serve, and therefore share in the potential
success of ubiquitous mobile broadband service and the
deployment of next-generation technologies in their hometowns.
As this Committee continues to focus on improving broadband
deployment, particularly in rural areas and for small
businesses, we urge you to ensure reasonably comparable
services are available in urban and rural areas with sustained
federal support in targeted areas, streamline policies to
deploy, maintain, and upgrade mobile broadband networks, and
provide all carriers with opportunities to access finite
spectrum resources.

Accurate Data is Necessary to Define Areas Where Federal
Funding Can Preserve and Expand Mobile Broadband Deployment

Congress created the USF high-cost program to provide
Americans in rural areas with ``reasonably comparable''
services as those in urban areas with the help of sufficient
and predictable support. Section 254(b) of the Communications
Act provides that the FCC shall base policies on ``statutory
principles established by Congress,'' including the provision
of ``advanced telecommunications and information services'' to
consumers ``in all regions of the Nation,'' at ``just,
reasonable, and affordable rates,'' and of services that are
``reasonably comparable'' to those provided in urban areas. In
today's world, `reasonably comparable'' service is synonymous
with fast, affordable mobile broadband technology. Yet, to this
day, numerous members of Congress attest to the unfortunate
reality of insufficient and inaccessible wireless coverage
throughout the United States, both as public servants
responding to their constituents and as consumers in the mobile
wireless ecosystem. Committee hearings recently held in both
the House and Senate find members lamenting the consistent,
uniform availability of mobile broadband throughout their
districts.

CCA applauds action on the FCC's Mobility Fund II. The FCC
adopted the Order in March of this year which to dedicate $4.53
billion over the next decade to close ``coverage gaps.''
However, without coverage data that accurately reflects
consumers' on-the-ground experience, decisions that determine
areas eligible for Mobility Fund II support will be misguided
and scarce resources will be squandered. The underlying data
that the FCC currently uses to make funding and other policy
decisions, known as the Form 477 data, relies on carrier-
reported information lacking standardization. The FCC's own
presentation of the data includes a disclaimer that ``coverage
calculations ... have certain limitations that likely result in
an overstatement of the extent of mobile coverage.'' Prior to
allocating Mobility Fund II support, the Commission must use
standardized data including a challenge process that is
efficient, eases burdens on smaller entities, and generates
accurate determinations of where qualifying coverage exists and
where Mobility Fund II must target support. The Commission is
about to distribute $4.53 billion in funds over the next ten
years for mobile broadband deployment, and it must do so in a
fiscally responsible way that accurately bridges the digital
divide to preserve and expand mobile services.

The need for accurate data and analysis is an
uncontroverted, bipartisan principle under current leadership
at Congress and at the FCC. Specifically, on-the-ground
experience, including coverage data obtained by driving across
the country, makes clear that mobile wireless service is not
yet available everywhere, much less on a competitive basis as
required by statute. Congress stands in bipartisan agreement on
this point, and has continuously noted that a strong foundation
based on data that accurately reflects consumers' on-the-ground
experience is critical to advancing economic decisions. CCA
applauds this Congressional support, including letters to the
FCC and recent legislation that recognize that From 477 mobile
coverage provides an inherently unreliable account of mobile
broadband coverage, particularly in rural areas. We must begin
with concrete, factual data to adequately address gaps in
effective competition across the mobile wireless market.

CCA supports current legislation before the House of
Representatives, H.R. 1546, The Rural Wireless Act of 2017,
introduced by Congressman Dave Loebsack (D-IA) which would
direct the FCC to establish a methodology for mobile wireless
coverage data that reflects actual consumer connectivity
experience. Additionally, Congressmen David McKinley (R-WV) and
Peter Welch (D-VT) introduced the bipartisan H.R. 2903, the
Rural Reasonable and Comparable Wireless Act of 2017, which
would direct the FCC to implement regulations that establish a
national standard to determine whether rural areas have access
to mobile broadband services comparable to their urban
counterparts. CCA commends each piece of legislation seeking to
identify remote and rural areas that are still unserved and
underserved.

Streamlined Infrastructure Siting Policies are Critical to
Robust Mobile Broadband Networks

Competitive carriers must be able to timely and efficiently
deploy physical infrastructure. Carriers must increase the
number of towers, base stations, antennas and wires, often
within public rights-of-way, to support the advanced wireless
services necessary to keep pace with consumer and network
demands, yet carriers continue to face prohibitive delay and
cost issues while working through the federal, state, and local
siting process. Carriers must pass through a regulatory maze,
as demonstrated in the attached chart, to gain approval to
serve their communities, with potential costs and delays at
each step. These longstanding obstacles are getting worse as
industry moves towards deploying dense small cell networks and
fiber. Most CCA members serve rural areas and have invested
significant private capital, along with USF support, to deploy
wireless services in some of the hardest to serve parts of our
nation. However, expanding service to underserved and unserved
rural areas depends on the ability to efficiently site
facilities, including on federal lands.

Congress, the FCC, and industry have acknowledged that
achieving true 5G connections will depend on government's
ability to update the applicable regulatory frameworks, and
make them more predictable. While critically important for 5G,
these are not issues for future action--they also affect
deploying today's technologies and policymakers must act
immediately. CCA supports Chairman Pai's Broadband Deployment
Advisory Committee (``BDAC''). The BDAC's recommendations on
how to accelerate broadband deployment will directly support
the Commission's statutory mandate to facilitate high-speed
broadband for all Americans. Congressional efforts also are
needed. Congress should pass legislation that improves the
process for deploying facilities on federal lands, and
streamlines state and local barriers to deployment. Strong
national siting standards, including shot clocks, reasonable
restraints on state and local infrastructure-related fees, and
modifications to current historic preservation and
environmental compliance siting processes, will relieve
carriers and state and local review offices from resource
burdens, and will improve connectivity for consumers. In
addition to reducing state and local barriers, Congress should
work with the FCC to address in the short term its current
framework for complying with the National Environmental
Protection Act (``NEPA'') and the National Historic Protection
Act (``NHPA''), including section 106 review.

Siting on Federal Lands

CCA members often express frustration about the hurdles
they face when filing an application to deploy or upgrade
facilities on federal lands. These experiences include lost or
missing applications, applications that languish for years,
inconsistent or undisclosed rules across and within agencies,
redundant historical or environmental reviews, and inconsistent
denials. In other words, unnecessary bureaucratic red tape
regularly prevents competitive carriers from providing high-
quality mobile broadband service in rural America. In many
cases, carriers stall and sometimes abandon plans to buildout
in these areas. This is not an acceptable outcome. The BDAC
includes a Working Group dedicated to streamlining the federal
siting process; I encourage this Subcommittee to pay attention
to the Working Group's efforts as part of any effort to address
federal lands siting issues.

State and Local Barriers to Broadband Deployment

CCA and its members are deeply engaged in policymaker's
ongoing work to address state and local barriers to broadband
deployment. At the FCC, for example, CCA serves on the BDAC's
Removing State and Local Regulatory Barriers Working Group,
alongside many other stakeholders, including municipal
representatives. When it comes to state and local siting
processes, imposing reasonable restraints on state and local
infrastructure-related fees and making sure applications are
timely reviewed under clear rules will allow competitive
carriers to make a better business case for deployment. It also
will reduce the need to lobby individual local authorities or
States to adopt broadband-favorable rules. Broadband deployment
is an investment in the local economy, and while local
authorities often resist a ``one size fits all'' solution, most
industry requests for national standards are administrative and
structural and can appropriately respect local issues.

Congress Must Implement Durable Infrastructure Solutions

The FCC can quickly move to address some of these
infrastructure challenges, but Congress must act to provide
long-term certainty. Congress should include support for mobile
broadband deployment and services in any infrastructure bill.
There is bipartisan support from House and Senate leadership to
find solutions to bridge the digital divide. Democrats on the
House Energy and Commerce Committee as well as Senate Democrats
have proposed broad infrastructure plans that include
designated funding for broadband infrastructure. House Energy
and Commerce Subcommittee on Communications and Technology
Chairman Marsha Blackburn has confirmed her commitment to
include broadband in any infrastructure proposal, and Senate
Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee Chairman John
Thune has held numerous hearings on the importance of mobile
broadband infrastructure. Similarly, the Administration's
Fiscal Year 2018 budget proposal prioritizes improvements in
broadband deployment, and includes ``$200 billion in outlays
related to the infrastructure initiative,'' which could support
broadband deployment. Policymakers must be mindful that small
rural and regional providers have limited resources, and
continue to face challenges securing adequate capital for
wireless siting projects, an issue where this Committee plays a
critical leadership role.

CCA also supports legislation like S. 19, Making
Opportunities for Broadband Investment and Limiting Excessive
and Needless Obstacles to Wireless Act, or the MOBILE NOW Act.
The MOBILE NOW Act would contribute to streamlining federal
siting and deployment policies, as well as repurposing federal
spectrum for commercial use. Combined with FCC efforts,
Congress is poised to provide relief to carriers seeking to
serve the most challenging areas of the United States. Sound,
unified infrastructure policies will create jobs and drive
economic development. This will play a significant role in
ensuring the United States leads the world in 5G.

Access to a Myriad Spectrum of Resources is Critical to
Deploying Ubiquitous Mobile Broadband Networks

The wireless industry is on the brink of a tectonic
technological shift. While many carriers in rural areas still
maintain 2G networks, other wireless providers are currently
transitioning from 3G to 4G networks and other providers are
turning down their 2G and 3G networks altogether. Carriers are
now looking forward to deploying 5G next-generation
technologies. To make this important jump, competitive carriers
must have access to low-, mid-, and high-band spectrum to
deploy next-generation mobile broadband and, eventually, 5G
networks. This will determine viability of smaller carriers as
the demand for data increases.

Building on the trend to next-generation technologies,
Congress should support efforts to allocate additional spectrum
resources for mobile broadband use, including low-, medium-,
and high-band spectrum, both licensed and unlicensed.
Additionally, Congress should work alongside the Commission to
prevent attempts to encroach on mobile carrier operational
rights throughout the millimeter (``mmW'') spectrum.
Competitive carriers already are using these licenses for
point-to-point and critical backhaul services across rural and
urban communities, enabling broadband connectivity for local
municipalities, schools and businesses in these areas. Congress
and the FCC should continue to facilitate carriers' use of this
spectrum to provide all consumers with the most advanced
services.

A varied spectrum portfolio is necessary to meet consumers'
increasing demands, and the birth of unlimited plans and data
services on a variety networks. The Commission's first ever 600
MHz incentive auction closed successfully on March 30, 2017,
with a gross revenue totaling nearly $20 billion. Importantly
for this Committee, based on Congressional direction, the FCC
took many steps to support participation by smaller businesses,
including building interoperability into the rules, providing
sufficiently small geographic license sizes, and ensuring all
carriers had a fair and equitable opportunity to participate.

CCA commends Congress for its critical role in authorizing
the incentive auction, which is the second largest spectrum
auction in FCC history with 84 MHz of reallocated spectrum, 70
MHz allocated for mobile broadband use, and $7 billion provided
to the Treasury for deficit reduction. Broadcasters won $10.05
billion in revenue and eligible broadcasters will have access
to $1.75 billion in reimbursement payments for the repack. The
auction itself topped the charts in FCC auction history--
garnering a whopping $19.8 billion in gross revenues, second
only to the AWS-3 auction, And, the nearly $20 billion in gross
revenue from the 600 MHz incentive auction is the capstone for
an estimated total of about $66.5 billion in gross revenue
generated by the 2012 Spectrum Act.

Once put to use, this 600 MHz spectrum will be vital to
expanding mobile broadband coverage into unserved areas. What's
more, the Congressionally based 39-month repack timeline also
will provide an engine for economic stimulation and job
opportunities across rural America. For these reasons, Congress
and the FCC should promptly dismiss any attempts to introduce
delay and uncertainty in the repack process, and instead, focus
on completing the post-incentive auction transition within the
statutorily-based timeline or sooner. Any delay would be a
detriment to competition, the public interest, and the economy.

--

CCA members are proud to serve rural and remote parts of
the country, but there is a long way to go for ubiquitous
connectivity. Indeed, the majority of CCA's members live and
work in the communities they serve. As a result, competitive
carriers share both a professional and personal stake in
ensuring ubiquitous mobile broadband service is available to
all consumers in their communities. The coming year will be a
time of significant transition in the wireless market as
regulatory and technological changes take hold, and as carriers
move toward 5G and ioT technologies. During this transitional
and often uncertain time, Congress must continue to identify
and remove structural barriers to mobile broadband deployment
in rural and remote areas of the United States, providing
greater opportunities and certainty for small business and the
consumers they serve. Mobile broadband is a critical economic
driver, and its role in economic development will be magnified
following the evolutionary leap to 5G technologies. Consumers
expect their service and devices to connect wherever they live,
work or travel; yet competitive carriers struggle to access the
resources required to build out robust mobile broadband
networks. Policies established by Congress and implemented by
the FCC will play a significant role in whether rural America
has access to the latest services or languishes behind the
modern economy. CCA looks forward to continued work with
policymakers to ensure legislation and policies support
ubiquitous mobile wireless service and innovation for all
consumers.

Thank you for your attention to these issues and for
holding today's important hearing. CCA looks forward to
continuing to work with you, your colleagues, and the FCC to
make these policies a reality, and I welcome any questions you
may have.
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Written Testimony of Christopher Allendorf

V.P. of External Relations and General Counsel

Jo-Carroll Energy, Inc. (NFP)

Before the Subcommittee on Agriculture, Energy, and Trade

Improving Broadband Deployment: Solutions for Rural America

Electric Cooperatives and Rural Broadband

Thank you for the opportunity to address this committee
regarding efforts to increase access to high-speed broadband
internet in rural America. As a natural gas, broadband, and
electric cooperative serving thousands of rural accounts across
four counties in Northwest Illinois, Jo-Carroll Energy is part
of a broader electric cooperative industry that serves
approximately 42 million consumer-owners (members) who own
approximately 42% of electric distribution lines that cover 56%
percent of our nation. Considering that most of those members
and lines are in rural America, these numbers are critical to
identifying and understanding how electric cooperatives serve
as an established, sensible partner in developing programs and
rules that will increase rural access to broadband internet. In
our rural areas, we serve an average of four consumer-owners
per mile of line, which is higher than many cooperatives, but
significantly less than the thirty or more consumers per mile
average for investor-owned and municipal utilities in urban
areas. Low customer density is an important statistic to keep
in mind when considering how best to help facilitate deployment
of large-scale broadband access in rural America.

Jo-Carroll Energy was founded in 1939 as a result of the
Rural Electrification Act of 1936 (REA) by a small group of
farmers who saw the immense business benefits of electricity,
though none of the existing utilities found it economically
viable to serve them. This small group of farmers pooled their
resources, with critical funding provided under the REA, to
construct the necessary infrastructure and energized their
first lines in 1940. With electricity provided by their local
cooperative, these rural Americans were able to enjoy the same
comforts as their urban peers. There is a parallel situation
happening right now with broadband deployment.

Utility cooperatives like Jo-Carroll Energy are private,
not-for-profit businesses owned and governed by their
consumers. Two principles under which utility co-ops operate
are democratic governance and operation at cost. Specifically,
every consumer-owner can vote to select local board members who
then set rates and oversee the co-op. Revenue received by the
co-op that is in excess of the amount it takes to provide
services must be returned to consumer-owners as capital
credits. Under this structure, utility co-ops provide economic
benefits to their local communities, rather than distant
stakeholders, by ensuring profits stay it the hands of the
local consumers, not stockholders.

Why is Jo-Carroll Energy in the Wireless Broadband
Business?

Locally-owned cooperatives, as a result of their governing
principles, are more attuned to the needs and requirements of
those they serve. It has become apparent that the need for
access to high speed broadband service is no less important for
the success and survival of rural areas today than electricity
was more than 75 years ago. Can you imagine large swathes of
the inhabited U.S. without electricity today? We have to ask
ourselves the same question now about rural areas without
broadband access.

Recognizing this reality, Jo-Carroll Energy's board of
directors decided to begin offering wireless broadband service
to our members in 2009, based on feedback the individual
directors received from their constituents that they either had
no access to internet or were limited to dial-up connections.
This lack of internet service was impeding everything from
expansion of small, local businesses, to students not being
able to perform necessary coursework at home.

At that time, there were two local, for-profit, wireless
internet service providers (WISP) within our service area, a
major telco, and a regional cable company providing service.
Their services were limited to larger rural towns and villages.
None had a business motivation to serve our more rural areas,
unless a person/business could afford to make it feasible for
them by shouldering significant costs of construction
themselves, which is the opposite of how utility cooperatives
have operated for 80 years. We have since acquired one of those
WISPs, which otherwise would have ceased operating, so that
numerous rural residents would continue to have access to
fixed-wireless broadband. Others continue to operate for-profit
broadband businesses in areas with more concentrated
populations.

What we found over the course of the next six years,
however, was that fixed-wireless broadband systems are a
rapidly aging technology that struggles to keep up with the
ever-increasing speed and bandwidth demands of users.
Additionally, the rural nature of our business created
geographical challenges to large-scale deployment of fixed-
wireless internet. Our service area has several types of
topography, from the tallest point in Illinois, through dense
forests, to innumerable valleys and river basins. Fixed-
wireless proved to be more difficult to deploy due to our
terrain and we ended up constructing costly towers in order to
somewhat compensate. The resulting service that we could
provide was a lifeline to remote users who likely never would
have received service from a for-profit company, but it is far
from ideal.

Over the course of time, as our utility operation demands
changed, we converted our utility communications, including our
offices and links between substations and meters, over to a
fiber-based loop. Fixed wireless broadband for our utility
operations faced the same geographical challenges as our
consumer-owners were experiencing and it could not continue to
provide the increasing reliability and capacity needs for our
own utility operations. Eventually, we nearly eliminated our
internal use of the fixed-wireless component, except as a
redundancy. Since then, we have seen the benefits of fiber
broadband firsthand in our utility operations.

We continue to serve roughly 1600 wireless broadband
accounts, but the technology is increasingly expensive to
construct and maintain, with most of the equipment having a 5-
year useful life. Fiber infrastructure, on the other hand, has
an exponentially longer useful life and few bandwidth
constraints. It is also cheaper to construct because we can
better utilize our existing overhead and underground utility
infrastructure rather than having to construct towers. The
cooperative business model allows us to provide utility service
to the most remote areas in our service territory, but it also
means that costs must be shared equally among consumer-owners
and broadband is no different for us. Cooperatives' electric
utility business took nearly two decades to develop
incrementally in order to eventually provide service to
everyone. Rural America, especially our businesses, cannot
afford to wait that long, at a competitive disadvantage, for
broadband to develop in the same fashion.

Why Do We Believe That Fiber is the Solution for our
Territory and Rural America?

After seeing for ourselves internally how much of an
advantage fiber provided, we saw fiber as a technology that
could provide reliable, fast broadband to rural America and one
that would allow us to better utilize existing overhead and
underground conduit infrastructure, free from the geographical
constraints of fixed-wireless technology. Several companies,
including some with government fund grants, had laid ``middle-
mile'' fiber throughout our area, but it is still up to other
companies to establish ``last-mile'' infrastructure for end-
users.

As a result, while increased middle-mile infrastructure
meant that fiber became a technology option for us to provide
retail broadband service, it would still require significant
capital to bring fiber to our rural users. In addition to local
businesses, one area that stood out to us as demonstrating the
urgent need for last-mile fiber construction was rural schools
and students. Several of our rural schools were able to connect
to the middle-mile fiber network, allowing them to provide the
benefits of fiber broadband at school. However, the students
were left with whatever internet service they had at home to
research, complete, and submit their assignments, which often
requires broadband internet. Very rural students were left at a
competitive disadvantage because of a lack of access to
reliable broadband compared to their peers who lived in towns
and villages with more internet options.

Fixed-wireless broadband had not proven to be a feasible
solution for connecting our rural consumer-owners and in 2015,
Jo-Carroll Energy began planning a fiber pilot project in one
of the rural towns we serve, Galena, Illinois. The feedback we
heard from our consumer-owners, along with the countless
articles and research we read, all demonstrated that reliable
broadband was a necessity for quality of life and economic
development in rural areas. It is difficult for rural
businesses to remain competitive without high-speed broadband.
The global economy requires rural areas to have the same access
to reliable broadband as their urban peers in order to remain
viable.

We felt that Galena was the perfect testing ground for our
first fiber deployment. Galena, a town of 3500 near the
Mississippi River, has very diverse population and business
demographics. It is the second most visited tourist spot in
Illinois after Chicago. Tourism has created a large retail and
service industry in Galena and the surrounding area. Outside of
tourism industry needs, Galena represents the needs of any
other small, rural towns. Galena businesses told us they needed
reliable broadband service to ensure they could process credit
cards in a timely fashion, take online reservations, provide
high-speed wireless to customers, and much more.

We believed a fiber system could meet the needs of Galena
businesses and we saw Galena as the perfect starting point for
a fiber system that could meet the same needs eventually
throughout our service area.

Jo-Carroll Energy's Galena fiber pilot project was
completed in 2016. We utilized a mixture of existing overhead
and underground infrastructure to place the fiber bundles. We
estimate that there are approximately 460 possible accounts
within the footprint of the project. I have attached
testimonials from several of our fiber-connected businesses
that demonstrate how crucial fiber broadband has been to their
success. Our take rate among businesses is over 60%. Many of
these users previously had cable or fixed-wireless broadband.
The success of businesses using our fiber internet service in
the pilot project area has convinced Jo-Carroll Energy that
fiber internet provides the most stable, reliable platform for
rural internet and that it is a critical component for economic
development.

Residential demand has not been as high as we anticipated
and cost is a factor. Though we are working on bringing costs
down, our fiber packages are currently more expensive than
options offered by other providers, but these other services
are subject to latency, reliability, and usage allowance
restrictions. We hope that as our fiber-connected businesses
continue to tout the benefits of fiber, more residential users
will take note.

A major factor leading to our higher costs is the lack of
access to capital in sufficient amounts to cover the high
expense of initial construction and deployment. As a
cooperative, we operate at cost and our access to capital is
limited by what we ask consumer-owners to contribute through
rates. As our density figures shows, we have a smaller group of
consumers over which we can spread costs. Therefore, more
government grant funding to reduce the upfront capital
investment would help create the financial incentive for local
cooperatives to expand high-speed internet access beyond what
we are able to undertake on our own.

Another contributing factor to our fiber pilot project also
came about because for-profit entities were abandoning
broadband in our service area. The major telco providing
broadband within our project area is not connecting new users
and existing users are constrained by limited infrastructure
and slower speeds; much like traditional phone lines, its
broadband system has been left to wither on its own.

Regardless of whether broadband service is provided by a
for-profit telco or cable company, their offerings are only
available to residents who live in towns and villages, where
higher customer density provides profit incentives; profits
play a large role in determining what areas are served.
Additionally, we are offering a superior product with fiber.
The existing service options are subject to bandwidth
restrictions and high latency during peak demand times which
are more acute in rural areas because of weak signals due to
topography. All of this frustrated local businesses.

Jo-Carroll Energy has seen firsthand that fiber integrates
relatively seamlessly with existing overhead and underground
utility infrastructure, making permitting easier to obtain,
which is otherwise a concern for any company. We have found
that fiber is also much more scalable at a lower cost than
fixed-wireless. As bandwidth demand increases and new users are
connected, only relatively minor investments in fiber
infrastructure are needed to meet both challenges, which we
have not found to be the case with fixed wireless.

Utility cooperatives are uniquely positioned to partner
with the government to provide this service because of the
existing infrastructure we have in place to serve rural
America. Together with a governance model that is favorable for
rural internet users because there is no profit motivation and
consumer-owners have a direct say in the service being
provided. Utility cooperatives will remain serving these areas,
long after other companies have reduced the quality of their
service or abandoned areas altogether and fiber is the robust,
scalable technology we need to provide it.

How Can Government help Provide Reliable Broadband Service
to Rural America?

We applaud Chairman Pai and the Federal Communications
Commission for creating the Broadband Deployment Advisory
Committee (BDAC) to take look at the barriers to providing
broadband access to rural areas of our country. We were
especially pleased that Jim Matheson, CEO of our national trade
association, NRECA, was appointed to serve on the committee and
bring the voice of non-traditional providers, like electric
cooperatives to the table for these important discussions. Mr.
Matheson will undoubtedly make sure that the voice of our
consumer-owners in rural America is heard in conservations
about expanding broadband access. The BDAC is expected to make
recommendations later this year on how to spur greater
deployment of broadband service.

Congress has worked with previous Administrations to
provide funding for broadband projects through the Federal
Communications Commission, the Rural Utilities Service at USDA,
and the National Telecommunications and Information
Administration at the Department of Commerce. These programs
have had both success stories and challenges in pursuit of
bridging the digital divide for rural America. I hope we can
use the knowledge gained from those programs to make sound
investments in the future.

As Congress and the Administration discuss plans for
reauthorization of the Farm Bill and an Infrastructure funding
package in the coming months, increasing deployment of
broadband service in rural America through grants and direct
construction contributions must be one of the top priorities in
those packages. As you consider proposals to spur broadband
deployment, we believe that all potential providers, including
electric cooperatives, should be eligible to participate in an
open and inclusive process that allows providers the ability to
compete for funding opportunities. In addition, we urge
policymakers to consider the scope of capital needed to make
the upfront capital investment to extend broadband service to
rural America and allocate the monetary resources needed to
meet this expansive challenge. We hope that our experience with
what has and hasn't worked for deploying broadband in rural
areas will also provide insight for these discussions.

Looking to the Future for Rural America

Bringing electricity to rural America 80 years ago was a
task of epic-proportion. The federal government created a
strong, lasting partnership with rural utility cooperatives to
accomplish that goal. That partnership provided the same high
quality of life to all Americans, regardless of economics and
location. The investments made over 80 years in utility
infrastructure shines as an example of what can be done when
you are willing to think outside the box to meet a goal. Today,
the challenge to bring robust broadband service to rural
America is as difficult as it was to bring electricity, but Jo-
Carroll Energy has seen that it is no less important for the
continued success and well-being of rural America. It is our
sincere hope that Congress and this Administration will
continue to reinforce their partnership with rural utility
cooperatives to bring electricity to rural America and build
upon that partnership in the 21st century with continued
support for the no-less audacious goal of providing rural
Americans with high-speed broadband service.

Thank you for taking the time to allow me to share our
experiences.
Testimonals from Galena Businesses with Jo-Carroll Energy's

Fiber Product

Note: Jo-Carroll Energy's broadband internet
service is marketed as Sand Prairie Wireless to differentiate
it from our other utility services. It is a fully integrated
business unit.

Paul, Owner of a Galena business

We were really excited when we heard that fiber was coming
to downtown Galena. Our business specializes in selling things
for people...in our case here, I have eight listing stations.
To sell on e-bay you have to upload pictures, create
descriptions, and research items. All of that is done on the
cloud - or the internet. All of our business is cloud based, so
when we had the opportunity to go to a fiber system that
offered the speeds that the fiber does, we could not wait.

We went from doing 5x2 to 50x7. The bottom line is that was
a huge increase in speed. What that means for us is an increase
in productivity. Fiber means we can work faster and we can list
more; that means my business can grow, I can employ more
people, I can sell more things, and I can help more people find
value in the things they have.

If you use the internet from a business standpoint, you
need the speed of fiber. It is the way of the future; it is why
this install in downtown Galena makes Galena a more viable
place to do business. Having a consistently high internet
connection is crucial. You need that high-speed connection and
you need it to be consistent.

Fiber optic in downtown Galena gives business owners the
opportunity to grow their business utilizing the power of the
internet. With that consistent speed, you can grow your
business to a whole different level outside of just Main
Street.

The investment in downtown Galena for the fiber network is
incredible from the standpoint of the business community. Very
few communities of our size have that kind of a connection.
They're working with much slower speeds and connections that
are not consistent. To have that investment in downtown Galena
just brings us to another level. Galena is already a great
place to visit; Galena is a great place to come shop, to eat,
and just enjoy the beautiful Main Street that we have. Now as
business owners, we can go beyond that by utilizing the power
of fiber internet. The investment made in the infrastructure
makes it easy for any business on Main Street to do business
internationally with the speed of light. It is just phenomenal.

Cory, General Manager of a Galena restaurant.

Chose to go with Sand Prairie Fiber for the fast internet
speeds. It is one of the first companies to offer speeds that
are beneficial for our restaurant. The fast internet speeds
allow our wait staff to give our guests the best service
possible by using tablets to enter orders and also to accept
credit card payments. With the fast speeds we are receiving
credit card transactions are instant and online reservations
are made and confirmed in real time. I would highly recommend
it. The speeds are blazing fast. The installation process went
seamlessly.

Dan, President of a Galena Business

My company uses the Sand Prairie Fiber service for our
daily connectivity to our third-party data center and has six
people on the connection throughout the day. We are very happy
with the speed and stability of the connection. High-speed
broadband service was very badly needed here in Galena for the
entire business community and we are very happy Jo-Carroll
Energy and Sand Prairie have committed to providing this
valuable service.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Question from Representative Bacon:

``With the technological advances of agricultural equipment
requiring grater connectivity, rural broadband development can
greatly improve the productivity and efficiency of our
agricultural economy in states like Nebraska. Production
agriculture operations are significant businesses that drive
growth outside of just rural communities. How can we
specifically streamline the regulatory requirements so rural
providers can spend less on compliance and focus more capital
on deploying infrastructure to communities that have tremendous
need for this kind of connectivity?''

VTX1 Response:

The last several yeas have seen a lot of what our company
sees as change in direction for regulatory reporting, and with
all these changes it has created a whirlwind of activity. The
FCC 477, to include HUBB reporting and 481 reports and their
formats, seemed to be evolving constantly over the last several
years. Inclusion of a detailed five-year plan and yearly
updates was very time consuming for our company because it had
to be in the right format for our consultants. It was
questionable whether anyone ever looked at the data submitted
for the five-year plans, and we understand the five-year plan
is no longer a requirement.

We were also required to submit electronic boundaries in a
specific format for our exchange boundaries (study area
boundaries) to identify and rectify boundary overlaps/conflicts
with other LECs. Historically these boundaries had been
maintained and documented by the Texas PUC. For us this was
very time consuming, and we did reach out to other small LECs
and get some boundary overlaps identified. As it turned out the
larger companies such as Verizon (now Frontier) and AT&T were
somehow given a waiver and were not required to submit their
boundaries due to confidentiality agreements so those were
never addressed. The majority of our study area boundaries
border these two companies, so for us this seemed like a big
waste of time and resources. We are already reporting our areas
by census blocks via the 477 process. See the link below.

https://www.fcc.gov/reports-research/maps/study-area-
boundaries/

This year NECA has asked us to provide data for each work
order we issue that is ``similar'' to FCC 477 data already
being submitted. So that process has been implemented.

Our yearly activities related to documenting and updating
records, maps and CPR related to our annual cost study is very
time consuming. Although we realize this is important, it still
takes time and often results in questions from the consultants
for clarification.

In 2016 we instructed our engineering records groups just
to document the number of hours we spent on the FCC 477 and
study area boundary projects alone and it exceeded over 700
employee hours for this group alone. The number did not include
all the other reports and data we compile for regulatory.

For small companies all this reporting can be overwhelming.

There is a need for some regulatory oversight for obvious
reasons, but for the EPA regulators to prohibit performing
engineering activity in conjunction with environmental activity
is a waste of time and money. These two activities could have
been performed concurrently, by two different entities, thus
reducing the time to deliver service to customers.
Environmental approvals can take as long as six months to a
year. Ours took 9+ months and delayed our project start almost
a year. Our view is that there were wasteful delays.

We also spend an inordinate amount of time submitting forms
to NEPA (National Environmental Policy Act) that includes the
following: the US Fish & Wildlife, TCNS (Tribes), FCC, FAA, and
SHPO (State Historic Preservation Office) Archaeology. There
are many others, too many to list. The point being that all of
the information submitted to all of these agencies is almost
the same information and it can take months to hear back from
each one. This led to even more delays. This is compounded when
you add wireless towers to the list.

If a floodway is to be crossed, then the State and Local
agencies must approve. State and local Agencies have
jurisdiction over U.S. Floodways and Waterways. Often the local
representative is only available 2-1/2 days a week so this
builds in delays that takes weeks to overcome. These agencies
and agents are not flexible at all. If the state says it's ok
to cross a floodway, and you don't get local approval, the
local representative will make you redo the entire crossing at
your expense, even if the project is 100% compliant with the
state and local regulations.

After all of this, the demand for reports to the agencies
like USDA, NTIA, etc... is never ending.

In the event there is a need to cross a water boundary (Rio
Grande River), then the U.S. International Boundary & Water
Commission (IB&WC) gets involved. In our case, both Mexico
(CILA) and the USA (IB&WC) have to agree on the project needs.
Approval can take from months to a year.

By working under the thumb of our Federal Program Officer
and trying to meet the 67% completion date by the end of year
two requirement, we spent approximately $1M-$2M which we could
have spent on putting fiber in the ground. We went over budget
by approximately this amount which was booked against our
annual capital budget.

This was caused by the way the federal government defined
project completion: percentage of completion status was based
on how many dollars we had drawn down from the BTOP pool to pay
contractors. The more dollars you spend, the faster you reach
project completion. The percentage of completion had to
relation to how much of the actual project construction had be
completed. No private sector organization I know of would
utilize this type of criteria to determine the percentage of
project completion.

We were also required to follow Davis-Bacon guidelines for
wages on our projects. This is a federal framework that
determines wages and weekly wage payments for all workers--
contractors and employees. We had to wait weeks and months to
get approvals from our regulators confirming that a certain job
required a certain pay depending on the county in which the
work was being performed. In all cases our prevailing wages
were over the Davis-Bacon minimums, so all of this effort was
unnecessary and a waste of precious time.

The heart of the question in our minds is how can we
specifically streamline the regulatory requirements so rural
providers can spend less on compliance and focus more capital
on deploying infrastructure to communities that have tremendous
need for this kind of connectivity. Our recommendations are as
follows:

1. Shorten the EPA approval cycle. EPA requirements
are complex and take months to complete and usually
require the expertise of an EPA consulting firm which
adds cost to the process. Delays due to EPA
environmentals cost money and serve little practical
purpose in furthering the EPA's goals to protect the
environment.

2. Focus environmental impact studies to areas where
it is useful. Requiring environmentals on public
highway rights of way where people drive cars in
addition to pulling over and stopping there is
unnecessary. The right of way land is continuously and
frequently disturbed thereby making it highly unlikely
that protected and endangered plant and animal species
will be found and harmed.

3. Scale back the reporting - much of which is on
information that is available elsewhere. We have
submitted similar information to multiple government
agencies (NECA, RUS, FCC, USAC for example) whose
computer systems cannot share data. Our cost to create
and submit reports for the federal government alone
amount totals to around $100,000 per year in salaries -
not counting the overhead that goes with those salary
dollars. This is excessive and could be lowered by
significant amounts with more reasonable reporting
requirements.

Representative Bacon, thank you for the opportunity to
respond to your very relevant question.
REP Don Bacon (R-NE-02): ``With the technological advances
of agricultural equipment requiring greater connectivity, rural
broadband development can greatly improve the productivity and
efficiency of our agricultural economy in states like Nebraska.
Production agriculture operations are significant businesses
that drive growth outside of just rural communities. How can we
specifically streamline the regulatory requirements so rural
providers can spend less on compliance and focus more capital
on deploying infrastructure to communities that have tremendous
need for this kind of connectivity?''

Across all levels of government, streamlining the network
deployment process is critical. As noted in my testimony, the
current regulatory steps necessary to deploy mobile
infrastructure are burdensome and rife with opportunities for
delay and additional costs. These barriers stifle network
investment and ultimately thwart carriers' ability to provide
service that meets consumers' coverage and capacity needs.
Streamlined siting policies are critical to expanding mobile
broadband service to unserved areas today and leading the world
in 5G in the years ahead.

Congress and the Federal Communications Commission
(``FCC'') must simplify infrastructure processes and procedures
to facilitate more effective mobile broadband deployment.
Mobile data traffic will grow an estimated five times--from
approximately 5 gigabits per month per smartphone in 2016 to an
estimate d25 gigabits per month per smartphone by 2022--and
carriers are working to deploy the infrastructure needed to
innovate and keep up with consumer demands, especially those in
rural areas. Expanded infrastructure supports new services,
creates jobs, inspires innovation, and powers for economic
opportunities, especially in rural America.

CCA offers the following recommendations for Congress and
the FCC to achieve the mutual goal of streamlining regulatory
deployment requirements for competitive providers.

Amend the Communications Act to streamline
state and local siting processes, including prohibiting
moratoria;

Improve access and increase certainty with
regard to deploying mobile broadband infrastructure on
federal lands;

Amend the National Historic Preservation Act
(``NHPA'') to clarify that small wireless deployments
are not a federal undertaking;

Streamline mobile network deployment under
the NHPA and National Environmental Preservation Act
(``NEPA'') processes, including common-sense exclusions
for small wireless equipment or structure deployed on
previously disturbed grounds;

Reduce burdensome fees and delays in the
local, state, and federal siting processes by enforcing
meaningful ``shot clocks'' and employing ``dig once''
and ``deemed granted'' policies;

Improve access to municipal poles and reduce
attachment fees.

Additionally, carriers must have long-term certainty with
regard to support from the High Cost program of the Universal
Service Fund, and eligible areas for support from Mobility Fund
Phase II must be based on reliable coverage data.

CCA looks forward to continued work with Congress and
policymakers to ensure siting policies facilitate innovation
and foster ubiquitous mobile broadband service across the
United States.
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
