- THE PUERTO RICO OVERSIGHT, MANAGEMENT AND ECONOMIC STABILITY ACT: STATE OF SMALL BUSINESS CONTRACTING

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE PUERTO RICO OVERSIGHT, MANAGEMENT AND ECONOMIC STABILITY ACT: STATE
OF SMALL BUSINESS CONTRACTING

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEES ON CONTRACTING AND WORKFORCE AND ECONOMIC GROWTH, TAX,
AND CAPITAL ACCESS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
JULY 13, 2017

__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 115-029
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

26-249                         WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
ROD BLUM, Iowa
JAMES COMER, Kentucky
JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, Puerto Rico
DON BACON, Nebraska
BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
ROGER MARSHALL, Kansas
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
DWIGHT EVANS, Pennsylvania
STEPHANIE MURPHY, Florida
AL LAWSON, JR., Florida
YVETTE CLARK, New York
JUDY CHU, California
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
VACANT

Kevin Fitzpatrick, Majority Staff Director
Jan Oliver, Majority Deputy Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Adam Minehardt, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Steve Knight................................................     1
Hon. Stephanie Murphy............................................     2
Hon. Dave Brat...................................................     3
Hon. Dwight Evans................................................     4
Hon. Nydia Velazquez.............................................     5

WITNESSES

Mr. William Shear, Director, Financial Markets and Community
Investment, United States Government Accountability Office,
Washington, DC.................................................     7
Mr. Robb N. Wong, Associate Administrator, Office of Government
Contracting and Business Development, United States Small
Business Administration, Washington, DC........................     8

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Mr. William Shear, Director, Financial Markets and Community
Investment, United States Government Accountability Office,
Washington, DC.............................................    25
Mr. Robb N. Wong, Associate Administrator, Office of
Government Contracting and Business Development, United
States Small Business Administration, Washington, DC.......    39
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
GAO Report...................................................    43
Statement of Mr. Kenneth D. McClintock, President, Puerto
Rico Equality Forum........................................    98

THE PUERTO RICO OVERSIGHT, MANAGEMENT AND ECONOMIC STABILITY ACT: STATE
OF SMALL BUSINESS CONTRACTING

----------

THURSDAY, JULY 13, 2017

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Subcommittee on Contracting and Workforce,
joint with the
Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Tax, and Capital Access,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
Room 2360, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Steve Knight
[chairman of the Subcommittee on Contracting and Workforce]
presiding.
Present: Representatives Chabot, Brat, Knight, Kelly,
Gonzalez-Colon, Velazquez, Evans, Murphy, Lawson, Chu, and
Espaillat.
Chairman KNIGHT. This hearing will come to order. Trent
Kelly is here so we are ready.
I would like to thank our witnesses for taking time to come
and share their thoughts with us today, and I look forward to
your testimony.
Today's joint hearing on the Subcommittee on Contracting
and Workforce and the Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Tax, and
Capital Access will focus on findings by the Government
Accountability Office, GAO, report mandated by section 408 of
the Puerto Rico Oversight Management and Economic Stability
Act, also known as PROMESA. This report takes a close look and
evaluates the Small Business Administration's contracting
activities in Puerto Rico.
According to SBA size standards, 99 percent of all
businesses on the island are considered small, but only a
limited number of these firms are actually engaged in federal
contracting activities. We often say on this Committee that
small businesses are the backbone of this country. This is
especially true in Puerto Rico. Therefore, it is important that
small businesses are given every opportunity to ensure their
success. The SBA's federal contracting programs strive to do
just that. These programs provide contracting preferences to
small businesses based on specific socioeconomic designations
such as service, disabled veteran, or woman-owned. This is done
to ensure small businesses are given opportunities to access
and compete fairly for federal contracts.
The island itself is dominated by small businesses, and
thus, presents an excellent case study examining the
effectiveness of SBA's federal contracting programs on the
small business community. For example, the GAO found that small
businesses in Puerto Rico are winning a significant portion of
federal prime contract obligations, roughly twice the national
average. While the findings appear promising, the report also
states that most contract obligations were not won through
SBA's federal contract programs, so this raises the question:
are SBA small business contracting programs effective or
influential? Additionally, the result of PROMESA's expansion of
the SBA's historically underutilized Business Zone or HUBZone
program in Puerto Rico also provides important insights into
the program and small business contracting in general.
The lessons we take from today's GAO report will help in
our understanding of how the SBA's federal contracting programs
impact small businesses in the United States territories and
nationwide.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses. We will
benefit from your perspective, and I thank you for being here
today.
I would now like to yield time to the ranking member, Ms.
Murphy, for her opening statement.
Ms. MURPHY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am pleased that we are holding this hearing on the small
business provisions contained in PROMESA on the GAO report that
was produced as a result of one of those provisions, and on the
possible steps this Committee and the SBA can take to empower
small businesses in Puerto Rico and to help the U.S. territory
address its economic challenges.
I want to thank Ranking Member Velazquez, who is a
tremendous champion for the island. I also want to thank my
colleague, Congresswoman Jennifer Gonzalez, who represents
Puerto Rico in this chamber with skill and determination.
There are 3.4 million American citizens living in Puerto
Rico. Because of the migration of Puerto Ricans from the island
to the mainland, especially in recent years, there are now 5.4
million individuals of Puerto Rican heritage living in the
States. The Puerto Rican population in Florida has increased by
over 120 percent since the year 2000, and now stands at 1.1
million, running neck and neck with New York.
My district in Central Florida is home to about 100,000
Puerto Ricans, the second highest of any district in the
Sunshine State. Many of my constituents have family and friends
still living in Puerto Rico. They care deeply about the island,
and so I care deeply about the island.
My view on Puerto Rico is simple: I believe the American
citizens that live on the island should be able to vote for
their president, should have a full delegation in the House and
the Senate, so that Congresswoman Gonzalez does not need to do
the work of seven people, and should be treated equally under
all federal spending and tax programs. Our fellow citizens in
Puerto Rico ought to have the same rights and the same
responsibilities as residents of Florida or any other State.
Until Puerto Rico is treated equally in all respects,
however, federal policymakers should be exploring both
straightforward and creative ways to improve quality of life
and spur economic growth on the island.
To that end, Congresswoman Velazquez and Congresswoman
Gonzalez have introduced the Puerto Rico Small Business
Assistance Act, which I am proud to cosponsor. This bill
incorporates recommendations made by the bipartisan, bicameral
Congressional Task Force on Economic Growth in Puerto Rico,
which was established by PROMESA and which issued a
comprehensive report in December 2016. I hope Congress acts
swiftly on this legislation.
As the ranking member of the Subcommittee that oversees
contracting, I will have specific questions for the two
witnesses regarding the conclusions in the GAO report and the
specific steps SBA can take at the agency level to better
assist Puerto Rico's 44,000 small businesses.
For now, I want to close by expressing a general concern.
Puerto Rico firms, whether they are small, medium, or large,
receive relatively few federal government contracts. As
discussed in the report issued by the Congressional Task Force
on Economic Growth in Puerto Rico, the territory ranks nearly
last when it comes to the total dollar value of federal
contracts performed within each State and dead last when
considered on a per capita basis.
Compounding the problem, according to the Federal
Procurement Data System, of the 571 federal contracts that were
performed in Puerto Rico in fiscal year 2015, 346, which is
approximately 61 percent, were awarded to firms located outside
of Puerto Rico. That is a very high percentage compared to
other jurisdictions. And in short, very few federal contracts
are performed in Puerto Rico, and those that are performed in
Puerto Rico are more often than not awarded to firms located
off the island. That is an impediment to economic growth and
job creation.
I hope the witnesses will address this broader point during
the hearing. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman KNIGHT. Thank you very much.
And now we are going to yield time to Chairman Brat, as
this is a joint hearing, for his opening statement.
Chairman BRAT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would also like
to thank our witnesses, first of all, for your willingness to
be with us and speak to us today, and I look forward to your
testimony.
I think we can all agree on both sides of the aisle that
achieving and sustaining long-term economic growth is the key
to unlocking Puerto Rico's full potential. Unfortunately, the
island has been, and continues to be, embroiled in economic
crisis. I hope through our discussion today we can identify
pro-growth policies and solutions from the GAO's report.
As the chairman noted, the vast majority of businesses in
Puerto Rico are considered small, but not many of these firms
actually operate in the federal contracting space. Even fewer
hold SBA certifications, which would allow them to receive
federal contracting preferences. The GAO report also makes
clear that less than a handful of government agencies actually
award contracts to firms in Puerto Rico, and only in a few
select industries. Having a strong, healthy, and diversified
small business base has been critical to this country and is
critical to Puerto Rico's economic stability and financial
independence.
We can start by taking steps to harness the power of the
small business workforce in Puerto Rico. I look forward to
hearing from our witnesses on ways this Committee can help
small businesses in Puerto Rico succeed.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman KNIGHT. Thank you very much.
And now we would like to hear from the ranking member, Mr.
Evans, the ranking member on Economic Growth, Tax, and Capital
Access.
Mr. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And also, I would like
to thank my colleague Congresswoman Velazquez for her long
history of working to help Puerto Rico.
Today is an opportunity for us to consider the dire
economic situation facing Puerto Rico. While the cause of
decline are debatable and outside the purview of today's
hearing, what is very clear is the harm being done to Puerto
Rico's small business community. More private sector workers in
Puerto Rico are employed by small firms than here on the
mainland, yet their needs are overlooked, their economic
contribution unappreciated. Rather than bickering over the
issues not under our control, we should be working together to
improve the lending, contracting, and entrepreneurship
development landscape on the island.
The Small Business Administration offers a wide variety of
programs to support entrepreneurs in exactly those areas, yet
the GAO report concludes that much more can be done,
specifically as it relates to contracting. The GAO spoke with a
number of stakeholders that identified challenges that small
businesses in Puerto Rico may face in obtaining federal
contracting opportunities. These include increasing use of
contracting bundling or consolidation, difficulty in meeting
contract procurement requirements, and a lack of knowledge
about the federal procurement process. These barriers are
compounded by challenges created by the island's geographic
location and economic condition. Along those lines, I am
greatly concerned about the lack of access to contracting
officials for Puerto Rican entities. GAO referenced the uphill
circumstances the island businesses face in forging
relationships with agency representatives. These
representatives are meant to be advocates for small
contractors, but Puerto Rico does not have the same access as
the mainland firms.
Small businesses in Puerto Rico also lack the knowledge
about the federal contracting process. Despite SBA efforts to
train them, GAO concludes that the small firms do not know how
to complete proposals or even basic information about the
existence of the small SBA federal contracting programs.
But most disappointing is the lack of access to capital and
financing. In light of the fiscal realities facing the island,
it comes as no surprise that small businesses cannot meet
financial standards of surety companies and other lenders. The
gap in financing reduces the ability of small contractors and
small firms to generally do their part in rebuilding Puerto
Rico's economy. While I applaud the approval of the first
Puerto Rican surety company to be approved to participate in
the Small Business Surety Bond Guarantee program, I believe
more must be done to attract lenders and other programs'
resources to partner to our own.
Doing nothing is no longer an option in that regard. I am
encouraged to learn that the SBA is serious about its duty to
Puerto Rican entrepreneurs. I look forward to working with my
Committee colleagues and with the SBA to move legislation
forward to help small businesses in Puerto Rico because they
are the engine needed to promote growth, drive stability, and
achieve economic revitalization.
I thank the witnesses for testifying today and hope to
learn more about how we can use the federal marketplace as a
building block to help Puerto Rico.
Thank you. I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman KNIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Evans.
And I am pleased to see the ranking member from the full
Committee, and I would like to yield her some time for an
opening comment from Ms. Velazquez.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am very grateful
for your indulgence.
I am very proud of the island, not only because it is where
I was born, but because despite all the fiscal ailments it is
facing, young entrepreneurs are leading its economic
renaissance. While the bankruptcy process slowly unfolds, there
is a degree of uncertainty that has forced banks to cut back
markedly on their small business lending. When small businesses
employ more than 80 percent of all private sector workers, this
becomes particularly challenging. Yet, in the face of
adversity, entrepreneurs are rolling up their sleeves and
getting to work. They are harvesting the land and building upon
their strong human capital to get out of their economic hole.
Just last week, I learned of a small 50-person 8(a) technology
company that secured a contract with a large federal agency. I
also learned of virtual office spaces and business incubators
that are encouraging collaboration with likeminded businesses
and supplying entrepreneurs scalable solutions for their
particular needs.
The truth is that the people of Puerto Rico want and need
jobs. I believe small businesses will be the driving force
behind the island's vitality. I commend Administrator McMahon
for traveling to the island and hearing from small businesses.
Understanding their challenges is vital to restoring economic
growth. Assisting small businesses in Puerto Rico is not only
good for entrepreneurs on the island; it is the right thing to
do. We must remember that as citizens of the United States,
Puerto Ricans have fought, shed blood, and given their lives in
nearly every major American war. We owe it to the island to
provide them the help and resources to jumpstart their economy.
In the agriculture space alone, Puerto Rico can become the
leader in organic, tropical, and specialty crops. It has a
year-round growing season, abundant rainfall, and it abides by
the same legal structure and regulatory standards as crops in
the mainland United States. Their universities graduate over
18,000 students annually in engineering and technology. I want
for those students, for those engineers, to have the option to
stay in Puerto Rico. I do not want for them to face the reality
that the only option they have for themselves and their
families is to leave the island.
The potential to increase agribusiness in the often
overlooked territory is wide-ranging. Leveraging the existing
assets can be as simple as increasing education. In fact, last
year, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York released a report on
a small business survey in Puerto Rico and found that 19
percent of respondents cited a need for training on federal
government contracts. To that end, I welcome the GAO analysis
of the trends and challenges in the federal contracting space.
I take very seriously the responsibility of examining the
effectiveness of SBA programs, both nationwide and in Puerto
Rico, and that is why I introduced H.R. 2488, the Puerto Rico
Small Business Assistance Act. It comprehensively addresses the
needs of small firms on the island by expanding lending,
contracting, and entrepreneurial development services and
resources to Puerto Rico. I hope we will have the opportunity
to move it through Congress as the first step towards the
revitalization of the island's economy.
And let me make a last point. We owe it to the people of
Puerto Rico to have a final resolution to the political limbo
that they find themselves. Puerto Rico is a colony and we need
to resolve that issue. But it is not for these members of
Congress who happen to be Puerto Rican to decide what is the
best political situation for Puerto Rico; that is up to the
people of Puerto Rico. And so our responsibility in the U.S.
Congress is to provide for a fair, open, inclusive process that
will allow for the people of Puerto Rico to resolve that issue
once and for all.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman KNIGHT. Thank you very much.
And I would like to say welcome to the chairman of the full
Committee, Mr. Chabot is here, and we started off the day with
the SBA secretary. And it was a nice morning, and she has got a
lot of energy and is doing a great job so far.
So if Committee members have an opening statement prepared,
I ask that they be submitted for the record.
I would like to take a moment to explain the timing. I
think that both of our witnesses understand this, but you have
5 minutes. As the lights come on, you will be green until you
get down to 4 minutes. You will go yellow and then you will go
red. And when you get to red, either try to wrap it up or we
will wrap it up. But it has been pretty easy so far, and both
of you are veterans, so we are good to go. Okay.
Okay. I would like to introduce our witnesses today. Mr.
Shear is a friendly face, been in front of this Committee many
times. And our first witness is Mr. Shear, director of
Financial Markets and Community Investment at the United States
Accountability Office, or GAO. Mr. Shear has engaged with this
Committee on a wide range of small business topics and having
testified before the Committee on a number of occasions. We
welcome you back today.
Our second witness today is Mr. Robb Wong. Mr. Wong serves
as the associate administrator for the United States Small
Business Administration Office of Government Contracting and
Business Development. He recently rejoined the SBA in his role
in March of 2017. Mr. Wong is responsible for overseeing more
than $500 billion in total federal spending within the federal
marketplace and ensures small businesses can compete for
federal contracting opportunities. Mr. Wong is returning to his
roots at SBA, having started his career there as an attorney
with the Office of General Counsel and as SBA acting district
director and counsel in the Lubbock District Office. We look
forward to your testimony.
So we will start with Mr. Shear. And Mr. Shear, we welcome
you back, and you have 5 minutes. Thank you, sir.

STATEMENTS OF WILLIAM SHEAR, DIRECTOR, FINANCIAL MARKETS AND
COMMUNITY INVESTMENT, UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY
OFFICE; ROBB N. WONG, ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATOR, OFFICE OF
GOVERNMENT CONTRACTING AND BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT, UNITED STATES
SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION

STATEMENT OF WILLIAM SHEAR

Mr. SHEAR. Thank you very much.
Chairmen Knight and Brat, Ranking Members Murphy and Evans,
and members of the Subcommittee, and I also have to add that I
am very honored that Chairman Chabot and Ranking Member
Velazquez are also in attendance.
I am pleased to be here today to discuss, first, trends in
small business contracting and the use of SBA programs in
Puerto Rico that provide contracting preferences to small
businesses, and second, stakeholder views on any challenges
that small businesses in Puerto Rico face in obtaining federal
contracting opportunities.
First, in discussing trends in small business contracting,
we use nationwide statistics as a reference point. For fiscal
years 2006 through 2017, a higher percentage of federal
contracting obligations was awarded to small businesses within
Puerto Rico for contracts performed there compared to the
percentage for small businesses nationwide, particularly in the
last fiscal years of the period. In fiscal year 2016, small
businesses in Puerto Rico received about 47 percent of federal
contracting obligations to Puerto Rico, compared to 23 percent
of federal obligations awarded to small businesses nationwide.
As our mandate directed, we evaluated the utilization of
four SBA programs that provide contracting preferences based on
socioeconomic designations that can help small businesses
obtain contracts. Of the four SBA programs that provide
contracting preferences, a higher percentage of obligations was
awarded in Puerto Rico through the 8(a) Business Development
program, compared to the HUBZone, women-owned, and service-
disabled, veteran-owned small business programs combined. More
generally, full and open competition and the 8(a) program were
the most prevalent basis for awards, and I certainly hope in
Q&A we can talk about the success in full and open competition.
I think it is a major point from what we found.
In June 2016, for its HUBZone program, SBA eliminated the
cap on qualified census tracks for Puerto Rico and nationwide.
Nearly all of Puerto Rico now qualifies as a HUBZone. We found
that the number of applications submitted to the HUBZone
program increased in Puerto Rico after this expansion. The
number of certified HUBZone businesses in Puerto Rico increased
from 25 to 40 for the first 6 months of fiscal year 2017.
As to our second objective, stakeholders GAO interviewed
identified several challenges small businesses in Puerto Rico
may face in obtaining federal contracting opportunities.
Challenges identified include a lack of knowledge about the
federal contracting process, difficulty meeting procurement
requirements, and difficulty accessing bonding, financing, and
capital. Many of these challenges are similar to those we had
identified in a 2012 report on challenges faced by small,
minority-owned businesses in obtaining federal contracts. In
our discussions with SBA, DOD, GSA, and VA, the officials
identified examples of conducting outreach, providing training
and seminars, coordinating with local organizations, and other
efforts intended to help Puerto Rican small businesses obtain
federal contracting opportunities.
Chairman Knight and Brat, Ranking Members Murphy and Evans,
this concludes my prepared statement. I would be happy to
answer any questions.
Chairman KNIGHT. Thank you very much.
And we will go to Mr. Wong for your 5-minute opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF ROBB N. WONG

Mr. WONG. Good morning. Esteemed members of Congress, on
behalf of the U.S. Small Business Administration, our
inspirational administrator, Mrs. Linda McMahon, and the
longstanding and dedicated team in the Office of Government
Contracts and Business Development, thank you very much for the
opportunity to meet with you today.
At SBA, Mrs. McMahon has encouraged us all to be efficient,
effective, and customer-centric in executing our
responsibilities; and so I will try to do that right now.
Our team has previously provided a much lengthier testimony
that I understand is already included in the record. Therefore,
instead of repeating something that you may have already read,
I want to focus on your questions about SBA and how we can best
serve the people of Puerto Rico. I will do my best to provide
meaningful responses to you today or, if necessary, I will get
the response to you as soon as possible. I look forward to
working together so that the SBA can continue to help
strengthen small businesses and to improve the opportunities
for them.
I respectfully yield back the balance of my time, and I am
ready for your questions.
Chairman KNIGHT. Mr. Chairman, my witnesses used 6 of their
10 minutes. This should be an example for what witnesses come
in and yield back time.
I think that everyone has got many questions for what is
coming. And I have read through the report and it is
interesting. But I want to go to Mr. Shear on a couple of the
things that you said.
One of them, and we see this with small businesses, whether
it be in Puerto Rico, whether it be here in the States or
wherever, access to capital and the requirements to go through
to get what you need to do to expand your business and expand
the ability to contract and make your business bigger is all
part of what you are trying to do, and it is very difficult. It
is very difficult for small businesses to kind of work through
that system and to make sure that they can dot all the I's and
cross all the T's.
So as you said in your opening statement, you want a little
time, so I am going to give you a little time to go through
that, and then I will shut you down because I have got other
questions.
Mr. SHEAR. Okay, thank you. First, I am very glad that you
asked questions about the challenges. And I will also make
reference to Representative Chu as one of the requesters of our
2012 report addressing challenges. And what we find many times
is that--as the Small Business Act and all the tools available
recognize, and I think SBA and other agencies recognize--there
is a need to reach out to small businesses to help them access
the federal marketplace.
So what do we have? SBA has its Procurement Center
Representatives that are intended to try to look at contracting
and to try to develop contracts that are more accessible to
small businesses. You have offices of small and disadvantaged
business utilization that are part of the federal framework
across 24 agencies to try to reach out, to have matchmaking
events, things of that nature. You have the Department of
Defense that funds PTACs to provide assistance and the regional
centers that basically reach out to have matchmaking and other
events. But what we find is that it is very difficult to get
into the federal marketplace, and many times it can take small
businesses years of concerted effort and working to get access
to contracting officials and of getting the right types of
financing to do that. So we found very much the challenges
identified in Puerto Rico are very similar. There are a couple
of others that had to do with building standards and past
performance on contracts, but for now I will end there. I am
happy to address follow-up questions.
Chairman KNIGHT. Mr. Wong, we talked to Mrs. McMahon this
morning and we talked about WBCs and SCORE and all kinds of
things that SBA does or performs that help small businesses.
Can you kind of help us out with that, of how small businesses
have the abilities and the different agencies to help them, and
sometimes that they might not know what is out there to help
them and how we can reach out to them?
Mr. WONG. Thank you very much for that question. This is
actually an industry that I was in immediately prior to coming
here. And one of the things I would just say is that one of the
main challenges, particularly with a lot of the set-aside
programs that we offer, there is a misperception, I believe,
that having the license itself is going to be the key to the
future. Sadly, it is not. I wish that it were so, but sadly it
is not. It is an amazing tool to help. But there is no shortcut
to educating and being an educated business so that they can
learn about the federal procurement process. Something as
simple as understanding what they can sell and being able to
annunciate that to a client very clearly. Some of the things
that I tell businesses when I have done this through SBA
training, you know, first and foremost, do not lead with your
certification, lead with quality. And tell people very simply
what you are very good at. That will start a conversation with
a contracting officer.
My secret weapon used to be I could tell you something that
this is what I do very well in 15 seconds, and then you lean in
and say, but what are three things that you need and how can I
help? And I guarantee you that that will start a conversation.
So what is the answer that SBA can do? We can teach those
things to the small businesses. We have those resources
available. I believe that we have up to 20 resource partners
located in Puerto Rico that have all sorts of different ways
that people can educate people about the federal procurement
process, as well as how to do business and how to grow your
business.
Chairman KNIGHT. And I think that is one of the challenges,
is getting out the information of what SBA does and all of the
resources that SBA has. And sometimes businesses do not think
of that. They think of, well, how do I get from A to B, and I
have got to do it myself instead of saying there are resources
out there that can help me. And sometimes that is an education
issue. Sometimes that is just an advertisement of us telling
you, hey, there are resources out there that can help you on
these challenges.
I am out of time, so I am going to now ask Ms. Murphy for
her questions.
Ms. MURPHY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to the
witnesses for being here. It is great to see you again, Mr.
Shear, and nice to meet you, Mr. Wong.
I would like to start with something that I mentioned in my
opening statement. GAO concluded that 47 percent of federal
contracting awards to be performed in Puerto Rico go to small
firms, which is twice the national average. That is encouraging
but it obscures a larger problem, which namely is that Puerto
Rico receives relatively few federal contracts compared to the
States, and 6 of the 10 of those awards are made to off-island
firms. Do you have any views on why this is the case?
Mr. SHEAR. We find that the number that you reference is a
fairly high share, but it is hard to say what a fairly high
share is, like we refer to nationwide as a reference point. We
really do not have a benchmark. What I will point out, which I
think is trying to be informative here, is we have in the
appendix to our underlying report State by State and territory
by territory, how those contracts break out. And so you will
see a wide range of variation. But as far as contracts
performed elsewhere and what we found, we focus on contract
obligations. We are looking at dollars. And what we find is
those dollars that are going to small businesses are, for the
most part, going to small businesses that are located in Puerto
Rico; in terms of the contract obligations, going to small
businesses. We focus on contract obligations. So in that sense
you could say they are doing fairly well.
As far as how big is the base in terms of how much
contracting is going on that is performed in Puerto Rico, we do
not address that question. But one of the things that we
observe is that that total has actually declined over time,
over the last few years. One of the reasons the small business
share went up since 2012 is just because the denominator fell
as far as the total size of contracting, but I think our
findings point, to some degree, some successes of small
businesses in Puerto Rico of being able to compete for
contracts.
Ms. MURPHY. Great. And my next question is for Mr. Wong.
The GAO reports that the federal agency use of the 8(a)
contracting program is higher in Puerto Rico than other SBA
designations. You also reported that certified small businesses
receive more contract opportunities through full and open
competition than the set-asides. This nullifies the effect of
any certification and price preference. Given the recent
increase in HUBZone eligibility, is SBA advocating for federal
agency use of HUBZone contracting preference to the same extent
that they are for the 8(a) program?
Mr. WONG. With respect, Congresswoman Murphy, I am not
sure, but it would match my hope. I am responsible for four
programs and I want them all to do well.
Ms. MURPHY. Well, how are the other contracting programs
doing given the high number of eligible veterans and women-
owned businesses on the island?
Mr. WONG. That is a good question. I think first and
foremost, if I can explain some of the differences between the
programs. Our first program and our priority program, in my
opinion, the longest standing program, has been the 8(a)
program. It is so old that I actually helped to write some of
the regulations in 1990. So, it has been a tried and true
vehicle and I think that what we are trying to do, I think that
every other program is basically based off of that program. It
has been around the longest so it is not a surprise to me that
it does better than others. But I think that my personal belief
is with the HUBZone program, I think that it is an equally
strong program. We have to do a better job of highlighting a
lot of its capabilities because I think that it has the
potential to have equal, if not wider, effect.
Ms. MURPHY. And given the large number of veterans on the
island, what do you think the SBA can do to increase the
presence of veteran-owned small businesses?
Mr. WONG. I am sorry for missing that part of the question.
We do have a service-disabled veteran-owned program. One of the
things I wanted to say, though, is that compared to the 8(a)
program, the 8(a) program is a program that we internally have
to approve. It is an analysis process. It is an eight-step
analysis process to qualify for the program. The service-
disabled veteran program is a self-certification program. So in
that regard, we have less to do with the certifications. I do
not know why more companies may not participate in that, but if
they do both are qualified to do contracts. Again, it does go
back to the number of contracts, the number of opportunities
really is based upon the firm's ability to go out, market, and
to find contracts.
Ms. MURPHY. Great. Thank you both. It looks like I am out
of time so I yield back.
Chairman KNIGHT. Thank you, Ms. Murphy.
And we will go to Chairman Brat for his questions.
Chairman BRAT. All right. I was going to ask a certain set
of questions more narrowly targeted, but then you guys got my
economic juices going.
James Madison is from my country and Adam Smith is overseas
a little bit. And if you follow those two, together you might
get sustained economic growth over the long run. And so we are
all talking about economics, and we want the best for
everybody, and in my reading of economic history, a society has
to choose a free market system or you will not get growth.
And so I heard you mention a few themes that struck my ear.
Central governments do not work too good. We set up a control
board. Control boards do not have a good history of producing
long run, sustained economic growth. You said you need to lead
with quality, and that caught my ear. That is good, right? And
you have got to lead with quality that is demanded by somebody,
right? And so we are all struggling right now to compete,
right?
The Indian economy is doing well. The Chinese economy has
2.5 billion people. They are now globally competitive. We are
asleep at the wheel growing at 1 percent last quarter, et
cetera. And it seems to me we all need to capture this free
market logic. So I just kind of want to hear your comments.
I worked at the World Bank about 25 years ago and they
propped up every economic variable except the one that
mattered; right? They were concerned about secondary education,
caloric intake, infrastructure, the environment, et cetera. But
if you do not choose a free market economy in the first place,
you can invest in all those secondary variables and you will
not get good performance.
And so when you said you have got to educate small
businesses, how is it going? And you also have to think
business is morally good. If you think business is morally bad
and you are trying to educate small business that this is the
way forward, I am just interested in both your commentary on
how are we doing on educating that there is some hope that
people want to get in this small business entrepreneurial
space.
And Mr. Wong, sorry for the liberal arts sermon, but what
have you got for me?
Mr. WONG. Congressman, that is okay. I am a liberal arts
major myself. Do you know what the great thing about that is?
What they teach you in liberal arts school, it does not teach
you anything like a trade school, but what it teaches you, I
learned, is not to be afraid of new things, right? Within 1 to
2 weeks, if you look at a 5-credit course and a 3-credit
course, take 1 to 2 weeks and you will be able to learn
anything. So it teaches you the wide and the deep. So I will
take a liberal arts education from anybody all the time.
My feeling is this, and I do not mean to sound critical,
but I believe that it is the analogy that you can lead a horse
to water, but you cannot make him drink. We can provide the
resources. We do not have the authority to make people learn,
but the best thing that we can do, we can advocate. And to that
degree, I think I have given 11 lectures within 4 months. I
have been traveling constantly trying to educate people and
tell the new things that we are trying to do. Overall, I am
trying to take our programs that are a little bit dusty and I
would like to make them simpler to apply for and much more
effective to use in 2017 and beyond.
One of the things that I cannot do is I cannot force people
to believe me. I cannot force them to take the courses, but I
can make them available. So, what I do try to do, as an
example, I try to be a little bit different. So, for example,
when I speak, I give out my email address and I give out my
phone number. And I return every single email and I return
every single phone call. Hopefully, by demonstrating, leading
by example, it shows that I am going to be different. But at
the end of the day, as you are saying, not everybody believes
what you and I believe. But we can certainly try to help them.
Mr. SHEAR. I do not want to repeat what I just said before
about challenges and the need to outreach, and Robb Wong just
gave a very good answer as far as addressing that issue. But I
will just say that I do not know if you are trying to wind me
up or not. As it happens, I am an economist with a Ph.D. in
economics, so I can get carried away with these issues.
So at any rate, the one issue that I will raise, and I
think it is very pertinent to this hearing and to the
expansion, the elimination of the cap for qualified census
tracks, is that going back to 2008, I testified before this
Committee on the HUBZone program. I said it is a pretty
complicated program. It is an economic development program
meant to serve depressed economic areas. And really what is
needed is an economics framework to evaluate how well that
program is working. That was one recommendation from that
report that SBA did not implement. And I think we are still in
a situation where we are trying to say, how can you use the
HUBZone program to try to increase opportunities for low-income
areas, whether they be in Puerto Rico or elsewhere, or to help
to encourage small businesses that are located in depressed
economic areas? And I think that is part of what is kind of
missing here in terms of how to move forward with that program.
Chairman KNIGHT. Thank you, Chairman. I give out my
personal cell phone, too, and as a congressman that is a
thrill. Every day, let me tell you. Responding to those texts I
get every day. But it is part of leadership, being there and
being available. You are right, you can lead a horse to water,
but you cannot make him drink. A thirsty horse will drink, and
businesses that do not know about the resources do not know,
but if you show them the resource, they will use it. And so I
think that that is a big part of this. And we talk about this
in small business all the time. If something is not working,
stop doing it. And either reverse course or change course or do
something else to make sure that your business can be
successful. And if you do not have the resource, that is what
we are trying to get you to. Some people know something other
than you and the resources can help you. So I think that that
is a big part.
Mr. Evans, we will go to you for your 5 minutes of
questions.
Mr. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wong, it appears that some businesses in Puerto Rico
have trouble meeting certain procurement requirements. From
your experience, do you feel that these requirements need to be
modified in terms of location specific?
Mr. WONG. Congressman, if you could be more clear it would
be helpful.
Mr. EVANS. Basically, my understanding from listening is
the question about procurement requirements, and the question
is, particularly for the island of Puerto Rico, should they be
modified relating to specifically Puerto Rico because of the
location?
Mr. WONG. Well, at this point I would be hazarding a guess.
I probably would want additional information. But in general,
this is the way that I would look at things. If you do not have
a result that you like, you have to look at what the potential
causes are. So the procurement requirements could mean a
thousand different things to me, and I apologize, I am a lawyer
by trade so, you know, I make things difficult for myself.
But in general, one of the things, I think that you might
asking is, you know, part of the thing that we are dealing with
in federal procurement is a changing environment. For example,
with 8(a) set-asides, there were lots of them because there
were not very many competitive vehicles. What happens when you
make a rule or a law? People start to pivot. People start to
become tactical, right? People get smarter, right? And people
start changing their behaviors.
So where we are in procurement right now, one of the things
that I think that we are talking about is bundling and we are
talking about category management and making things more
condensed. The problem is that what happens is that makes it
more difficult for small businesses, and particularly newer
small businesses, to compete.
So one of the resources that we have with SBA is the PCRs.
And we work in tandem with the OSDBUs. Are you familiar with
them? Okay. So the OSDBUs, the analogy that I would look at is,
they go into that $500 million federal spend and they do the
dirty work. They do the enforcement. They go in there and they
grab things for small business and they fight with their
agencies. And the PCRs fight with their agencies to make sure
that small businesses get their share. And I am proud to say
that we have achieved the 23 percent goal for at least 4 years
running. Can we do better? We are analyzing that, and I always
think you can do better. But it is going to take some analysis
first.
Mr. EVANS. I want to go to Mr. Shear and then what I want
to do is sort of come back to you because I really would like a
yes or a no on the modification of the location. I heard what
you just said but this is what I want to say, Mr. Shear. If you
were on the ground in Puerto Rico on a day-to-day basis, what
type of advice would you give to officials there who would like
to increase the number of small businesses to engage with the
SBA? Hearing what Mr. Wong said and understanding what we are
trying to accomplish in terms of procurement to achieve a
certain objective, I am interested in your reaction, your
comments.
Mr. SHEAR. Let me go to a very specific case that we found
based on our work in Puerto Rico that gets to very much the
role of PCRs.
Very relevant to that. There are different building
standards in Puerto Rico than there are in the 48 States. And
the question is, so you have small businesses, construction
businesses in Puerto Rico that feel that they are being
disadvantaged because their construction standards are
different than mainland standards. So, for example, SBA
acknowledged that can be a problem. GSA, one of the three
contracting agencies that we met with said that they try to
strike a balance between what is appropriate for the territory
with the requirements that tend to be part of kind of like the
cloth that they come out of. But this is, to me, it is like
regardless of where the PCRs are located, whether they be in
Boston or they be in Puerto Rico, this, to me, is begging for
involvement by PCRs to try to look at are there ways that we
can come up with changes in requirements for construction
contracts that make sense for Puerto Rico and expand
opportunities for small businesses in Puerto Rico to compete.
Mr. EVANS. That is the key point I am making because I do
not have much time. So did I hear you say that you think it
should be modified?
Mr. SHEAR. I am saying that GSA in particular said we try
to modify, but this is really a role for PCRs to ask are they
modifying? How much are they modifying? How engaged are the
PCRs from SBA in terms of looking for opportunities? We did not
have the chance to drill down exactly what are the PCRs doing
in Puerto Rico? We could observe where they are located, but
this to me would represent a real opportunity. It seems that
PCRs, if they are not heavily involved now, they should be
heavily involved.
Mr. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the
balance of my time.
Chairman KNIGHT. Thank you very much.
And we will now go to Mr. Kelly for his questions.
Mr. KELLY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and the ranking members,
for this important hearing.
Over my 32-year career in the Mississippi Army National
Guard, I have had the pleasure of serving with many soldiers
from Puerto Rico National Guard. As citizen soldiers, many of
these men and women that I have served with owned small
businesses in Puerto Rico. Starting with basic training in 1985
and the officer basic course in 1989 and Iraq in 2005, let me
just tell you, Mississippi and Puerto Rico are a lot alike. We
are very patriotic. A larger number than usual serve in the
military services. So that being said, I think there is a lot
of similarities and we both are poorer States or areas.
So Mr. Shear, in your testimony you state that stakeholders
are complaining of a lack of access to agency contracting
officials. I know how hard it can be, being from Mississippi,
for service-disabled veterans from rural areas to connect with
government officials, like federal contracting officers. Can
you talk to me about what the SBA, the Department of Defense,
and VA can do to increase access to service-disabled veterans?
Mr. SHEAR. Thank you for the question. I will start out
first with VA is one of the three agencies that we interacted
with because it is one of the three agencies that conduct the
most contracting activity in Puerto Rico: the VA, along with
GSA and DOD, obviously. VA has different statutory provisions,
and what is often called Vet First for its contracting, and VA
for its own contracting you have to have verification. So what
I can observe from other work we have done for this Committee
is that VA works with the PTACs, the Procurement Technical
Assistance Centers, in trying to reach out to the veteran-owned
small business community and the service-disabled, veteran-
owned small business community.
And again, on this work, we did not have the opportunity to
drill down exactly what they are doing in Puerto Rico, but this
gives a certain framework for certain things that are going on
in the VA contracting space that is leading to greater
opportunities for service-disabled veterans to participate at
least in VA contracting. And I would hope that with the veteran
centers, whatever interactions there are with these other tools
that are available through Small Business Act provisions such
as the PTACs, that SBA would explore looking for greater
opportunities. I realize that they are already doing some, but
I would hope that they could explore doing more.
Mr. KELLY. And I just think that is so important. Listen,
these guys choose to serve our Nation, and I think they ought
to get a leg up and be ahead of everybody else because they
have chosen to serve this Nation and their patriotism.
Mr. Wong, I think everyone can agree that Puerto Rico has
some unique geographical and economic challenges, as
Mississippi has some of those same economic challenges.
However, I believe that some of the challenges of small
business contracting that affect Puerto Rico also affect areas
like Mississippi. Only three agencies awarded contract
obligations to firms in Puerto Rico and only three sector:
manufacturing, construction, and professional services. Do you
see this trend in other economically depressed areas, like
Mississippi, as well as Puerto Rico?
Mr. WONG. With respect, Congressman, I am not sure at this
point. I am still learning. I have been here 90 days, but it is
something that if it is important to you, then it is important
to me and I can take a look at it.
Mr. KELLY. Mr. Shear, do you have any comments on that?
Mr. SHEAR. I would just go back to what I just answered
your previous question. Thank you.
Mr. KELLY. I thank you for saying. And Mr. Shear, you said
at the very first, it was a program that I did not get it, I
was not listening as well as I should have been, that you
wanted to talk about the successes of. If you would address
that in the last minute we have left I would appreciate it. In
your opening comments you said there was a program that you
wanted to talk about the success of.
Mr. SHEAR. I think one of the things I wanted to talk about
was that you did have small businesses in Puerto Rico that, at
least a fair number of them, that are successful with small
business set-asides, outside of the four SBA programs, as being
able to compete for small business set-asides and, also,
competing in full and open competition. And to me that just
points to the idea that there are at least some businesses in
Puerto Rico that basically have found a way to manage even
without preferences, or with just the small business set-asides
in Puerto Rico. And hopefully, it means that if there is
greater outreach by the agencies and other things that that
could be something that could be leveraged.
Mr. KELLY. And with that I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman KNIGHT. Thank you very much. And we will now go to
Mr. Lawson for his questions.
Mr. LAWSON. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And welcome
to the Committee.
Mr. Shear, we are all aware of the economic challenges that
Puerto Rico has faced over the past several years. Do you think
it could be helpful for GAO to study the impact that our
overall economic market in the mainland U.S. has on the growth
or the lack of growth of the Puerto Rico economy?
Mr. SHEAR. I feel like, I want to become an economics
professor again, but I would just say that you raise a very
good issue. And I think probably the best thing to do in
response to that issue, which happens with Committee staff all
the time, which is there are ideas for GAO work and I and
others on our team are always glad to come up and talk about
work you might be interested in. So it sounds promising, but
beyond that I am not that good at thinking on the fly.
Mr. LAWSON. Okay.
Mr. SHEAR. Okay.
Mr. LAWSON. My next question was, as you know, there are
more small businesses in this country than any other type of
business, and these businesses provide large support for the
local economy. It appears that SBA has worked at its fully
capacity in support of small business in Puerto Rico,
particularly with regard to contracting. Can you describe SBA's
past effort in Puerto Rico, as well as SBA plans moving forward
to build a stronger small business industry?
Mr. WONG. In Puerto Rico, sir?
Mr. LAWSON. Yes, sir.
Mr. WONG. I am unfamiliar with the efforts with the agency
prior to PROMESA, but I do know that after PROMESA we are doing
everything allowed under the law to maximize the participation
of Puerto Rico firms, for example, for HUBZones. Mrs. McMahon
has made this a priority. She has gone down to Puerto Rico for
a week. She is debriefing me on the issues. Her priorities are
my priorities, and so I am thankful for today's meeting. I am
taking a look at the strategies that we employ. I am looking at
the education that we can provide. And I am looking at the
outreach that we could provide as well. If what we were doing
previously is not meeting with satisfaction, then I am looking
for ways to improve that.
Mr. LAWSON. Okay. And from my research on some of the
economic issues with Puerto Rico, it seems that Puerto Rico has
a lack of access to a lot of resources, including agency
officials' knowledge, financing, and adequate communication
with SBA. And I guess this might have a little bit to do with
your statement about you can take a horse to the water, but you
cannot make them drink. And so with that disconnect, how do you
think that that can be improved in order to guarantee full
accessibility to SBA resources?
Mr. WONG. And let me please clarify, I did not mean that at
all in a disrespectful or pejorative way. I know Janette
Fasano, who is the Area Director for Puerto Rico, and I know
that she does a great job. She has been with the agency for
forever. I know that we deal with issues and I think our
district office down there is bilingual, so we know we have the
capability. And if that is not true, that is something easily
that we can fix. You have my commitment that I will look into
that. I apologize.
But again, I am still in the analysis phase of what we can
do. If this will help, what I used to do is I used to help fix
businesses, and what I tend to look at is their processes and
their procedures and things like that. And in this case here,
if we are looking at a specific market, then I am going to take
a look at that as a business person and I am going to see what
is working, what is not working, those things. To Chairman
Knight's admonition, if it is not working, we are going to stop
doing it. But I do believe that going forward we can always
make improvements.
Mr. LAWSON. Okay. Thanks for your answer.
Mr. Chairman, just before I yield back, I was talking about
a business roundtable that I did in Jacksonville, Florida, and
it still is a lot of disconnect, especially in a minority
community in the U.S., and I can imagine what the disconnect
might be from the distance of being in Puerto Rico and that is
some gap that we ought to fill.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman KNIGHT. Thank you very much.
And we are going to,--well, I am going to take a little
latitude and I am going to give Ms. Gonzalez-Colon a little
extra time if you would like, and we would like to hear from
you.
Ms. GONZALEZ-COLON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to
really thank Chairman Chabot and Ranking Member Velazquez and
the chairmen of the Subcommittee and ranking member for
allowing this hearing today regarding the island.
As you may know, the situation of the economic crisis in
Puerto Rico, it is very important to fix, and having small
business empowered to do that I think is the key to solve part
of that situation. So thank you again to the members of the
Subcommittee and the Committee for having this hearing. And
thank you, Mr. Shear, for having been in my office for more
than 2 hours discussing these same aspects of the methodology
of the report that you are issuing regarding the SBA.
As you may know, I have got a lot of questions and a lot of
recommendations. And one of them is the continuous situation
with contracting bundling and assuming most of the contracts
there have been awarded to companies on the island are in the
lesser amount. Most of them have already been rewarded or the
requests for proposal are not directed from the district
office. They have already been requested from Washington, D.C.,
or an original office in the States and not in Puerto Rico. So
when the award is already granted, even the local office, they
never know what is going on between that process.
That is the official process to award those kinds of
contracts with small businesses? I know we got 2 weeks ago SBA
administrator Linda McMahon, and I was so happy we got a lot of
roundtables with her, with the SBA, with the private sector,
with the lending sector on the island. But we think we should
improve the way Puerto Rico businesses are making contracts
directly for their government. I want your input on both ideas
and I have got other questions.
Mr. Wong? Contracting bundling.
Mr. WONG. Yes. The contracting volume, as I look at this,
and sometimes I think it helps to be new to the process. So the
tool that SBA has is again to advocate. So, for example, with
Puerto Rico being the priority for Mrs. McMahon, there are two
things that we can do. We can certainly help to improve our
programs so that they will increase education and outreach and
things like that going forward to Puerto Rican small
businesses.
The other thing we can do in terms of contract volume is,
again, using the PCRs, and also here in Washington, go to, some
of the procuring activities and highlight the importance of
Puerto Rico; ask them and advocate to them that when thinking
about Puerto Rico maybe should not bundle as much. And if I
could work with you to help to annunciate the concerns that you
have, I mean, at the end of the day, contracting officers,
PTACs, OSDBUs, they are all people. I get an opportunity to
meet them and they are very nice. But I am very persuasive.
Ms. GONZALEZ-COLON. That is good to hear. And I will tell
you, in that matter, that we filed H.R. 2429, which is a bill,
a bipartisan bill that has a lot of ideas regarding small
business on the island. And one of the ideas is having on the
island a full-time procurement center. We do not have that. So
if we got a procurement center based on the island, I think
that may improve the situation we are having. The same thing
with the veteran outreach center in the island. And I want to
thank Congressman Kelly for his statement regarding our people
in the military. And that situation, our people in the
military, they cannot even vote for the commander in chief, but
we do serve proudly, but we do not have even a veteran outreach
center for SBA. That, I request for you that you take a look at
H.R. 2429. It has got a lot of provisions regarding SBA.
And there is another bill that we filed and that bill is
bipartisan. Actually, the ranking member is a cosponsor of that
bill. And there is another bill, H.R. 2488, which has similar
amendments and try to fix those problems we are having. For
example, and I do not know if the chairman is letting me have--
thank you.
One of the situations we had with the SBA administrator 2
weeks ago, there was a vet owner, an IT contractor, highly
experienced with excellent references, and what happened is
that contractors from the mainland win prime contracts only to
turn around and subcontract them. And that is happening all
over again: IT, communications, construction. So if they even
have a lower bid and they are going to be the final of the
process doing the job, that contract went for $1.7 million and
his original bid was $900,000. So what is going on? The bid has
already been awarded in D.C., not in the district or not in the
regional office. And those are the kind of things that are
happening every time, not only in Puerto Rico, but I think in
other territories.
With this situation, I do not want to extend the indulgence
of the chairman of the Committee, but I do want to have SBA and
the panel to come up with new ideas in terms of having pilot
programs being implemented on the island regarding this. And we
discussed that in our meeting, Mr. Shear, and I know you are
very committed to this, and identify prime contractors located
on the mainland--I am sorry, local contractors on the island
can compete against contract bundling. So we need to fix that
problem at the source.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Chairman KNIGHT. Thank you very much. And we will now go to
the ranking member of the full Committee, Ms. Velazquez, for
her comments.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Mr. Chairman, if I could ask that Ms. Chu be
recognized before me because she has been there waiting. Thank
you.
Chairman KNIGHT. Absolutely. We will go to Ms. Chu for her
questions.
Ms. CHU. Well, actually, I would like to just ask one
question, then yield to Ms. Velazquez.
And my question is on language barriers. I saw that
stakeholders that were interviewed by GAO identified that
language was an issue facing small businesses on the island and
it may hinder the ability of these firms to complete the
applications, to become certified, or to access the
opportunities once certified. So, actually, I wanted to ask Mr.
Wong, given that we have seen that agencies like the General
Services Administration successfully staffed their Puerto Rico
office with bilingual staffers, why does SBA struggle to hire
an appropriate number of bilingual staff members in the Puerto
Rico district office?
Mr. WONG. Thank you for that question, Madam Congresswoman.
All I can tell you is that now that I know that that is the
issue, I will do my best to fix that. I think that language
barriers is something that should--I agree, that should not be
an issue in 2017, and that has been a failure in our office and
I will do my best to rectify that.
Ms. CHU. That is good to hear.
And now I would like to yield to Ms. Velazquez.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Ms. Chu.
Mr. Wong, Ms. Murphy asked a question earlier about
veterans and I want to follow up. There are many veterans on
the island who have and still are fighting American wars. What
specific resources are present on the island dedicated to
meeting veterans' needs for contracting, lending, and technical
assistance?
Mr. WONG. I will be honest with you; at this point, if you
are asking for specific resources, I do not know them, but I
can certainly educate myself on them and be prepared next time
when you ask that question.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Well, Mr. Wong, it is really disappointing
that you come here, and I know you have been in the job for 90
days, but this issue from PROMESA was enacted a year ago. And
so you are going to come here and you will not have information
to provide to me. You know, this is an issue that is too
important for American citizens who live in Puerto Rico. For
veterans, who even are willing to make the ultimate sacrifice
for this nation, that is an unacceptable answer.
And on the issue that Ms. Chu raised, I do know that GSA
has bilingual staff all the time in Puerto Rico. We cannot say
the same with SBA, and I want and I beg for the SBA to really
address this issue because it is important. You just made a
reference about taking a horse to the water and teaching them,
but if you teach them in a language where they cannot
comprehend, then what good does it do?
I do not want for the people of Puerto Rico, American
citizens, to be given preferences. I expect fairness. And when
it comes to prime contractors, most of those prime contractors
are from the mainland, and then they are going to sub, provide
subs to people in Puerto Rico who will perform the jobs. That
is not right. When contractors in Puerto Rico come to Ohio and
develop public housing for the federal government with federal
funding, but they cannot do the same in Puerto Rico, that does
not make sense. So we need to address those issues.
And then we need to have--I would like Mr. Shear, to tell
me what nonlegislative fixes can be done that will help the
people of Puerto Rico and the small businesses on the island
based on your research, based on your communications with GSA,
veterans, DOD.
Mr. SHEAR. I think there has to be a lot of focus, first of
all, on just the small business community. And, you know, I
have had the pleasure over the last month or so of meeting,
Robb Wong, and he is showing an interest in looking into the
situation, but it is something that I point to. I do not mean
this to be marketing a request, but we have not looked at the
role of PCRs in a number of years, generally, much less in
Puerto Rico. And the question is, what is the involvement of
the PCR in trying to improve opportunities?
We are looking at what lessons can be learned about the use
of small business set-asides? What can be learned about just
generally as far as outreach and working--I know that SBA works
with what I call the OSDBUs and DOD's Office of Small Business
Programs, but the question is that the level of commitment, it
just is not that clear. So I am glad it is at least on Mr.
Wong's agenda to be looking into this situation.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. So let me just make it clear for the record.
You know, I truly believe that the administrator, Linda
McMahon, genuinelly cares about what is going on in Puerto
Rico, but there is a culture that we need to deal with within
the SBA and many other federal agencies. And I can tell you and
the people who sit on this committee will tell you that I have
raised the same issue, whether it is a Republican or Democratic
administration, I went after the administrator that was there
for many years, in previous years, whether they were one or the
other. We want to make sure that the resources are there to
assist the small businesses and that we will do everything
within our power to make sure that happens.
But Mr. Shear, in your testimony, you indicated that GAO
analyzed data from the Federal Procurement Data System Next
Gen. What data is not covered in FPDS that could be valuable to
seeing the whole picture?
Mr. SHEAR. It is a really good question and it is a very
difficult question. There are certain efforts to try to bring
small businesses, reaching out to small businesses generally.
Some of them deal with programs that work through
subcontracting. Some of them work with mentor-protege programs.
I will point to the pilot Mentor-Protege Program that DOD has
where we have raised issues as far as the lack of measures of
how well those programs are working. But you are asking a very
good question where I do not really have a good answer for you,
but those are some of the things that come to mind.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Do you agree with me that maybe it does not
really reflect the real scope of what is going on in Puerto
Rico when it comes to federal procurement?
Mr. SHEAR. I think that we were focused on contracting
obligations, which I would argue that we were focused on the
right thing. It is what revenues are being generated for small
businesses in Puerto Rico that can help them succeed and can
help facilitate economic development. So I think we were
focused on the right things, but there are other things that
are going on, part of the dynamic that would include
subcontracting which we did not look at and some other aspects
that I think would be important to look at. And then the more
general question as far as how do agencies decide what should
be procured for performance in Puerto Rico, and that is
something we did not look at.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Mr. Wong, going forward, are you planning to make sure that
there is going to be all kinds of events that will provide
information in terms of federal procurement with the different
agencies? What kind of things are you planning to do to make
sure that we provide a level playing field for businesses in
Puerto Rico to be able to compete and win? Win contracts that
are not only subs, but prime contracts?
Mr. WONG. Thank you for----
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Such as the FBI building that is being built
in Puerto Rico and where there were a lot of Puerto Rican
contractors that bid as prime contractors, but none of them,
even when Ms. Gonzalez explained the case of someone who bid
with a lower number, and yet not even that gave him an
opportunity?
Mr. WONG. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman.
If I could go back. I apologize for going backwards, but I
just want to let you know, my own wife is not a native English
speaker so I am very sensitive. When we met, I proposed to her
on our first date. We just hit 20 years of marriage, but one of
the things that I did was I had to educate myself. I took 8
weeks of a 12-week Japanese course just to be able to ask for
her hand in marriage, so I am very sensitive to the needs of
people who are not English speakers, and I apologize if my
first comment was taken as pejorative. It certainly was not.
As for the veterans, we have one individual in our office
who I believe is an American hero. On Memorial Day, he said
that he had to say goodbye to 34 of his friends who were killed
in action in his unit. I see him every day and I try to get to
know my staff very, very well, and that has affected me. So
veterans are extremely important to me. I see them.
I like police officers and firefighters. When there is
danger, we run away from danger. When they see danger, they run
to it. That is a job that I would not ordinarily accept, and I
applaud anyone who has done that, and I have deep abiding
respect for anyone who has lost their life. So in that regard,
you have my sincere commitment to address those problems.
As to your last question, my job is to represent all
businesses fairly. By the same token, when Mrs. McMahon has
made Puerto Rico a concern and a priority, and I understand the
concern raised in your testimony as well, my commitment to you
is that I will analyze and I will evaluate, and if there is a
need, if we could work together to do this, I believe that we
can work together and address your concerns.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman KNIGHT. Thank you very much.
Well, as this hearing comes to a close, I would first like
to thank every Committee member for being here. And I would
like to recognize my co-chairman, Chairman Brat, for any
closing statement he might have.
Chairman BRAT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And to our guests
today, thank you all for being here.
I am going to yield my time to Ms. Gonzalez-Colon for
closing remarks.
Ms. GONZALEZ-COLON. Thank you, Chairman Brat, for letting
me use your time and your leadership. First, I want to thank,
again, Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez, and Chairmen
Brat and Knight, and ranking members for having this hearing
that is so important for the Puerto Rican community and
businesses on the island.
Second, I think it is most important to acknowledge and
recognize that under PROMESA, we are looking forward to have
the tools to improve our economy. And those tools are going to
be in the private sector. So if we do not have the small
business area working in the right direction we will never
accomplish that. In that area, the bundling contracting
problems are I think one of the main issues. The second one, we
do not have a veteran outreach center on the island, and that
is one of the provisions that are included in H.R. 2429, and in
H.R. 2488, both bills in this Committee.
Second, we need to have a procurement center on the island.
I think that will solve a lot of the issues regarding the
federal contracting situations that the island is facing, but
it has got to be on the island, on site, not on the mainland,
because we are facing that kind of problem.
Third, a similar situation that occurs with the SBA is
occurring with the General Service Administration. Suppliers,
such as HP, will win the contractor bid, a GSA supplier, and
then simply subcontract local companies to do the hands-on
service. And as a result, Puerto Rican companies will never get
a chance to get listed as a contractor. And that is a problem
we are having every time.
So I want to thank SBA Administrator Linda McMahon for her
commitment and her leadership regarding and facing these
issues. We discussed that. We had several roundtables. We even
visited the VA Hospital in San Juan where she got the
opportunity to see those same problems with veterans telling
her directly the problems with the contracting services on the
island, and I think the SBA now may face that in a more quickly
way.
And a fifth point I may say regarding the General
Contracting Office report, that I am leading an effort with the
local SBA office for Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands to
improve and to make more seminars, more orientation and
education to our businesses and to our people about the
services of the SBA locally. And that includes an alliance with
not only the universities or the outreach centers, but the 78
municipalities on the island. And we just began that process in
July and it is going to be through the next year.
So I want to thank you again. And thanks to the chairman
and the Committee for having this hearing. I yield back.
Chairman KNIGHT. Thank you very much.
And I want to thank our witnesses. Thank you, Mr. Wong, for
your coming here today and willingness to understand and to
work on some of the problems that we see today. And also
understand that we appreciate what Mrs. McMahon is bringing to
the table and her enthusiasm and her commitment to small
business. And we appreciate everything that you are doing.
Mr. Shear, we appreciate your report, as always, and your
candor, in this Committee. It is always fun and interesting to
hear your opinion on what is going on in the small business
world.
I ask unanimous consent that members have 5 legislative
days to submit statements and supporting materials for the
record.
Without objection, so ordered.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:26 a.m., the Subommittees were
adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Brat, Chairman Knight, Ranking Member Evans,
Ranking Member Murphy, and other distinguished members of this
Committee. Thank you for inviting me here to speak with you
today. It is truly an honor to speak before you today and I
thank you for this opportunity to discuss the trends and
challenges facing small businesses on the island of Puerto
Rico. I stand ready to work with you and the committee to
improve the future for small businesses.

My name is Robb Wong. I am the Associate Administrator for
Government Contracting and Business Development (GCBD) at the
U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA). I have been a
lifelong entrepreneur and small business advocate. I have had a
small business since the age of 11. After my education, I have
been blessed to spend a majority of my 30-year career focused
on small business federal contracting. I have personally seen
SBA programs positively impact small businesses around the
country. I started my career at the SBA years ago as an
attorney in SBA's Office of General Counsel; I also spent
several years working in both the SBA Houston and Lubbock
district offices, and 6 months in GCBD in the early 90s. I left
government and spent the past 20 years in several leadership
positions within several small businesses that successfully
relied on SBA products and programs to enhance their growth. I
am a personal testament to the power and importance of the
SBA's effectiveness in helping small business. I am blessed and
fortunate to be back at an Agency that I love and to work with
our Administrator Linda McMahon who is inspirational leader. I
hope to help them to strengthen the SBA both now and for the
future to help ALL small businesses.

Administrator McMahon has asked the new leadership at the
SBA to make our programs as efficient and effective as possible
to empower the further success of small businesses in the US.
In that regard--my team's mission is to assure that small
businesses continue to receive their fair share of federal
government contracts; to optimize the present-state of the SBA
certifications; and advocate on behalf of the small business
community. We want businesses to spend less time applying for
certification, and more time USING them to grow their
businesses. I hope to increase opportunities for small
businesses as well as enhance their abilities to grow and
compete by (1) reducing or eliminating regulations that are
unnecessary and burdensome; (2) improving our processes without
sacrificing quality; and (3) becoming more customer-centric.
Finally, I will work hard to advocate on their behalf for their
inclusion government-wide as often as possible.

I am here today to talk about trends and challenges to
Small Business contracting on the island of Puerto Rico. Within
the past two weeks, Administrator McMahon visited the island to
learn about how the SBA can best assist Puerto Rico in its
economic recovery. She spent several days meeting small
businesses and talking to local government officials--including
Congresswoman Gonzalez-Colon--to learn about economic
conditions and challenges the island is facing.

GAO recently released a report detailing the challenges and
trends in government contracting on the island of Puerto Rico.
GAO noted that a high percentage of Puerto Rican small
businesses use the 8(a), HUBZone, Service Disabled Veteran-
Owned, and Women-Owned Small Business programs. However, we
know that Puerto Rico faces unique challenges due to its
economy and geography. Small businesses confront a number of
challenges when they attempt to contract with the Federal
Government including lack of knowledge about the federal
contracting process; difficulty meeting procurement
requirements; and minimal access to bonding, financing and
capital. GAO found that small businesses in Puerto Rico feel
these challenges more acutely than their counterparts off the
island. The SBA appreciates GAO's work in this area.

While Puerto Rican small businesses are participating in
Federal Contracting, more work needs to be done to increase
their numbers. According to the Congressional Task Force on
Economic Growth in Puerto Rico, Puerto Rico ranks 55th (out of
the 50 states, D.C., and 5 major U.S. territories) by total
dollar value of federal contracts performed in each
jurisdiction per capita at $430.6 million. Further, 53% of
federal contracts performed in Puerto Rico were awarded to
firms located outside the island. We know that in order for
firms on the island to grow and thrive, more federal
contracting needs to stay with local firms. Part of that effort
will be to educate our Federal buying partners about the
capabilities of Puerto Rican firms to do quality work--both on
the island and off. We look forward to working with Congress to
do that.

Administrator McMahon and I are committed to improving the
delivery of our programs. Improving the programs as a whole
will specifically benefit small businesses in Puerto Rico.

Businesses have an expectation that obtaining SBA 8(a) or
HUBZone certifications will immediately and significantly
improve their businesses and allow them to quickly win
government contracts. Although we recognize that not all firms'
expectations can be realized, we remain committed to help firms
to better understand the procurement process and to utilize our
many resource partners to gain needed business development
assistance.

SBA provides assistance to firms at all phases of the
procurement process. Our District Office in Puerto Rico
conducts small business outreach activities throughout the
island including training and seminars to promote participation
in the SBA's small business programs. The District Office has
developed crucial relationships with local governments,
nonprofits, chambers of commerce as well as resource partners
with local governments, nonprofits, chambers of commerce as
well as resource partners such as SCORE, SBDC and Women
Business Centers to provide a referral and training network for
SBA programs. We are discussing with the Administrator ways to
provide enhanced SBA support to Puerto Rico, such as revised
HUBZone rules, suggestions to pending legislation, and enhanced
procurement support.

The staff of Office of Government Contracting and Business
Development continues to improve the implementation of the
SBA's federal government contracting programs through improved
application and certifications processes. With the expansion of
eligible HUBZone census tracts in Puerto Rico, SBA continues to
focus on online accessibility to the HUBZone program through
improvement to our HUBZone maps and application process.

The small businesses of Puerto Rico are essential to the
economic recovery and future of the island; they are the
island's innovators and job creators. Administrator McMahon and
I, along with the SBA staff are committed to help the small
businesses of Puerto Rico grow, innovate, and create jobs
through the efficient and effective delivery of the SBA's
federal contracting programs. This creates meaningful and
sustainable jobs, and promotes economic growth in the
community.

I reaffirm my commitment to work together with you and the
Committee to improve the future for small businesses.

Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today. I am
happy to take your questions.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
