- EVALUATING THE PAPERWORK REDUCTION ACT: ARE BURDENS BEING REDUCED?

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EVALUATING THE PAPERWORK REDUCTION ACT: ARE BURDENS BEING REDUCED?

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
MARCH 29, 2017

__________

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 115-012
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
24-759 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2017

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
ROD BLUM, Iowa
JAMES COMER, Kentucky
JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, Puerto Rico
DON BACON, Nebraska
BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
ROGER MARSHALL, Kansas
VACANT
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
DWIGHT EVANS, Pennsylvania
STEPHANIE MURPHY, Florida
AL LAWSON, JR., Florida
YVETTE CLARK, New York
JUDY CHU, California
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
VACANT

Kevin Fitzpatrick, Staff Director
Jan Oliver, Deputy Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Adam Minehardt, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Steve Chabot................................................     1
Hon. Nydia Velazquez.............................................     2

WITNESSES

Mr. Sam Batkins, Director of Regulatory Policy, American Action
Forum, Washington, DC..........................................     4
Ms. Leah F. Pilconis, Environmental Law & Policy Advisor,
Associated General Contractors of America, Arlington, VA.......     6
Mr. Frank Cania, Founder & President, driven HR, Pittsford, NY,
testifying on behalf of the Society for Human Resource
Management.....................................................     8
Ms. Sally Katzen, Professor of Practice and Distinguished Scholar
in Residence, New York University School of Law, Senior
Advisor, Podesta Group, Washington, DC.........................     9

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Mr. Sam Batkins, Director of Regulatory Policy, American
Action Forum, Washington, DC...............................    27
Ms. Leah F. Pilconis, Environmental Law & Policy Advisor,
Associated General Contractors of America, Arlington, VA...    37
Mr. Frank Cania, Founder & President, driven HR, Pittsford,
NY, testifying on behalf of the Society for Human Resource
Management.................................................    51
Ms. Sally Katzen, Professor of Practice and Distinguished
Scholar in Residence, New York University School of Law,
Senior Advisor, Podesta Group, Washington, DC..............    60
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
NADA - National Automobile Dealers Association...............    66

EVALUATING THE PAPERWORK REDUCTION ACT: ARE BURDENS BEING REDUCED?

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 29, 2017

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 11:00 a.m., in Room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Steve Chabot
[chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chabot, Luetkemeyer, Brat,
Radewagen, Knight, Kelly, Blum, Bacon, Velazquez, Evans,
Lawson, Adams, and Schneider.
Chairman CHABOT. Good morning. I call this hearing to
order.
While the burden of federal paperwork is felt year-round by
individuals and small businesses, there is no more relevant
time to discuss federal paperwork than in the weeks leading up
to Tax Day. Right now, individuals and businesses are pouring
over tax forms and mind-numbingly complex instructions to make
sure they get things right. The Paperwork Reduction Act, or
PRA, was enacted back in 1980 and amended and reauthorized in
1995. It was aimed at minimizing the burden of federal
paperwork, as well as maximizing the usefulness of the
information collected. Congress recognized that requests for
information imposed significant burdens on the public and that
if information was not used efficiently, it reduced the
government's effectiveness as well.
Before requesting or acquiring information from the public,
the PRA requires federal agencies to seek public comment. Then
agencies must submit the proposed collections of information to
the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, or OIRA,
under the Office of Management and Budget for review and
approval. As part of that process, agencies must determine
whether the information collection is needed, estimate its
burden, and certify that it meets specific requirements. I
actually practiced that OIRA last night and I still cannot get
it right for some reason. I have a mental block to that word.
We will change the name of that agency, I guess.
Although the PRA has been on the books for a number of
years and Presidents of both parties have directed federal
agencies to find ways to reduce and streamline federal
paperwork, the overall burden continues to grow. Currently,
federal paperwork is estimated to annually take $11.6 billion--
yes, with a B--hours to respond to or comply with and cost
nearly $1.9 trillion. Yes, with a T. However, the burden may be
higher as OIRA and others have raised concerns about the
accuracy of agency burden estimates.
While nearly 75 percent of the overall federal paperwork
burden is generated by Treasury, onerous requests from other
agencies contribute as well. Examples of these include Census
surveys, OSHA reporting, and recordkeeping requirements, and
third-party or public disclosures, such as food labeling
requirements. Laws enacted in recent years, like Obamacare and
the Dodd-Frank Act have added hundreds of millions of hours to
the total. Today, we will be discussing how effective the PRA
has been in reducing the federal paperwork burden on small
businesses and issues that require additional attention or
perhaps legislative action to resolve.
I want to thank all the witnesses for being here today, and
we look very much forward to your testimony which we will be
getting around to very shortly.
And I now yield to the ranking member, Ms. Velazquez, for
her opening statement.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The federal paperwork burden continues to grow for small
firms. In fiscal year 2015, the public spent an estimated 9.78
billion hours responding to federal information collections.
This total represents a net increase of 350 million burden
hours, or about 3.7 percent from the estimated 9.43 billion
hours that the public spent responding to federal information
collections in fiscal year 2014.
For small firms, paperwork requirements are particularly
burdensome. Due to economies of scale and a lack of in-house
lawyers and experts, paperwork compliance can be especially
costly.
The Paperwork Reduction Act was created in 1980 and amended
in 1995 with the intent of curtailing the growth of paperwork,
but, unfortunately, it has not done so. One question the
committee seeks to address today is whether current law
provides OMB with the right tools to limit this growth or if
changes must be made to the PRA to improve its effectiveness.
At today's hearing, it is my hope that our witnesses can
talk about the underlying weaknesses of the law and whether
agencies have adequate resources to comply with it. While OIRA
has a difficult task, small businesses deserve to know exactly
why their paperwork burden continues to grow.
However, we must also remember that data collection exists
for a reason. Agencies rely on data to make informed decisions
achieving important policy outcomes. These goals include
ensuring worker safety, preserving clean air and water, and
safeguarding taxpayer dollars and benefit programs.
Ensuring that agencies are considering the economic impact
of their regulations and paperwork requirements on small firms
is critical. However, it is also important that regulations
adequately protect the public interest. That is why it is so
crucial our agencies receive adequate funding. Without proper
resources, it is impossible for them to evaluate and streamline
paperwork burdens or provide the necessary compliance
assistance to level the playing field for small firms.
In today's testimony, we will surely hear about both the
successes of OIRA and the obstacles that are preventing the
office from reducing paperwork requirements for small
businesses. The PRA should not serve to discourage agencies
from conducting proper regulatory flexibility analysis. All too
often we see agencies implementing regulations that ignore or
understate economic impacts on small businesses. In many
instances, this is because of a lack of communication between
the agencies and the small business community.
I hope today's panel offers insight into what type of
reforms may be needed to improve this communication. I also
hope to hear about the role new technology and electronic
filing can play in reducing regulatory burden.
Finally, I will note that these mechanisms were designed
principally to reduce the burden on small businesses. Just as
we work to ensure these processes are helping small firms, we
must also be vigilant that these programs are not hijacked to
benefit large corporations at the expense of their smaller
competitors.
I look forward to working with Mr. Chabot to ensure this
important law is meeting its full potential for small
businesses, and I want to take this opportunity to thank all
the witnesses for being here today.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. And I would be remiss
if I did not mention that yesterday was a big day on Capitol
Hill and in New York City because it was Ranking Member
Velazquez's birthday yesterday. So we hope she had a good one.
There we go. [Applause.]
I always say this is a very bipartisan Committee, so.
And if Committee members have an opening statement
prepared, I would ask that they submit them for the record.
And I will take just a moment to explain our timing rules
here which is pretty simple. We operate by the 5 minute rule as
other Committees do. Each witness gets 5 minutes. There is a
lighting system to assist you in that. The green light will be
on for 4 minutes. The yellow light will come on when you have
got a minute to wrap up and then the red light will come on,
and we would ask you to kind of stay within that time if at all
possible. And then we are also restricted to 5 minutes
ourselves as well.
And I would now like to introduce our very distinguished
panel here today. Our first witness is Sam Batkins, the
director of regulatory policy for the American Action Forum
here in D.C. His research focuses on examining the rulemaking
efforts of administrative agencies, and he has testified before
Congress and state legislatures on his findings in the past.
Before joining the American Action Forum, Mr. Batkins worked at
the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and the National Taxpayers Union.
He received his bachelor of arts in political science from
Sewanee: The University of the South, and his juris doctorate
from the Columbus School of Law at Catholic University of
America. Mr. Batkins is a member of the Maryland Bar.
Our next witness is Ms. Leah Pilconis, the environmental
law and policy advisor for the Associated General Contractors
of America, AGC, in Arlington, Virginia. She spent the last 16
years establishing and directing the environmental program at
AGC which represents general contractors and specialty
contracting firms in the construction industry. In her role,
Ms. Pilconis monitors and regularly comments on federal
legislation and serves as the liaison in the Environmental
Protection Agency and other agencies. She also develops
compliance tools for construction contractors and participates
in government advisory panels. Ms. Pilconis holds a bachelor of
science in biology from Gettysburg College and a law degree
from the Dickinson School of Law at Pennsylvania State
University. She is admitted to practice law in Pennsylvania. We
welcome you as well.
And our third witness is Frank Cania, president of driven
HR, a human resources consulting firm based in Pittsford, New
York. He has been a business and HR professional for more than
30 years, and his primary focus is helping business owners,
managers, and other HR professionals navigate state and federal
regulatory compliance
Mr. Cania is certified by the HR Certification Institute as
a senior professional in human resources and by the Society for
Human Resource Management as a senior certified professional.
He graduated from the Shepard Broad College of Law at NOVA
Southeastern University with a master's degree in employment
law.
In addition, Mr. Cania volunteers his time as a team
captain for a national legislative advocacy team for the
Society of Human Resource Management. He is testifying on
behalf of that organization today and we welcome you as well.
And I would now like to yield to the Ranking Member to
introduce our fourth witness.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is my pleasure to introduce our distinguished witness,
Ms. Sally Katzen, a senior advisor at the Podesta Group and a
professor of practice and distinguished scholar in residence at
New York University Law School. She has served as Administrator
of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs in the
Office of Management and Budget and as the Deputy Director for
Management at OMB.
Before joining the Clinton administration, Ms. Katzen was a
partner in the Washington, D.C., law firm of Wilmer Cutler and
Pickering, specializing in regulatory and legislative matters.
She has also served in leadership roles in the American Bar
Association and as President of the Women's Legal Defense Fund.
She graduated from Smith College and the University of
Michigan Law School where she was the first woman editor-in-
chief of the Law Review. Welcome, and thank you for being here.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
And Mr. Batkins, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF SAM BATKINS, DIRECTOR OF REGULATORY POLICY,
AMERICAN ACTION FORUM; LEAH F. PILCONIS, ENVIRONMENTAL LAW AND
POLICY ADVISOR, ASSOCIATED GENERAL CONTRACTORS OF AMERICA;
FRANK CANIA, FOUNDER AND PRESIDENT, DRIVEN HR; SALLY KATZEN,
PROFESSOR OF PRACTICE AND DISTINGUISHED SCHOLAR IN RESIDENCE,
NEW YORK UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF LAW; SENIOR ADVISOR, PODESTA
GROUP

STATEMENT OF SAM BATKINS

Mr. BATKINS. Thank you so much, Chairman Chabot, Ranking
Member Velazquez.
As we have already mentioned, I think the short answer to
the title of this hearing is, no, paperwork burdens have not
been reduced. As of this morning, as we mentioned, it stood at
11.6 billion hours of paperwork, which is up from 7 billion
hours of paperwork roughly 17 years ago. To put 11.6 billion
hours into some context for this incredibly large figure, it is
roughly 35 hours for every person in the United States. That is
35 hours, a week's worth of compliance for every man, woman,
and child in the U.S. And small businesses are particularly
affected.
There was a 2013 Minneapolis Federal Reserve study which
found that hiring two additional compliance officers could
reduce profitability of small banks by 45 basis points and
cause one-third of those small banks to become unprofitable.
Now, the vast majority of these burdens as we have
mentioned are within Treasury and IRS, but due to passage of
recent legislation, a lot of non-Treasury burdens have also
increased. Since 2006, the non-Treasury burden has increased
roughly 93 percent. That is non-Treasury burdens.
Now, we have heard a lot of figures on 11.6 billion hours
and I think the big question whenever you are talking about
cost-benefit analysis is, are these figures reliable? And I
know talking to former OIRA officials, they say maybe the PRA
is not the top priority. And according to Professor Stuart
Shapiro of Rutgers University, in his interviews we found
phrases like ``unreliable,'' ``pseudoscience,'' and random
numbers at best describing paperwork estimates, which is
generally not encouraging, I think.
And I will just give you two examples of that. The National
Credit Union Administration somewhat recently estimated that a
routine truth in savings form was going to impose 43 billion
hours of paperwork. They arrived at that figure by multiplying
several numbers together. They should have added them,
apparently. The actual total was less than 10 million hours.
Likewise, IRS once estimated that its summary of benefits
coverage under the Affordable Care Act was going to cost $1.7
trillion. Now, I have no doubt that the coverage requirements
cost something, but I do not think it was the GDP of Canada.
Later, they revised those figures downward as well to less than
$10 million in compliance costs.
Beyond those estimates there are also problems with just
monetizing general paperwork hours. Sometimes agencies will
state that several hundred thousand or a million hours does not
contain any monetizable cost, which I find somewhat difficult
to believe. And sometimes agencies will go through the work of
monetizing the cost and go through the work of benefit-cost
analysis, and they will publish in the Federal Register. You
will see it online at the back end of OIRA's website, but those
totals will not be reported in the agency's subtotals, and they
will not be reported for the typical information collection.
There is also the question of management under the PRA.
Now, last fiscal year, according to the information collection
budget, there were 283 violations of the Paperwork Reduction
Act specifically by Federal agencies. That is up 58 violations
from the previous fiscal year. And because these violations
happen all the time, maybe that is not too surprising. Maybe
that number is not too shocking. But one thing that strikes me
is that, for some reason, every year two agencies lead the list
of paperwork violations and it is Health and Human Services and
Department of Defense. And every year, for basically the last 4
or 5 years, HHS and DOD have led the pack and there really has
not been a change. And from what I can tell, there has not been
any reform needed to address HHS and DOD.
Finally, on the reform front, I think reform could greatly
benefit small businesses because paperwork compliance generally
imposes fixed costs that as a percentage of overall revenues
burdens small businesses the most and they are acutely affected
by paperwork costs.
As we have mentioned, I think in terms of reform, agencies
could do a better job of monetizing paperwork burden hours and
OIRA could do a better job of reporting the effort the agencies
go through to actually monetize those hours. Like the reforms
from 1996, I think Congress could also examine maybe setting
reduction targets for cumulative paperwork burden hours. The
enforcement there is tricky. But just for perspective, if
Congress shaves 10 percent off the cumulative paperwork figure,
that is going to save a billion hours of paperwork and,
conservatively, $38 billion a year in compliance costs.
Online modernization is also another reform option. There
are roughly 2,000 OMB control numbers that contain forms that
cannot be submitted online. It is the year 2017. I am not sure
why there are so many forms that just cannot be submitted or
obtained online.
And finally, increasing public participation with major
collections I think could be a key point. Those collections
with over a million hours of paperwork, maybe moving them from
notices to proposed and final rule status to increase
transparency I think would be key. Thank you so much.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Ms. Pilconis, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LEAH F. PILCONIS

Ms. PILCONIS. Thank you. Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member
Velazquez, and members of the Committee, thank you for inviting
the Associated General Contractors of America to testify today.
AGC represents more than 26,000 construction contractors,
material suppliers, and related firms. These members build
everything but single-family homes.
My name is Leah Pilconis, and I am AGC's environmental law
and policy advisor. I maintain liaison with the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency and other regulatory agencies,
and I help our members comply and understand environmental
rules and requirements.
Ninety-one percent of today's construction firms are small
businesses. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency is an
information-based agency. The agency constantly requires the
collection or generation of data in developing and implementing
its programs. AGC members will tell you that the paperwork
associated with the environmental requirements has become a
huge and growing burden and responsibility, delaying, if not
threatening, construction projects and greatly increasing the
cost of doing business.
Both EPA's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
Stormwater program under the Clean Water Act, which is a permit
program, and the Spill Prevention Control and Countermeasure
program under the Oil Pollution Act, impose duplicate paperwork
requirements on construction site operators to develop written
plans for managing oil storage and oil spills. The list of
overlapping documentation requirements includes site maps and
diagrams, inspection and maintenance logs, training,
notification and response obligations, and recordkeeping. If a
construction site has a site-specific stormwater plan that
addresses oil storage and spill control containment and
cleanup, then EPA should allow that plan to also satisfy the
agency's Oil Pollution Act requirements.
Another area of overlap imposing duplicate paperwork
requirements is the regulation of lead paint dust during
construction work. On every single job where any detectable
trace of lead coatings is present, OSHA's lead and construction
standard requires air monitoring, training, and a compliance
plan to keep all services free as practicable of lead, which
includes comprehensive recordkeeping requirements. Yet, EPA has
a separate program that also entails extensive recordkeeping
requirements. Moreover, EPA is looking to expand the reach of
these requirements.
EPA should recognize that OSHA rules adequately protect the
spread of lead paint dust during all construction and terminate
its efforts to expand current regulations. EPA should also
explore revisions to its current program to minimize
duplication with the OSHA rules.
The number and cost of environmental regulations, which
invariably involve recordkeeping components and the penalties
associated therewith, are at an all-time high. Many
environmental fines are being levied against construction firms
for relatively minor paperwork violations, not for
environmental harm or contamination.
EPA has terminated industry partnership programs and
defunded compliance assistance online centers. Congress should
enact a right-to-cure process for paperwork violations with no
threat of penalty and also provide relief to small business
contractors who inspect and promptly correct compliance
problems.
I would also like to discuss the fundamental policy shift
at EPA to require the regulated community to electronically
report their paperwork, to demonstrate compliance, and to make
that information readily available and searchable by the
public. Online public access to data introduces new burdens on
industry related to privacy, data quality, security, and
competition. There is also the cost to monitor company feeds
for errors and to consult with government to ensure that the
information provided includes proper context. These lifecycle
costs were not factors in the paperwork burden analysis of
EPA's 2015 nationwide rule that shifts its entire NPDS permit
program to electronic reporting. Congress should reconsider how
the electronic management of information should be factored
into burden estimates as it explores the future of using web-
based technologies for information collection. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Cania, you are recognized for 5 minutes. Am I
pronouncing that right?
Mr. CANIA. Yes, that is correct, Cania.
Chairman CHABOT. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. CANIA. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF FRANK CANIA

Mr. CANIA. Good morning, Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member
Velazquez, and members of the Committee. I am Frank Cania,
founder and president of Driven HR, a Pittsford, New York,
based human resource consulting firm, and we provide HR
services to small businesses. I am also a proud fourth-
generation entrepreneur.
I appear before you today on behalf of the 285,000-member
Society for Human Resource Management, SHRM, where I have been
a member for over 20 years. Thank you for holding this hearing
on the Paperwork Reduction Act, designed to reduce the total
paperwork burden imposed by the Federal Government on employers
of all sizes.
The PRA dramatically impacts small businesses, who
typically do not have an HR person or department equipped to
handle all of the filing requirements, Federal and State. Let
me explain some of those challenges.
Mr. Chairman, under the ACA, employers with 50 or more
employees are required to provide coverage to those working at
least 30 hours per week, as defined by the ACA, or face a fine.
To avoid IRS fines, employers need to provide their employees
with one of two forms. Form 1095B is provided by self-insured
employers with less than 50 employees, while Form 1095C is
provided by those with more than 50 employees. Both forms
present challenges.
Take, for example, the form's reporting requirement
regarding health coverage for the 95 percent of employees
working an average of 130 hours or more per month. Small
businesses often fall into the trap of thinking the reporting
requirement is an annual average rather than a monthly average.
This commonly made and honest mistake required one of our
clients to reissue every employee's form, to avoid potential
IRS fines.
Another Driven HR client who converted to self-funded
coverage, and relied on their payroll service provider to
produce their 1095C forms, did not realize that they were
required to provide information regarding employee dependents
on the form. Again, this honest mistake required our client to
reissue new forms to avoid potential IRS fines.
Although these may seem like nominal costs, they add up
quickly. Each client paid an initial setup fee of $250, and an
annual $600 service fee, as well as a $5 per form fee. Not
including administrative costs, a client with 50 employees will
pay a minimum of $1,100 to properly file. Compounded over
multiple forms, you quickly see how these costs eat into a
small business's operating margin.
In addition, the government requires this complex form, yet
employees are not required to submit it with their individual
tax returns. This begs the question, what purpose does this
form serve if the employee and the IRS already have the
information?
Now I would like to transition to USCIS Workplace
Immigration Form I-9. Every employer, regardless of size, is
required to complete an I-9 for every employee. However,
employers acting in good faith to properly verify their
workforce often are faced with unwarranted liability due to the
current I-9, and its confounding instructions.
For example, Mr. Chairman, the current I-9 restricts an
employer's ability to provide commonsense guidance to
employees, while still acting in good faith. Employers may not
suggest which documents an employee may present to establish
employment authorization and identity. Employers even risk
liability when explaining which documents are most commonly
presented, even when new employees request that information.
The process becomes even more complicated if the employee
selects ``alien authorized to work'' status. Here, the employer
is required to track the expiration dates of the work
authorization, both in sections 1 and 2 on the I-9. Yet, an
employer is prevented from asking to see the documents used in
section 1 to verify that information. Further, an employer
tracking the wrong dates may be accused of failing to complete
a timely reverification.
I-9 challenges are compounded for employers with multiple
locations. One client, for example, owns a chain of 24/7
businesses. He has trained multiple employees at each location
to properly complete the I-9, even paying a bonus for error-
free forms. Despite this, most have missing information or some
other error. He then required managers to travel to various
locations to complete I-9s. This was cost-prohibitive, time-
consuming, and it took them away from their primary
responsibilities.
While the cost of compliance is high, the cost of simple
paperwork errors is often higher. The penalty for even a single
mistake on the I-9 ranges from $216, to $2,126 per form. The
current PRA estimates the paper I-9 takes 35 minutes to
complete, and 26 minutes for the computer form. These estimates
have not changed, even though the I-9 instructions more than
doubled with the most recent update.
Mr. Chairman, my testimony today only scratches the surface
of regulatory and reporting burdens for small businesses, and
for every Federal requirement there is often a State
requirement with corresponding fines and penalties for
paperwork violations. Even for honest mistakes. In my
experience, small business owners are struggling to comply, and
this damages their ability to grow their businesses and reward
their employees.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I am happy to
answer any questions.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Ms. Katzen, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SALLY KATZEN

Ms. KATZEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Velazquez, members of the Committee. I appreciate the
opportunity to testify today.
As you know from my written testimony, I willingly join the
chorus and concur with the conclusion that the paperwork burden
has increased rather than decreased, and that small businesses
have a legitimate concern, if for no other reason than they
have fewer, sometimes appreciably fewer, resources and
institutional capacity than larger companies to comply with the
paperwork burden.
I would like to use my limited time to offer some different
perspectives from the other witnesses and other views about the
situation we are facing now. First, even though the paperwork
burden is not being reduced to the extent anyone would like, I
believe that the PRA, and OIRA's implementation of the PRA, has
been an important tool in restraining the Federal Government's
appetite for data. There has been no empirical study of the
effect of the PRA because there is no counterfactual baseline
to compare it with, but my experience over 7 years at OIRA and
OMB and since leads me to believe that PRA has affirmatively
discouraged some, perhaps many, program offices in various
agencies from proposing new ICRs unless they are statutorily
mandated. And this is because they believe that the multiple
steps set out in the PRA and recited in the chairman's opening
statement is so time-consuming and labor-intensive, and the
difficulty in negotiating with OIRA is so exhausting, that it
is not worth their effort.
The second point is there is only so much the agencies can
do to reduce paperwork. Among other things, it is Congress that
has assigned the agencies many programmatic responsibilities
for which they need information to be able to carry out their
tasks. It is Congress which has directed the agencies to ensure
that participants in their programs meet specified
qualifications and satisfy eligibility and participatory
conditions. It is Congress that has demanded accountability for
monies distributed to a host of recipients of Federal funds.
Each of these requires some sort of paperwork as we know it.
The agencies and PRA cannot change these statutory
requirements, nor make exceptions for selected individuals or
small businesses that get swept up in what Congress has
specified, and I would not be surprised if, even as we sit here
talking about trying to reduce the burden of paperwork, there
is a hearing in some other office of the Congress now
establishing a program which will have an accountability
element, a reporting element, a requirement that would produce
additional paperwork.
Third, and critically important, if we are identifying
potential barriers to burden reduction, perhaps the most
significant is that burden reduction requires sustained
funding. It was true in 2003 when the task force set up by the
2002 amendments to the PRA issued its final report and
specifically recommended additional funding for this purpose
for agencies. It is even more critical now after many years of
straight-line or decreased funding for many of the agencies in
the executive branch.
An agency cannot simply wish away paperwork burden. It
takes staff time and resources, both of which are in very short
supply in many agencies. If you are serious about doing
something about paperwork, the agencies must be provided
adequate resources to accomplish that task.
I see my time is running out. I wanted to address the very
different types of paperwork, their origins, and their
implications for small businesses, but I will try to conclude
by noting that I am not saying there is nothing that can be
done to reduce paperwork. I recognize paperwork is difficult,
particularly for small businesses. I discuss some possibly
productive steps in my written testimony, but those are going
to reduce paperwork burden only at the margin.
There is no silver bullet that is going to dramatically
change the numbers, particularly with, as the chairman noted,
70 percent of it as a result of our Tax Code, which is not just
the 1040s, but all of the deductions and exceptions, and
accelerated depreciation, and oil and gas depletion allowances,
and real estate loss carryforwards that are set by Congress and
which business would not take advantage of if the burden of
filling out the forms and providing the documentation were not
substantially offset by the benefits that they receive by
claiming these deductions.
In any event, I hope you will try to approach this in the
thoughtful way that this Committee has traditionally approached
these types of issues, and I greatly appreciate your attention.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. We appreciate the
testimony of all the witnesses. And we will go to the
questioning now. And Mr. Batkins, I will go to you first, and I
recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Should small businesses receive a waiver for first-time
nonharmful paperwork violations if they promptly correct the
problem?
Mr. BATKINS. From my perspective, the goal of regulation
generally is to correct market failures when they happen and to
protect health and safety. So if you have an instance where it
is a routine paperwork collection and it is simply a reporting
or recordkeeping instance where you do not have a repeat
pattern of violations by a particular industry who is trying to
flout Federal law, then I do not think that agencies should
initially take punitive steps because of an error or two that
happens to pop up in PRA.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. And that is, I think,
I will go to you next, Ms. Pilconis, and that was something you
were talking about there in some detail. Would you want to
expand upon that in any way?
Ms. PILCONIS. I would just add that particularly in the
environmental area with the rules that U.S. EPA writes and
enforces, the penalties for noncompliance are extremely high
and they are going up every year because Congress has now
authorized the regulatory agencies every January to assess and
potentially increase penalties, civil penalties for fines under
the environmental statutes. So, for example, the Stormwater
Permit program impacts nearly every single construction
project, and penalties for a violation, potentially even a
paperwork violation under the Stormwater Permit program could
reach up to $52,400-plus per day per violation. So huge, huge
penalties. I believe that, you know, a right to cure for small
businesses, considering how much of a paperwork burden there is
and how little compliance assistance is out there and the
limited staff and resources that they have would be
appropriate.
Chairman CHABOT. And you had mentioned that 91 percent of
folks in the construction industry are small business by
definition, so I think----
Ms. PILCONIS. Correct.
Chairman CHABOT.--this is an area certainly this Committee
would want to follow up on. So thank you. Thanks, both of you.
Mr. Cania, I will go to you next. I would like to start
with the I-9 forms that you had mentioned. How many pages long
is the I-9 form currently? And also, how long are the
instructions? You mentioned how burdensome they could be and
the guidance book associated with it? Would you comment on
that?
Mr. CANIA. Sure. And I have copies with me if you would
like to see them later.
Chairman CHABOT. Okay.
Mr. CANIA. The basic I-9 form is----
Chairman CHABOT. We all want copies of them, too, and
everybody in the audience.
Mr. CANIA. Not a problem. And we can begin filling them out
immediately.
The I-9 form is two pages. Page 1, or section 1, is for the
employee to fill out. Page 2, or section 2, is for the employer
to fill out. There is also a third page of acceptable
documents, a list of acceptable documents. The instructions are
now 15 pages long for a 2-page form, and the instruction manual
is a slim 69 pages.
Chairman CHABOT. That is something. And you also mentioned,
I think their estimate is 35 minutes to complete the I-9 form.
How accurate is that currently?
Mr. CANIA. It really depends on the business. We are asking
employees to fill out section 1, page 1, and if they are
employees with either English as a second language, or no
understanding of English, and need an interpreter, it could
take over an hour to fill out a simple one page form. So, it
may not be that accurate.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you.
Ms. Katzen, let me conclude with you if I can. You had
mentioned the agency department that is most responsible for
paperwork, obviously, the IRS. And I know that I used to do my
own taxes. I do not anymore. Stopped doing that, I do not know,
a dozen years ago or so. But I remember going to the local
library and they had all the forms out there and you would go
pick stuff up, et cetera. Well, as we all know nowadays you
file electronically, and there will be a couple of forms there,
but you have got to print them yourself at your own computer.
What progress have we made? What could we do better to
reduce the paperwork? It would seem that if you are doing
things electronically now, by definition it ought to reduce the
paperwork, but it does not seem to have done so. So would you
comment on that?
Ms. KATZEN. Yes, Mr. Chairman. The situation with IRS is
particularly puzzling or difficult to solve because when you
used to go to the library, you could also pick up the telephone
and reach somebody, usually on the third ring, to answer a
question about how to proceed, or to send you a form or to help
you through the process. Given the cuts to the IRS budget that
have been systematically supported by this Congress the last
several years, the waiting time now for getting assistance is
well over 2 hours, if you bother to stay on the phone. IRS does
not have the resources to provide the kind of assistance that
they would like to provide. It is difficult to suggest a
solution when they are so stressed and so tight on resources
that they have had to give up almost all of the compliance
assistance that had been there in the past.
The code is very complicated, as I tried to say at the end
of my statement, and that is because of decisions that have
been made that those types of offsets and deductions are all
appropriate, and I think somebody has to talk to somebody and
see that they are all on the same page. If you want the system
to work, and maybe that is an assumption that I am making that
others do not share, but if you do want the system to work, you
need to give them the resources to enable it to happen.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. To follow up, I would also
suggest that if they did not spend time and effort focusing
attention on targeting certain groups for their political
persuasions maybe they could spend some of those resources on
serving the public and their customers. But we try not to be
terribly partisan on this Committee, so I will just leave it
there.
My time is expired, and I will now recognize the Ranking
Member for 5 minutes.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Try harder.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Katzen, thank you so much for all of your testimony.
So here on this committee we are trying to make sure that
we address some of the issues that hinder small businesses and
small business growth. So, on the one hand, we are here
discussing paperwork reduction and how we can reduce the number
of regulations that impact small businesses, but then you said
we need more resources, we need more staff to be able to
conduct evaluations and decide where we can make the paperwork
reduction work. So how do you reconcile that with the Trump
administration policies, like a hiring freeze and cuts to
agency budgets, how will that impact the ability of agencies to
evaluate and streamline paperwork burdens?
Ms. KATZEN. Well, it does not help. It is particularly
concerning because so many of the departures from the civil
service are at the senior ranks, where they have experience and
proficiency in carrying out their various responsibilities. The
budget cuts for the domestic agencies will require them to
abandon certain substantive programs, but will also make a
further cut in their ability to provide the supplemental
services that we have been talking about, including providing
analysis of what they are doing right and what they are doing
wrong. No company, no small business, would simply issue an
edict about personnel without first studying the effects that
it would have on its day-to-day operations.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. So given the budget cuts and the hiring
freeze, some have suggested that to make the PRA more
effective, the volume of requests being sent to OMB need to be
reduced. This could be done by limiting OMB review to
significant paperwork collections and shifting more
responsibility to the agencies. Do you believe that delegating
more authority to agencies on less significant information
requests will help OIRA focus on bigger paperwork issues?
Ms. KATZEN. That is a very interesting point because, with
the review of regulations that is also done by OIRA, in 1993
President Clinton signed an executive order that limited review
to only the ``significant'' regulations so that we could focus
on the most important ones. That approach could well translate
to applicability in this area. Be careful what you wish for,
though, because to the extent you remove OIRA review, you
unleash the agencies, and those who are concerned about
agencies running amuck and asking for too much information they
do not need would have no restraints. So it has to be done
carefully and judiciously.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Ms. Katzen, you have expressed concern that
it is misleading to focus on the overall burden hours of
federal paperwork because not all of the hours are the same.
Can you please describe the different types of paperwork
burdens and why it will be constructive to distinguish them
from one another?
Ms. KATZEN. Yes. Thank you very much, Ms. Velazquez,
because that is the heart of the issue. You have to know what
the substance is of the paperwork burden so that you can
address it. In addition to 70 percent being from tax
compliance, there are--as the chairman noted--the Census Bureau
and BLS and the Bureau of Economic Information at the
Department of Energy. These agencies, statistical agencies,
collect critical information because we know that good
decision-making requires information.
This is the information age. It requires knowledge and that
is often in the hands of individuals or companies or State and
local governments. That information not only aids government
decision-making, but also, once scrubbed of personal
identifiers, is often redistributed to the public, which finds
that kind of information critical for making all sorts of
business decisions.
We also have the third party disclosures which the chairman
mentioned, and he talked about food labeling. One can have a
different view about the merits of that, but I will ask you to
think about drugs and the content information, and the dosage
information, and the counterindicator information that are on
that packaging. That is all paperwork. That I think is all of a
very different ilk.
You have in the rulemaking area, information as to the
costs and benefits, which comes from the private sector. That
helps good decision-making. Without that you are operating on
conjecture and speculation. And at that point, I think the
rules that we would be promulgating would be even more
burdensome, less effective, and less efficient, particularly on
small businesses.
I could go on, and in my written testimony I go through a
variety of different types of paperwork, but to quote a famous
author, not all animals are the same. Not all paperwork is the
same. And you have to understand the distinctions that can be
and should be drawn.
Chairman CHABOT. The Ranking Member's time is expired.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you.
The gentlelady from American Samoa, Mrs. Radewagen, who is
the Chairman of the Subcommittee on Health and Technology is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. RADEWAGEN. I want to thank you all for appearing and
testifying today, and I want to thank Chairman Chabot and
Ranking Member Velazquez for holding this hearing. Anything we
can do to make it easier for our Nation's small businesses to
operate is a goal I believe we can all work on.
Professor Katzen, I found your written testimony
fascinating. You have already talked about it a little bit
since you have been on the opposite side of these small
businesses, but I do think you make a fair point that many of
these burdensome requirements are a product of decisions made
right here in Congress.
All of you can answer this. What would you recommend that
we do here in Congress that can have actual enforceable impact
on relieving these burdens? Mr. Batkins?
Mr. BATKINS. Sure. One area that the Government
Accountability Office has focused on is duplication,
fragmentation, and overlap. And while I certainly think just
from our fiscal agencies, they are vital collections so we know
what is going on in the Nation with the census and so on, there
are probably countless collections that do, as we have heard
today, impose fragmentation, duplication, and overlap. And
thankfully, with the Paperwork Reduction Act it is slightly
different than just regulation as a whole because we know that
there are roughly 9,500 OMB control numbers, so someone could
sift through all of them and determine which ones actually do
overlap.
The second point I would make is I think retrospective
review is pretty critical in terms of getting better estimates
and determining if the collections are effective. And I think
that is a point initially when agencies are calculating burden
hours and calculating the impact of a particular collection,
they are sort of in the dark as we heard sort of made-up
figures or random numbers at worst was one definition.
So I certainly think that maybe after the 3-year collection
has expired and OMB and the agencies have the available data,
that they can go back and determine if the collection was
successful, if their data is correct. That is the point that
President Obama made when he issued the Executive Order 13610.
So I think retrospective review could be an important
component.
Mrs. RADEWAGEN. Thank you.
Ms. Pilconis? My time is short.
Ms. PILCONIS. Okay. Thank you.
So I concur with what Mr. Batkins said regarding seeing
where there is duplication and overlap. I would also add that
it would be helpful to require agencies to respond in writing
to serious objections from the Small Business Administration
Office of Advocacy where they perceive there to be an impact on
small businesses.
Also, as Ms. Katzen said, talking about OIRA's involvement
being a powerful tool to discourage some of the program offices
from proposing too many new ICRs, I reference in my written
statement some concerns that we have about the generic ICRs
where everything is just being kind of lumped together into one
ICR. This has been done with EPA's NPDS permit program, where
in that case you are really not truly looking at the burden of
putting new requirements into these stormwater permits that do
apply to all, like for the construction program, all sites, and
really are impacting small businesses. So it is a concern with
the generic ICFs and the fast-tracking permits that you are not
really looking at the burdens.
Mrs. RADEWAGEN. Mr. Cania?
Mr. CANIA. Well, although one of my employees would not
agree, I think I am relatively tech savvy, and I am sure the
people in my office are laughing right now because of that
statement. But, I think if we could use technology to more
effectively work with small businesses, especially in gathering
and reporting of information, that would decrease the time
necessary, and also increase the effectiveness of the data-
gathering programs.
Mrs. RADEWAGEN. Thank you.
Professor Katzen?
Ms. KATZEN. I would concur with Mr. Batkins' suggestion
that this be wrapped into the retrospective review that the
agencies try to undertake. Again, they need resources to be
able to devote their attention to that subject, but that is, I
think, one of the most important things.
As to consolidation and standardization and enhanced use of
electronic reporting, which is required by statute now, I would
just refer you to the report of the task force that was set up
in 2002, which set forth in great detail some of the real traps
to moving in that direction. But that, too, is something that I
think should be nibbled at around the edges.
Mrs. RADEWAGEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentlelady from North Carolina, Ms. Adams, who is the
Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on Investigations,
Oversight, and Regulations, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair and Ranking
Member Velazquez. Thank you as well for hosting the hearing and
thank you very much to all the witnesses for your testimony.
Reducing the paperwork burden for our Nation's small
businesses is certainly important, so we still need to maintain
a sufficient level of data reporting that would allow us to
gather important information on small businesses.
Ms. Katzen, one of my initial questions you already
addressed, so I want to ask you about after the OMB receives a
package of materials to review pursuant to the Paperwork
Reduction Act it is required that they provide for an
additional 30-day period for public comments. And I am a big
supporter of transparency and public participation in the
rulemaking process. So how many people are commenting on
information collection requests during this period, and how do
you believe we can encourage more participation during the
comment periods?
Ms. KATZEN. The amount of people who comment will vary
considerably depending upon the particular information
collection request at issue. Some generate a lot of comments,
some very few.
The second--if I can call it the second comment period,
because the agencies have already had their own comment
period--was originally designed because of the suspicion that
some regulated entities would not want to speak truth to power;
they would not want to tell their regulating agency, this is
stupid. And so, instead, they said, well, then OMB will have a
separate process whereby they can gather the information. I
think that that should be reviewed and consider cutting back to
some extent in certain circumstances.
I think the major kind, the big, the significant paperwork
should retain a second comment period for OIRA, but I think
some of the less significant ones could well do with just one.
Ms. ADAMS. Okay. Thank you very much.
So the Paperwork Reduction Act requires OMB to provide
direction and to oversee the privacy, the confidentiality,
security, disclosure, and sharing information, and in the past
few years there has been some troubling data breaches of
personal information held by the Federal Government. So what is
OMB doing to ensure that information collected from the public
is secure?
Ms. KATZEN. This has been one of the very difficult hurdles
for full-out electronic reporting which some of my copanelists
have called for. We used to be afraid of Big Brother. Now we
are afraid of hacking, with good reason. And this is something
which was in a separate office that was established under
President Obama. I do not know if it will continue under
President Trump--to try to minimize the government's
vulnerability--but it is a real risk. And to harden the system
to preclude those kinds of hacks, you are going to have to,
again, devote resources, which the agencies may or may not
have.
Ms. ADAMS. Okay. So when an agency experiences a breach,
does OMB help them implement more effective data security
measures?
Ms. KATZEN. Yes. Part of OMB reports through the deputy
director for management, a position in which I served for a
year and a half. And that is designed to be a troubleshooter, a
helper in troubleshooting with agency issues. And I know the
deputy director for management under President Obama was
extraordinarily proficient in this regard, Beth Cobert. No
nominee has yet been named by President Trump, but I look
forward to having that individual be of assistance in this
regard.
Ms. ADAMS. All right. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentleman from California, Mr. Knight, who is Chairman
of the Subcommittee on Contracting and the Workforce, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. KNIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I thoroughly enjoyed
these four comments and their discussion. There were a couple
that hit me. One was on the stormwater from Ms. Pilconis. If
you know anything about California, we have done extensive
regulations on stormwater so that if there is a storm, you have
to collect all that water, period. It cannot leave your sight
if you are under certain industries, a lot of industries in my
district, like aerospace. It makes it very difficult.
So I guess my first question would be to you. How much
discussion is there at the Federal level with States? And I am
not going to go over State lines here because States can do
what they want to, but if a Federal regulation is doing what we
are trying to get done, is there any discussion between the
Federal Government and that state who is trying to implement
something that is duplicative? Is there ever any discussion
like that?
And I will do a follow-up question here real quick. Go
ahead.
Ms. PILCONIS. Okay. So with regard to the stormwater
program specifically?
Mr. KNIGHT. Well, specifically, I used that just because
that one is an overreach.
Ms. PILCONIS. With the stormwater, and with the stormwater
program, though, the regulations have established the program,
and then EPA has authorized States to actually implement the
program instead of the agency. So in California, your State
environmental agency has written the permit and is implementing
the permit. EPA still has oversight. So in that case, the
overlap is really with regard to enforcement, but the industry
is applying for the State permit, not the Federal permit.
Mr. KNIGHT. Okay. So when this starts, this is kind of a
good discussion when we talk about States like me that have
kind of an overreach sometimes, and there is already a law on
the books. There is a regulation that kind of goes down this
road, correct?
Ms. PILCONIS. Yes. The Federal regulations set the minimum
standards, and there is actually a minimum stormwater
management standard in the Code of Federal Regulations that say
this is the minimum technology requirements that need to be in
all stormwater permits across the Nation, all State permits.
And then States can take it farther. So California has taken it
very far.
Mr. KNIGHT. Yes, we have.
Ms. PILCONIS. For construction, the most stringent permit
in the Nation. And actually, in my written statement, if you
look online, because California posts all stormwater permit
violations online for the public to view, if you do a search of
those violations you can see that the vast majority of them,
they are almost all paperwork violations. And less than 1
percent are actually labeled as any kind of environmental
discharge.
Mr. KNIGHT. I was in the legislature when that sterling
legislature was coming down the line.
Ms. Katzen, to you, I enjoyed your passion and your emotion
about Congress. I agree with you. I do. I think that there
should be an aggressive agenda, especially coming out of small
business, to alleviate some of these problems that small
business has to go through. I know when people talk about the
hours, the hours are money or lost revenue for that small
business. That is exactly what an hour is. It is not that I am
pulling someone off the line or pulling them out; it is that I
am not making money because that person is not working.
And so I guess my question to you is if we do have a little
bit more of an agenda that we are trying to pull away from
budget items, and I know you brought up the IRS and lowering
the amount of money that IRS is getting, then it is harder for
them to do what they are supposed to do, and part of that is to
look at businesses and their forms. Would we not then, if we
are going to lower the budget, lower the regulations, lower the
amount of work that small businesses have to go through? Would
that be a smart way of going about this? Or, and I am putting
this very simply, but would that not be the follow-on?
Ms. KATZEN. I do not think so because regulations, like
paperwork, are not the same. They do not have the same purposes
and they do not have the same effects. And just trying to
reduce something could lead to unintended consequences and
pernicious results.
Mr. KNIGHT. Understand. Understood. But if we do alleviate
business of certain regulations that are out there that are
paperwork, then we are taking some of the burden away from the
bureaucracy, taking away some of the man-hours of the
bureaucracy. We are also allowing business to now work.
Ms. KATZEN. And that would occur, but there might also be a
reduction in information that leads to either government
decision-making or individual decision-making. There might also
be a reduction in protections--the hardhats required, third-
party disclosures--and those are choices. And you can choose to
make those choices, and you will make those choices as you
will.
Mr. KNIGHT. Absolutely. And I am sure in 15 years, after
more regulations are put on, people will go, how did we live in
2017 without these regulations that we are trying to take off
now in 2035? But, at some point, we do have to look and say
business is overburdened. We have to do some maybe pullback in
certain areas.
Ms. KATZEN. And I think that is the basis for President
Obama's very aggressive retrospective review that Mr. Batkins
talked about and that I suspect will be forthcoming with the
new administration as well.
Mr. KNIGHT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, my time is expired.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Evans, who is Ranking
Member of the Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Tax, and Capital
Access, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Katzen, I want to follow up on something. It looked
like you were running out of time. You were pointing directly
at Congress, and I want to spend some time on you, giving you a
little bit more time to tell me exactly those points you were
getting ready to make about where the responsibility is.
Because I think in any of these hearings we need to be very
honest and put it on the table. I mean, this does not just
magically happen. Somebody is responsible for it. So let us go
into a little bit more when you say about what Congress is
responsible for.
Ms. KATZEN. One of the areas that I did not mention that I
feel very passionately about is that, when Congress establishes
a program, be it a grant or a benefit-type subsidy, it
legitimately demands accountability. It wants to make sure that
the agency is providing those funds, which are taxpayer funds,
to the recipients, only to those recipients who are eligible
and qualified. And so even with small business loans, you do
not just get a small business loan by calling up SBA and say,
please send me the following amount of money. You have to fill
out a form. You have to demonstrate you are a small business
and you have to explain how this is going to advance the
overall objectives of the agency. That is accountability, which
both sides of the aisle have subscribed to, appropriately so.
That, I think, is a very important aspect of our government. It
goes beyond what Congress is doing. It goes to the issue of a
democracy and decision-making in a democracy and Congress' role
in setting up those kinds of requirements, which have to be
held to account through paperwork.
The other type of thing that I am particularly familiar
with is the role of paperwork in rulemaking. We hear a lot
about rules. They need to be data-based. They need to be based
on what we have information about, and that kind of information
often has to come from the public. Congress has taken several
steps to insist that agencies base their decisions on sound,
best reasonably available data. They have to get it. Where are
they going to get it from?
And so I think, again, Congress has the right ideas and the
right objectives, but it does add to the paperwork burden every
time.
Mr. EVANS. So then do I hear you saying that Congress is
the problem? I am listening to you very clearly. I am just
asking, I mean, you know, this is your chance. Say it if you
think that is what it is. I am just curious.
Ms. KATZEN. I would rather say, sir, that Congress is part
of the solution.
Mr. EVANS. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay.
Ms. KATZEN. I borrowed that from one of the Republican
presidents. I am just turning it a little bit to my advantage
here.
Mr. EVANS. Okay. I just want to understand.
Ms. KATZEN. But I think awareness--and that is what this
Committee is bringing, awareness--of the consequences of making
decisions. And yes, Congress is participating in this venture.
Mr. EVANS. Okay. A little complicit in some ways, huh?
Ms. KATZEN. Yes, sir.
Mr. EVANS. Okay. Just thought I would ask. I thank you and
yield back the balance of the time.
Chairman CHABOT. I thank the gentleman for yielding. I
would just note that that is the case whether the Republicans
are in control or the Democrats are in control. So thank you.
And seeing no one on this side yet, we will go to Mr.
Lawson from Florida, who is the Ranking Member of the
Subcommittee on Health and Technology. You are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. LAWSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just realized that I
was in a very peculiar position today. And what I mean by that
is because all of my adult life I have been in business, and I
hated a lot of the paperwork required from the government. And
so now I am in a peculiar position, you know. And Mr. Chairman,
I want to thank you for putting me in this position. And what I
mean by being in a peculiar position is that now I am not too
sure what I am doing, but I know my opposition to a lot of
paperwork because I hated it. And so I guess this question will
go to Ms. Pilconis.
Someone who has been as a small business owner and operated
most of my life, I understand the burden that small businesses
have. Can you answer the simple question, do you believe that
the Federal Government has met the first purpose listed in the
1995 act to minimize the paperwork burden for individuals;
small businesses; education and nonprofit institutions; Federal
contractors; State, local, and Tribal governments; and other
persons resulting from the collection of information by or from
the Federal Government?
That is the question that I do not know whether I could
answer, so I want to see what comes from the other party
because I have been opposed to all of it.
Ms. PILCONIS. I think the procedures that are in place are
moving in the direction of evaluating the burden. I do not
think that the burden is always accurately evaluated. I think
that very often, particularly with my involvement with the
Environmental Protection Agency, the numbers that they are
coming up with when they are trying to say how much is this
going to cost industry, how many hours is it going to take
industry to comply, the numbers are always very, very low. In
actuality, it is going to cost a lot more. It is going to take
a lot more time. So I do not think that the outreach and the
information to the true actual small business owners who are
going to be having to implement these requirements is as great
as what it should be to get true burden estimates. I think that
the goal of reducing the paperwork hours has not been
accomplished.
I think the goal of trying to assess the burden, there have
been steps in that direction. I think more can be done.
Mr. LAWSON. Mr. Chairman, with no disrespect to many of my
colleagues who might not have been in business, I resent the
fact that small businesses have to pay CPAs and other people to
do all of this paperwork that is required. And I used to often
have the conversation with my CPA, you know, why should I have
to pay for all of this? You know, because it is probably going
and sitting on a shelf that is just there. But you have got to
pay to have it done or you will not be in compliance.
And so if anyone else cares to comment on that, Ms. Katzen,
it would be helpful to me. I understood your remarks a few
minutes ago, but from Congressman Evans here saying is the
Federal Government at fault? You know, I think they are and I
probably put the words in your mouth even though you might come
from a different angle.
Ms. KATZEN. Well, I would agree in part with the
observation that information which is requested but is not used
should not be requested in the first instance. I have no
problems with that. And, in fact, one of the things that I did
when I was the administrator of OIRA was to institute a policy
in which, when an information collection request expired--3
years, which is its term--and was resubmitted to OIRA, we would
ask the agencies to document how that information had been
used. If they cannot show it has been used, it should not be
renewed. That was my approach. And I think that that is a
philosophy that underlies the Paperwork Reduction Act. Where
the information is used, however, then I think it is a
different judgment.
The question here is: Is that something which is
appropriate to ask for and useful in making the government
better at doing what it is required to do? That is the test
there. And so I think discriminating views and reviews of these
issues would be salutary.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman's time is expired.
The Chairman would note for the gentleman from Florida that
there is a famous quote from a cartoon that used to appear in
the newspaper. I am thinking like 50 years ago, Pogo. I do not
think they are around anymore. And the quote was, ``We have met
the enemy and he is us.'' So Mr. Sherman is nodding down there
because he is familiar with that quote, too.
I was trying to remember the quote and I came up with, you
know, ``I have met the enemy and it is me,'' and I knew that
was not right, so Viktoria here checked it out. Google, you can
find anything nowadays, but that is what it was.
So in any event, the gentleman's time is expired. The
gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Schneider, who is the Subcommittee
Ranking Member of Agriculture, Energy, and Trade, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Thank you. And as always, I want to thank
the witnesses for making your time available for us. We cannot
do what we need to do without hearing from you. Your
experiences and insights are greatly appreciated. And I
apologize if I am repeating what others have said. As the
chairman will understand, we are balancing three Committees
meeting all at the same time. So if anyone has figured out how
not only to reduce paperwork, but to be in three places at the
same time, I would be very grateful.
Chairman CHABOT. The chair would note that the member is at
the most important of those Committees.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Yes, absolutely.
But I do have one quick question for Mr. Batkins. In your
submitted testimony, you have a graph on ``Non-Treasury Cabinet
Agency Paperwork.'' And having looked at a lot of these graphs
in business, it kind of has a hockey stick aspect to it, but in
2015, 2016, there is a dramatic spike in hours. You may have
explained this earlier, but what was driving that one spike? Is
there any key information from that line?
Mr. BATKINS. Sure. Well, as we mentioned, a lot of these
are programmatic changes from Congress, and from what we can
tell, the largest gain in paperwork was from the Department of
Health and Human Services. They went from roughly 400 million
hours, still number two behind Treasury, and now they are up
over a billion hours in paperwork. So a lot of that was driven
by HHS.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Okay. Thank you.
I want to turn to Ms. Katzen and something you have said
and talked about also in your testimony. But as we all know, I
was the poster child of hating paperwork when I was in business
and knew that it was not the best use of my time, would always
outsource it to somebody else. So while there is a burden,
there is also a benefit that you touched on of the data that
comes from some of that paperwork, and data being turned into
information that in my business life we also utilized to some
extent.
How would it be best to go about balancing the demands of
collecting information, knowing the information is accurate,
that a small business is a small business, that an applicant
for a loan is qualified for the applicant? How do we manage the
burden and the benefit and what are some potential
opportunities, perhaps for this Committee, as we look for ways
to reduce that burden?
Ms. KATZEN. Well, thank you for the question. I think the
short answer is ``carefully'' to try to balance those things.
There is not a ``one size fits all.'' There is not, as I
mentioned earlier, a magic bullet that can be used. It has to
be done agency by agency, program by program. And as I stressed
in my opening comments, to do that the agencies need the
capacity and the funding. And absent that, they are working
with both hands tied behind their backs.
We have heard repeatedly that the estimates of burden hours
are not always accurate. How do you test the estimates? You
have a focus group or you do a trial run. The agencies do not
have the funds to do that. And so they calculate what they
think is the right answer, and then, as Mr. Batkins was saying,
you have an opportunity during the renewal stage for people to
say, ``I filled out the form and it did not take 45 minutes; it
took 3 hours and 45 minutes.'' It is a process of development.
Unless the resources are given to the agencies, though, you
will not make much progress.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Thank you. I appreciate that in making sure
that as we are designing these structures that we include in
that the trial and error and learning aspect of it. I say that
as not just a businessman, but as an engineer. That is the only
way you get it done. If you do not learn from what you do, if
you are not smarter, you are not moving forward.
I like what you said. You talked about when you were at
OIRA you had the rule, show us how the data is used. Is there
any way, because obviously you are no longer at OIRA, are there
things that we can do to institutionalize or enforce that kind
of review?
Ms. KATZEN. I am always reluctant to urge legislation
because I think the kind of work that I did is called
management, and it is very difficult to legislate good
management. And therefore, I am reluctant to say you should
codify something in some statute. But a little comment from
this Committee to OIRA about working in that direction--
thinking about these kinds of things--could well go a long way.
Government agencies are responsive to communications from
Congress, and sometimes you can have them think about what the
nature of the problem is, and work with them to come up with a
solution, which is a lot better than simply dictating the
outcome.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. I agree. I am out of time. I would add the
one thing, I think our role in Oversight and the question we
ask in Oversight can play an important role in that as well,
making sure that we continue to work to ease the burden on all
businesses, but in particular small business here in our
country. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you.
We are going to go into a second round. I am going to ask
just one question here, and if any other members, I mentioned
it to the Ranking Member as well, it will not necessarily be 5
minutes. But first of all, just by clarification, Mr. Batkins,
I think you said the couple hundred thousand hours going up to
a billion hours in HHS, I think at the end you said, of course,
that was because of HHS. I think you meant because of ACA,
right?
Mr. BATKINS. Well, the ACA certainly drove a lot of those
burdens, correct. I think we have pegged something like 170
million hours from the ACA, which if you take a step back I
think makes sense given the scope of the law overall. But it
was not all ACA-driven, but a significant portion was ACA.
Chairman CHABOT. And for those dozens of people who might
be watching this at home, the ACA is the Affordable Care Act,
or Obamacare in some terminology.
My question is for Ms. Pilconis and Mr. Batkins. If an
agency wants to pay people to respond to an information
request, the PRA requires agencies to explain that decision.
What problems could result from paying people to respond to
government requests? Either one can go first.
Mr. BATKINS. Sure. I mean, if you talk to some
statisticians, you might run into the problem of getting
perhaps a nonrepresentative sample if you are paying people,
incentivizing people who really need or who really want that
$50, even though it is a somewhat nominal amount to comply. But
I know from the agency's perspective, for some of the surveys
they will claim that it is really difficult to get a
representative sample at all, so we have to sort of
incentivize. Obviously, through Congress' perspective, you
know, this is money going out the door. I am not sure if there
is a total catalogue of all the money that is spent on paying
representatives to answer these Federal forms.
Chairman CHABOT. Okay. Ms. Pilconis?
Ms. PILCONIS. I do not have anything specific to add to
that except to share an example of where I know that EPA is
offering to pay people who respond to a survey, and that is
with the agency's efforts to expand its lead paint program and
in continuing to try to look for some sort of justification to
show that there is a need for more rules. And there is a survey
out there now. There is concern that they are not going to get
enough response and so they are offering the $50 payment. So it
is an area where we have recognized there is already overlap;
have stated many, many times that it does not warrant EPA
expanding the program. But yet now we are in a situation where
we are surveying industry and paying industry, which is costly
and taking time on the part of the government. I think it is
important to evaluate when you are offering money and spending
those resources.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. And I will yield my
time back. I took about 2-1/2 minutes.
The ranking member is welcome to take as much time as she
wants.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Sure. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Batkins, you mentioned that there is not much public
participation. Any suggestion as to how we, the federal
government, can increase public participation?
Mr. BATKINS. Sure. I have noticed this before when you look
at the dockets on RegInfo and you will see maybe one or two
comments total. I think part of it, this is just from my
perspective of someone who visits the Federal Register every
day, the second-most important website that we visit, but from
my perspective it is sort of proposed rules, final rules, which
is a relatively small sample. If you wanted to see what was
going on in the Federal Government, you could see what EPA was
doing with directives.
And then there is an entire class of notices, and usually
there are hundreds of them. And that is usually where all the
PRA requests are. And just one idea is putting maybe these
major collections, I am not sure what hourly threshold you
would want or how you would define a major collection of
information, maybe upgrading that to sort of a proposed and
final rule status. So it is with all of the other significant
regulations that come out. And also, significant revisions to
existing collections, elevating those as well might be one way
to increase public participation.
It is also my understanding that most of the comments are
generally directed when the proposed and final rule are coming
out, and after the PRA, the ink is sort of already dry on the
regulation and there tends to be less interest once the rule is
already finalized. Obviously, all the lobbying is sort of
initially and then it sort of tails off.
Any other suggestions?
Ms. PILCONIS. Well, I just wanted to add that in talking
with our members, it is confusing when the information
collection request is kind of buried in the proposed rule and
it is not really called out. I know it is supposed to be, but
it is not always called out as a paperwork request, and it is
not always identified as an issue or flagged as an area where
the government is really soliciting feedback on the time and
the burden and the cost.
So in that respect, where it is not like a true ICR, it is
often, I think, an area that kind of gets meshed into the 300-
page Federal Register notice and there is not enough attention
drawn, particularly to small businesses, which is why I was
suggesting maybe getting SBA more involved where there is a
concern with small businesses, having the agencies respond to
that, because it seems that it is kind of, in that regard,
getting lumped in.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Do you have any suggestions?
Mr. CANIA. Yes. I would say if the agencies worked with
organizations like SHRM, and put out a request through SHRM for
information, I know that whenever there is an issue that is up
for debate, and SHRM puts out a legislative notice asking
whatever your view is, please notify your member of Congress,
your Senators, the response is very healthy. And so I think
having some type of a partnership like that with the various
organizations, you could increase the participation of the
responses, probably dramatically.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Do you have any?
Ms. KATZEN. I think I have said enough today. But if I come
up with something, I will let you know.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields
back.
And the gentleman from California I think had a final
question.
Mr. KNIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I am happy to know that
there might be as many as 36 people watching.
Just a quick question. I went on to reginfo.gov. It is a
difficult site. I am happy that people go on every day and look
at that stuff.
My first question is just other websites, you know, over
the last 15 years, it seems like everything has gone to the
Internet and we do not go down to the library, even though that
was easier than trying to do your taxes on line, I can tell you
that. Is it better now? Or is it just another kind of hurdle
that we are jumping through and then we have got to fill out
the paperwork anyway or we have got to sign something anyway?
And I do that because I look on a lot of these government
sites. The VA was the first one we looked at and it was
difficult for my folks back home to get through the VA, so we
made our own VA site of local things that were happening in the
VA, and it helped out our veterans tremendously. But I know you
cannot do that all over the country. You have got to have one
main site. But is RegInfo helpful? I am not going to ask Mr.
Batkins because he is on it every day, but Mr. Cania?
Mr. CANIA. I would say it has gotten better. I have
developed relationships with members of a number of different
agencies, both Federal and State. And so when I need
information I will generally try to reach them first, but then
going onto RegInfo is helpful. I was on there actually this
morning and I noticed that they recently added a mobile app,
which, again, is helpful for folks in trying to get
information. The more we can put out there in a user-friendly
manner, the better off everyone is going to be.
Mr. KNIGHT. And I always say if you cannot get there in two
clicks, you are going to lose a lot of people. And some of
these sites, it is like five clicks in before you get to where
you need to. And by that time I have lost interest or I am
calling somebody.
Mr. CANIA. Sure. Sure. And the other way to look at it,
also, is if you have to scroll very far.
Mr. KNIGHT. That is true, too.
Mr. CANIA. You are not going to get----
Mr. KNIGHT. As politicians, if you are not above the fold
on the first page, people are not reading.
Mr. CANIA. The same goes with information on a website.
People do not want to scroll.
Mr. KNIGHT. And I have got a question just for you. Beta
testing new forms before they are proposed by an agency, would
that help reduce paperwork for small business or the burden?
Mr. CANIA. I think it could help tremendously. And again,
working with organizations like SHRM to put the form out there.
SHRM could develop teams of HR folks, again, you know, being
our expertise, to use the forms and go through, and not only
point out where some of the redundancies might be with other
forms, but also working to show areas that are more likely to
cause mistakes or issues, errors for small businesses. I think
any time you can involve the ultimate final user in a beta
process, you are going to wind up with a much better final
product.
Mr. KNIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
And we would like to thank the panel for their very
excellent testimony here really this morning. You have provided
thoughtful recommendations on improving compliance, as well as
specific suggestions on minimizing federal paperwork and red
tape. Hopefully, this information is going to be helpful to
this Committee as it continues its oversight work and considers
what should be done in attempting to meaningfully reduce
federal paperwork burdens. So thank you very much for
contributing to that.
And I would ask unanimous consent that members have 5
legislative days to submit statements and supporting materials
for the record. Without objection, so ordered.
If there is no further business to come before the
Committee, we are adjourned. Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 12:33 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Introduction

Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez, thank you for
the opportunity to provide my assessment of the Paperwork
Reduction Act's (PRA's) effectiveness in reducing the paperwork
burden on small businesses, as well as encourage all federal
agencies to ``beta'' test all new form requirements. I am Frank
Cania, founder and president of driven HR, a Pittsford, New
York-based human resource (HR) consulting firm. I have more
than 30 years of combined experience in human resource
administration, management, employment law, and teaching. In
addition, I am proud to have carried on my family's rich
history of small-business ownership dating back more than three
generations.

My human resource consulting firm, driven HR, provides a
variety of human resource-related services to small businesses,
primarily in New York state. The services we offer relevant to
this hearing include human resource risk assessments (e.g., HR
audits); United States Citizenship and Immigration Services
(USCIS) Form I-9 (I-9) preparation, reviews, and compliance;
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) compliance
and reporting; Equal Employment Opportunity EEO-1 Report
preparation; Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Form 1095-B (Health
Coverage) and Form 1095-C (Employer-Provided Health Insurance
Offer and Coverage) preparation; Family and Medical Leave Act
(FMLA) leave eligibility determination, compliance, and
tracking; Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) compliance; as
well as a number of other compliance-related activities. I
appear before you today on behalf of the Society for Human
Resource Management (SHRM), where I have been an active member
for 20 years and currently serve on SHRM's Advocacy Team and
Labor Relations Special Expertise Panel.

SHRM is the world's largest HR professional society. For
nearly seven decades, the Society has been the leading provider
of resources to, and dedicated to serving the needs of, HR
professionals, in support of our goal of continuously advancing
both the HR professional and the human resource profession.
Currently, SHRM represents 285,000 members who are affiliated
with more than 575 chapters in the United States, along with
subsidiary offices in China, India, and United Arab Emirates.

In the interest of time and mindful that there are hundreds
of forms under the PRA we can discuss, my testimony will
address the challenges associated with IRS forms 1095-B and
1095-C preparation, USCIS Form I-9 preparation, conflicting and
overlapping federal and state regulations, and the benefits of
gaining stakeholder involvement through comments to proposed
regulations, roundtables and other types of engagement.

Ambiguity Involving Tax Form 1095

The Affordable Care Act (ACA) includes both an individual
mandate and the employer mandate for health care coverage. The
employer mandate requires employers with 50 or more full-time,
and/or full-time equivalent employees, to offer health care
coverage to their full-time employees working more than 30
hours a week--as it is defined in the Act--or face a fine. To
avoid IRS finds, employers must provide their employees with
either Form 1095-B or 1095-C, depending on the number of
employees an employer has and whether employers offer self-
funded health coverage. Form 1095-B is provided by self-insured
employers with fewer than 50 employees. Form 1095-C is provided
by applicable large employers (ALEs) with 50 or more employees.

One of the challenges for ALEs in the completion of Form
1095-C is the requirement that 95 percent of full-time
employees, and full-time equivalents working an average of 130
hours or more per month, be offered qualifying health coverage.
More times than not, small businesses fail to understand that
the percentage is not arrived at through an annual average. The
requirement is for 95 percent of these employees to be covered
each month. One client did not understand that he was required
to report ``employee offer of health coverage'' on a month-to-
month basis. He also failed to properly identify and code the
months prior to an employee's date of hire and the months
following an employee's date of termination. In order to avoid
federal government penalties for incorrect forms, we worked
with the client to correct and reissue the forms.

In another example, a client who relied on its payroll
service provider to produce its 1095-C forms had converted to a
self-funded health insurance plan at the beginning of the year.
The client did not understand that it was required to include
not only employee coverage but also employee dependent coverage
on the 1095-C form. In the first year of the self-funded plan,
the employer supplied the payroll service provider with the
updated insurance rates, as well as employee enrollments and
waivers. However, the employer failed to provide the required
information regarding employee dependents. As a result, the
1095-C forms initially produced by the payroll service provider
did not contain any of the required dependent coverage
information. This mistake was only uncovered when some of the
30 affected employees questioned the employer about why their
dependents were not listed on their 1095-C forms.

Although on its face the issuance of corrected forms does
not sound burdensome, the costs add up quickly. The clients
referenced above each paid an initial set-up of $250, a service
fee of $600 annually for the secure maintenance of their
employee information, and $5 per 1095-C produced. Not including
administrative costs, an ALE with 50 employees using this
service will pay a minimum of $1,100 to produce the annual
returns for all 50 employees. While these costs may seem
insignificant to some, small employers often have small
operating margins, making $1,100 a significant expense for many
small businesses.

One point many small-business employers find especially
maddening is that, although they are required to issue 1095
forms to their employees, the employees are not required to
attach a copy of the 1095 to their individual tax return,
whether they are filing paper returns or electronically. For
example, an employee working for one company with health care
coverage for the entire year can simply check a box on his or
her income tax return indicating that he or she maintained
coverage all year. Similarly, if an employee changed jobs
during the year, but maintained coverage both under their
former and new employers without a gap, he or she can also
check a box on the income tax return indicating that he or she
maintained coverage all year. This prompts the questions of if
these forms are really necessary and what new information do
the forms provide that the employee and IRS do not already
have? It appears that the 1095 form does little more than
increase both the paperwork burden and potential liability of
small businesses, without any resulting benefit.

Challenges Associated with the USCIS Form I-9

Employers are required to properly complete and maintain a
USCIS Form I-9 for every worker they employ. SHRM represents
many of the people who complete the employment verification
process at workplaces across all industries and sizes.
Employers, including SHRM members, need the best possible tools
to verify that their employees are authorized to work in the
United States.

Employers who act in good faith to properly verify their
workforce should not be subject to unwarranted liability, yet
the current Form I-9 restricts an employer's ability to provide
commonsense guidance to employees while still acting in good
faith. The I-9 instructions clearly state, ``Employers CANNOT
specify which document(s) the employee may present to establish
employment authorization and identity.'' Based on my many years
of experience, and through discussions with several attorneys
specializing in employment and immigration matters, this
statement is broadly interpreted to mean not only that
employers CANNOT require employees to provide certain
documents, but that employers CANNOT even suggest or explain
which documents are most commonly presented. As part of their
onboarding process, however, many small employers provide new
hires with a checklist of items and documents necessary on the
first day of work. Very often, these checklists suggest that
the employee bring documents such as a passport, or a driver's
license and Social Security card or birth certificate--all
acceptable documents for completing the Form I-9. Although most
employees appreciate this information, the I-9 instructions
prohibit an employer from providing this information, and doing
so could lead to penalties for the employer. Even in instances
where an employee asks which document(s) he or she should
provide, or which are most commonly provided, the employer is
best advised to reiterate that the employee should review the
``Lists of Acceptable Documents'' and provide one document from
List A (documents that establish both identity and employment
authorization) OR one document from List B (documents that
establish identity) and one document from List C (documents
that authorize employment).

The I-9 verification process becomes exponentially more
complicated if the employee is not a citizen, national, or
lawful permanent resident of the U.S. According to the
instructions, if the employee selects the ``alien authorized to
work'' status, he or she is required to provide an alien
registration number/USCIS number OR Form I-94 admission number
OR foreign passport number and country of origin, as well as
the date his or her work authorization expires, unless it
doesn't expire. The instructions go on to explain, ``Refugees,
asylees, and certain citizens of the Federated States of
Micronesia, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, or Palau, and
other aliens whose employment authorization does not have an
expiration date should enter N/A in the Expiration Date field.
In some cases, such as if you have Temporary Protected Status,
your employment authorization may have been automatically
extended; in these cases, you should enter the expiration date
of the automatic extension in this space.'' Despite the
potential confusion this section of the I-9 creates, employers
are not allowed to verify any of the information by asking to
see the documents. The instructions inform the employee that,
``Your employer may not ask you to present the document from
which you supplied this information.''

To further complicate matters where the employee is an
alien authorized to work in the U.S., the employer is required
to track the expiration date(s) of the employee's work
authorization--both the date the employee entered in Section 1,
as well as the expiration date of the document provided by the
employee from either List A or List C of the ``List of
Acceptable Documents'' as further proof of work authorization
in Section 2. The employer is also urged to remind the employee
of the approaching expiration date and his or her need to
provide additional documentation for reverification of his or
her work authorization, at least 90 days prior to the
expiration date. However, according to the USCIS, ``The
employment authorization expiration date provided by your
employee in Section 1 may not match the document expiration
date recorded by you under List or List C in Section 2. The
earlier date should be used to determine when reverification is
necessary.''\1\ This requirement presents a dangerous trap. An
employer tracking the wrong date may be accused of failing to
complete a timely reverification, which is all but certain to
be construed as knowingly continuing the employment of an alien
who lacks authorization to work. Such a finding often leads to
costly fines that I will describe shortly.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services. (2016, February 25).
Completing section 3, reverification and rehires. Retrieved from
https://www.uscis.gov/i-9-central/complete-correct-form-i-9/completing-
section-3-reverifcation-and-hires

Small businesses with diverse geographic footprints can
also face significant difficulties when attempting to properly
complete I-9 forms and, more specifically, when attempting to
verify the authenticity of the documents provided by the
employee during the completion of Section 2. Here the
instructions clearly state, ``the employer or authorized
representative must physically examine, in the employee's
physical presence, the unexpired document(s) the employee
presents from the `Lists of Acceptable Documents' to complete
the Documents fields in Section 2.'' There is often a difficult
balance between following this requirement and risking
potential errors for companies that have multiple shifts,
multiple locations, remote employees, etc., since several
different employer representatives must be trained to examine
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
those documents.

Take for example, compliance challenges faced by one of my
clients who owns a chain of 24/7 business locations. My client
has attempted several methods to comply, including training
multiple employees at each location on how to complete Section
2 and requiring a trained manager to be present whenever a new
employee starts work. Employees trained to correctly complete
Section 2 were paid a bonus for each form submitted with no
errors. Yet most were submitted with information missing or
some other error. Requiring managers to travel to the various
locations to complete the I-9 forms in the required timeframe
took them away from other important responsibilities and
ultimately was cost-prohibitive.

Another client has a workforce primarily composed of
remote, home-based employees in several states. With no
business need to bring any of these employees to the main
office at any point, the only reasonable solution is to attempt
to identify someone located near the employee's home who is
willing to act as an authorized representative--preferably
someone with at least a basic understanding of how to properly
complete Section 2.

I have personally spent more than 25 hours over a 15-month
period contacting HR consultants, attorneys, and other
professionals in various locations on the client's behalf. Most
of the people I've contacted have refused to even entertain the
idea of serving as an authorized representative, with many
completely unaware of the ``physical presence'' requirement and
questioning why I would go to such trouble for one form.

As small businesses contend with these compliance
challenges, they need to be mindful of the detrimental impact
that honest mistakes may have on their bottom line. Although
most small-business employers make a good-faith effort to
properly complete the I-9 form, and few are unlawfully
employing undocumented immigrants, they still face potentially
catastrophic fines when paperwork errors are made. For
instance, it is easy for newly hired employees and their
employers to be confused by, or misinterpret, the information
on the Form I-9 and/or its accompanying 15 pages of
instructions, plus the 69-page M-274 guidance handbook that is
intended to, among other things, provide detailed instructions
and examples for both the common and more complex situations
and documents an employer may encounter when completing the I-9
form, verifying an individual's identity and employment
eligibility, and reverifying employment eligibility.

In my experience, the average error rate on I-9 forms by
small-business employers exceeds 75 percent. That means three
out of every four I-9 forms my company has reviewed contain at
least one error. Depending on the circumstances, and based on
the most recent fine schedule for Technical/Substantive errors,
the penalty for even a single mistake on the Form I-9 ranges
from $216 to $2,126 per form. Penalties are normally assessed
based on the percentage of I-9s with Technical/Substantive
errors, including the failure to prepare an I-9 for an
employee. For example, consider an employer presenting 100 I-9
forms for audit. With a relatively low error rate of 9 percent,
the minimum fine likely to be assessed adds up to $1,944 (9 x
$216); with an error rate of 50 percent, penalties may total
$106,300 (50 x $2,126); and an error rate of 75 percent would
result in fines of $159,450 (75 x $2,126) or more. It's also
important to note that employers making a good-faith effort to
correct errors on their I-9 forms--but failing to follow the
prescribed method for doing so--face additional fines.
Similarly, employers who don't follow the prescribed retention
schedule, ``either 3 years after the date of hire (i.e., first
day of work for pay) or 1 year after the date employment ended,
whichever is later,'' also face additional fines. It is
counter-productive that a business making a good-faith effort
to complete a two-page form should face such catastrophic
repercussions.

Small businesses that contract with the federal government,
and those in states that require the use of E-Verify, face
another level of complexity regarding the I-9. The federal
government uses E-Verify to enhance enforcement of federal
immigration law and makes its use mandatory for federal
contractors through the required Federal Acquisition Regulation
(FAR) E-Verify clause. E-Verify allows employers to
electronically verify the employment eligibility of their newly
hired employees. Small businesses sometimes mistakenly view E-
Verify as a safe harbor against worksite enforcement. The fact
is, employers using the E-Verify system have the same
requirements for properly completing, maintaining, and
retaining paper I-9 forms for all employees as do nonusers.
Employers who erroneously believe they have satisfied the I-9's
requirements once an employees eligibility to work has been
confirmed by E-Verify may face significant liability.

The current Paperwork Reduction Act estimate for completing
the Form I-9, as reported on the last page of instructions, is
35 minutes to complete the form manually or 26 minutes when
using a computer to aid in the completion of the form, despite
that using the computer lengthens the forms' instructions and
data collection fields. The 35-minute estimate is unchanged
from the previous version. The 26-minute estimate is new and
based on the use of an electronically fillable form that USCIS
provided for the first time. Nonetheless, the instructions for
both types of the I-9 form are 15 pages long (compared to the
six pages of instructions for the previous version). By more
than doubling the instructions, it is logical to conclude that
it will take both the employee and employer more than twice as
long to read and understand the instructions and complete the
form manually. Therefore, at a minimum, the estimate for
completing the I-9 form should be increased proportionately due
to any increased length of the form or its instructions.

The Burden Continues for Small Business

Although I've limited my testimony today to the IRS Forms
1095-B and 1095-C, and USCIS Form I-9, there are countless
other federal and state paperwork requirements that burden
small businesses. In my home state of New York, when most small
business employers hire a new employee, the necessary forms
necessary for completion include, but are not limited to the I-
9, the New Health Insurance Marketplace Coverage Options and
Your Health Coverage (ACA Model Notice), IRS Form W-4, Employee
Withholding Allowance Certificate (federal income tax), New
York State Department of Taxation IT-2104 Employee's
Withholding Allowance Certificate (NY income tax), and New York
State Notice and Acknowledgement of Pay Rate and Payday Under
Section 195.1 of the New York State Labor Law (LS-54, LS-55,
LS-56, LS-57, LS-58, or LS-59 depending on the type of
employee). These are in addition to the various health
insurance and other benefits applications and/or waiver forms
that must be completed at the time of hire.

Other paperwork requirements include Occupational Safety
and Health Administration (OSHA) Forms 300, 300A, and 301
regarding workplace illnesses and injuries; and Family and
Medical Leave Act (FMLA) forms WH-380E, WH-380F, WH-381, WH-
382, WH-384, WH-385, and WH-385V, and additional forms that
will be required in implementing the recently announced New
York Paid Family Leave law, which covers all New York employers
regardless of size.

From the perspective of a small business, there seem to be
a new federal or state form or paperwork requirements each
month, often with corresponding fines and penalties for
paperwork violations, even honest mistakes. While the growing
paperwork requirements of employers is difficult for virtually
all businesses to manage, the burden falls especially hard on
small businesses. Large employers often have staffs of
accountants, attorneys, and other trained professionals
dedicated to complying with government paperwork and reporting
requirements. Small businesses, on the other hand, particularly
those of 15 or less employees simply cannot afford to do that.
Thus, the burden falls on either the owner or, if they have
one, the HR manager to spend hours outside of the normal
workday to do paperwork. And when it comes to HR, that's in
addition to their normal duties of finding and hiring new
employees, administering benefits and payroll, general employee
relations and discipline, and being responsive to the needs of
their organization's management, as well as employees. These
are the people that need your help reducing the paperwork
burdens we're here to discuss today.

User Input Prior to Implementation

In today's economy, employers of all sizes utilize field,
or ``beta,'' testing for new software, technology, and products
and services before making them available to the public. This
is most often done to ensure a successful user interface. As a
small-business employer and consultant, I see the obstacles
that employers, especially small employers, face when
attempting to comply with government regulations. Federal
agencies creating the forms and processes I've discussed today,
as well as literally thousands more, often overlook the user
experience as they seek to set standards and processes for data
collection. In my experience, seeing only one side of any issue
rarely, if ever, results in the most effective or efficient
solutions. For example, when someone on my team creates a new
form and/or process for a client, he or she never does so in a
vacuum. Once we've completed our internal work, we ask the
client to test and comment on what we've developed. Without
exception, this extra step has increased our ability to better
meet the reporting and data-gathering needs of our clients.

Often the federal agency comments process is not enough--
employers need an opportunity to test the forms and data
collection tools in the real world. For this reason, the
federal government should look to partner with organizations
like SHRM to field test paperwork requirements before they are
imposed on the employer community. I'm sure I can speak on
behalf of SHRM, and many of its 285,000 members, when I say
that HR professionals have the expertise to understand not only
the time it will take to complete a certain form but also to
identify whether a new or revised form is redundant and show
where common mistakes are likely to occur. Making the effort to
field test new paperwork requirements would increase clarity
and compliance while reducing the potential for unnecessary
employer liability. Those are things SHRM and the HR community
as a whole would fully support.

Conclusion

Mr. Chairman, small-business employers often fall into the
``they don't know what they don't know'' category. There are no
required classes for small businesses on all the forms and
requirements of the federal and state governments. Many of my
driven HR clients started and continue operating today because
someone had an entrepreneurial spirit and an idea. Further,
although none are experts in, or sometimes even familiar with
the full panoply of employment laws and regulations, they have
always made a good-faith effort to be in compliance. As I sit
here today, I can think of several clients who were only one
regulatory agency audit away from significant hardship or ruin
before we started working with them. I say that not to pat
myself on the back, but to show that, for far too many small
businesses, and far too many well-intentioned and hard-working
small-business owners, government forms and data collection may
unnecessarily pose their biggest threat to continued success
and prosperity.

SHRM and its members will continue to work with the federal
government to provide outreach and educational efforts to the
employer community on these important issues. Thank you for
your time. I appreciate the opportunity to share my perspective
with you today and would be happy to answer any questions.
Testimony of Sally Katzen

Professor of Practice and Distinguished Scholar in Residence,
NYU School of Law and Senior Advisor, Podesta Group

before the House Committee on Small Business

on March 29, 2017

on ``Evaluating the Paperwork Reduction Act: Are Burdens Being
Reduced''

Good morning, Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez and
Members of the Committee. Thank you for inviting me to testify
today on ``Evaluating the Paperwork Reduction Act: Are Burdens
Being Reduced?'' As you know, I served as the Administrator of
the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) at the
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) from 1993-1998 and was
therefore very involved in the discussions that led to the 1995
Reauthorization of the Act. I also was responsible for
implementing the Act (before and after the 1995 revisions)
during my tenure as Administrator and as the Deputy Director of
Management of OMB from 2000 to January 2001.

This Committee has played an important role in protecting
and promoting the interests of America's small businesses,
which are one of the important drivers of our nation's economy.
For decades now, the small business community has listed the
burden of federal regulations, including specifically
paperwork, as one of its most pressing concerns. This concern
is deeply felt (as you are hearing again today) and
understandable, if for no other reason than small businesses
have fewer (sometimes appreciably fewer) resources and
institutional capacity than larger companies to acquire,
understand, complete and process the paperwork required by the
Federal government (as well as that required by State and local
governments).

The disparate impact of paperwork requirements on small
businesses was foremost in our minds during the 1995
reauthorization of the Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA), 44 U.S.C.
3501, et seq.; indeed, the first subject identified in the
purposes of the Act was to ``minimize the paperwork burden for
... small businesses ...''. (PRA Sec. 3501(1)). The work we did
then was later reinforced by amendments to the PRA, advanced by
this Committee, which were enacted into law as the Small
Business Paperwork Relief Act of 2002, 44 U.S.C. 3520, et seq.

It is therefore most appropriate to ask, as you do in this
hearing's title: ``Are burdens being reduced?'' Regrettably,
the answer to this straightforward question is not as simple as
it may seem and the reasons for that are more complicated than
they might initially appear.

When you look at the gross numbers, there is, in fact, a
huge paperwork burden, which as continued to increase, rather
than decrease, over the years. The amount of time (and other
resources) spent filling out forms or responding to information
collection requests (ICRs) by the federal government is now
roughly 9.8 billion hours annually. (See Office of Management
and Budget, Information Collection Budge for 2016, available at
http://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/omb/
inforeg/icb/icb
--
2016.pdf) But over 70% of the total
is attributable to one agency--the Internal Revenue Service.
That figure is a function both of the large number of people
who file a Form 1040 (or the streamlined version 1040EZ), as
they should, and also the complexity of the Internal Revenue
Code; that complexity, in turn, is a product of decisions by
the Congress--not the agency--that there should be a myriad of
deductions, allowances, exceptions, credits, etc. Taxpayers
could, I suppose, just put down the amount by which they wish
to reduce their own taxes, but some calculations,
documentation, or other basis for the claims is generally
thought to be appropriate to justify the offsets. Most
businesses that choose to take advantage of the provisions for
accelerated depreciation, oil and gas depletion allowances,
foreign tax credits, or real estate losses, to name a few
examples, would not do so unless the tax benefits they derive
from filling out those forms and supplying the required
documentation were greater (often appreciably greater) than the
cost of making such claims.

More importantly, references to total burden hours (and
their increases (or decreases were that to occur)) obscure the
fact that there are different types of ``paperwork'' with very
different effects and consequences for small businesses.
Filling out a tax return means having to pay taxes (or getting
a refund). But another type of paperwork is the so-called
``third-party disclosures,'' such as signs that say ``Hard Hat
Required'' or ``Caution: Dangerous/Toxic Substances Present,''
or labels on foods providing nutritional information or those
on medicines providing content, dosage, and counter-indicator
information. While a small business is often unable to hire the
army of accountants and lawyers retained by a larger
corporation to prepare its taxes, it is not self evident that
it should be exempt from complying with straight-forward
requirements for posting, or otherwise providing, health or
safety warnings for their employees or customers.

Another type of paperwork that should be considered on its
own merits, rather than being swept up in the gross numbers, is
paperwork designed to establish eligibility for, or compliance
with statutory provisions establishing, various benefit
programs. Consider, for example, applications for small
business loans, student loans, veterans' benefits, social
security or disability payments, farm subsidies, or permits for
designated uses of our national parks. Obviously these forms
should be as streamlined and simplified as possible, so that
the burden on the applicant (including a small business) is
reduced to a minimum. At the same time, however, there is a
legitimate interest in ensuring that the program authorized by
Congress (and using Federal funds) is run consistently with the
underlying statutory requirements. The shorthand for this is
``accountability,'' which both sides of the aisle agree is
essential for good government. Paperwork in this context serves
to help ensure that only those eligible for a loan, grant,
payment, or permit are approved and that the agencies have
sufficient information to competently evaluate whether or not
their programs are achieving their objectives.

That leads to yet another distinct category of paperwork--
namely, requests for information that enables the government to
make informed and rational decisions in the first place. Data
based decision-making is clearly preferable to conjecture or
speculation, and in many instances the requisite data are
dispersed among individuals, businesses, and/or state and local
governments. Regulatory agencies should be making decisions
based on the best scientific, technical or economic information
available; otherwise the rules they impose on regulated
entities (including small businesses) may be less efficient or
effective ways of achieving their regulatory goals. Another set
of information collections that guide Federal government
decision-making involves the various statistical agencies, such
as the Census Bureau at the Department of Commerce, the Bureau
of Labor Statistics at the Department of Labor, the Bureau of
Economic Analysis at the Department of Commerce, the Energy
Information Administration at the Department of Energy, the
Bureau of Transportation Statistics at the Department of
Transportation, and the National Agriculture Statistical
Service at the Department of Agriculture, to name some of the
more well known statistical agencies. Much of the data they
collect is not only used and useful for government decision-
making, but is also (once stripped of personal identifiers)
often disseminated to the public, where it is used by those in
the business community (including small businesses) or in the
academy in considering or analyzing such subjects as marketing
strategies or investment decisions.

One other thought that is relevant when considering
paperwork burden reduction is that, in some circumstances,
providing information may actually be less burdensome than the
alternative. This is classic First Amendment theory of the
``least restrictive alternative,'' which is, I believe, an
appropriate framework in this context as well. Consider, for
example, the warning labels on cigarette packages. It is not
better (in terms of burden and intrusiveness) to require
information than to restrict the sale or ban the product
altogether? Another example is that EPA has found that the
reporting of emissions of certain toxic chemicals has the
effect of reducing the commercial use of those products; when
the reports are released, some (not all) companies choose to
reduce their use of the covered products, either because they
want to be responsible corporate citizens or because of
pressure from neighbors affected by the releases. Whatever the
reasons, the effect has been a substantial decrease in the use
of some of these products, even though they were not subject to
traditional regulation.

I have gone into detail about some of the origins and
objectives of different types of paperwork because,
understandably, the small business community often does not
make these distinctions. The Final Report of the Small Business
Paperwork Relief Task Force, called for in the 2002 amendments
to the PRA, recognized, albeit briefly, the force and effect of
some of these distinctions. Small Bus. Admin. Final Report of
the Small Business Paperwork Relief Taskforce
(2003)(hereinafter ``SBPRTF Report''). For example, the Report
notes ``several barriers to burden reduction'':

Information Needs. ``Federal agencies have
specific statutory and programmatic responsibilities
and require information to fulfill those
responsibilities. Paperwork can only be reduced in ways
that will not negatively impact the effectiveness of
the laws and regulations for which the agency is
accountable''

Expanded Responsibilities. The need for
information increases as new Federal programs are
created, existing programs are expanded, additional
health, safety or environmental protection laws are
enacted, and the tax law becomes more complex.'' SBPRTF
Report, at 17.

This statement not only reflects an appreciation for the
various components of the total paperwork burden, but it also
explicitly recognizes the role that Congress (as a whole) plays
in adding to the burden and the limited ability of agencies (or
of the PRA) to simply cut their paperwork requirements.

That said, there are ways to try to minimize the burden of
paperwork on small businesses. The Report provides several
recommendations, some of which have been undertaken or are in
process that would be salutary. It is interesting that the Task
Force does not unequivocally endorse (though it certainly does
not dismiss) one of the ways agencies have tried over the last
decade to reduce their paperwork burden--namely, by converting
paperwork (as in pencil and paper) to electronic reporting.
This effort is consistent not only with the PRA, but is also
pursuant to the Government Paperwork Elimination Act of 1998.
44 U.S.C.A. Sec. 3504, et seq. IT is worth noting, therefore,
the portion of the SBPRTF Report that explains, in part, the
reluctance of small businesses to move into the electronic
environment, noting that

``the expenses associated with automation are often
beyond their reach. Small businesses often do not have
the training to quickly grasp new software
applications, nor the staff to assign to the task.''
SBPRTF Report, at 32.

To be sure, this finding was made in 2003, and we have all
come a long way since then; even many of my generation who did
not immediately embrace the advances in technology when they
first came on the scene are now proficient users of electronic
devices. For this reason, I believe that continued emphasis on
electronic reporting is important in trying to constrain, if
not reduce, paperwork burdens for small businesses.

Another portion of the Report worth noting is its analysis
of the potential for reducing burden through synchronizing or
consolidating reporting requirements across agencies and even
across federal, state, and local governments. Here too, the
possibilities, which I have often championed, are tempered by
other factors, including the following:

[S]ynchronizing reporting frequency ... seems to have
the least potential for burden reduction because not
all information that businesses are required to report
is submitted to the Federal government on a regular
basis ... [but rather] only at the time of an event,
such as admission of a patient to a nursing home, or a
chemical spill.

Seemingly duplicative information collections may not
be appropriate for consolidation due to the nature or
utility of the data collected. For example, definitions
across similar data collections may not be harmonized
due to differences across industries or underlying
statutes. Consolidation ... may lead to confusion
rather than simplification.

Further, for many reporting requirements, the
reporting frequency [content and timing] is mandated in
statute ... [and thus] would require legislative ...
action. SBPRTF Report, at 18.

The Report is also on point in recognizing another
potential problem with consolidating information from private
individuals or firms in a single database or even isolated
instances of sharing of information among agencies. See, e.g.,
SBPRTF Report, at 19. If this were proposed, it is almost
certain that the relief from submitting information
repetitively would be replaced by concerns about
confidentiality and/or privacy. These are highly charged issues
that we have made little progress in resolving; fears of
hacking and identity theft are even more pronounced now in some
quarters than the fear of ``Big Brother.''

One final point from the Report that I think is critically
important is the extent to which burden reduction requires
sustained funding. See, e.g., SBPRTF Report, at 26. That was
true in 2003 and is even more critical now, after many years of
straight lined or decreased funding for many of the agencies in
the Executive Branch. An agency simply cannot wish away
paperwork burden; it takes staff time and resources, both of
which are in very short supply in most agencies, which have
been told for a number of years now to do more for less. If we
are serious about doing something about the paperwork burden,
the agencies must be provided adequate resources to accomplish
the task.

Lastly, although I may be biased because of my previous
position at OIRA, I firmly believe that even if the paperwork
burden is not being reduced, we should recognize that the PRA
(and OIRA's implementation of the PRA) have been an important
tool in restraining the Federal government's appetite for data.
While there has been no empirical study of the effect of the
PRA--there being no counterfactual baseline to compare it
with--I submit that it has had a salutary effect. By its terms,
the PRA requires agencies to provide notice to the public and
an opportunity for them to comment on the ICR when it is in
draft form. (PRA, Sec. 3206(c)(2)) Those being asked for
information or those expecting to use the information can and
should suggest ways of simplifying, streamlining, or otherwise
reducing the burden of the proposed form. The agency is
required to consider the comments submitted (PRA,
Sec. 3206(d)(2)(A)), and only after the agency has either
accepted or rejected the comments (in the case of rejection,
the agency has to explain why (PRA, Sec. 3206(d)(2)(B))), is
the ICR sent to OIRA, which again provides public notice (PRA,
Sec. 3206(b)) and undertakes its own independent (and
dispassionate) review of the ICR.

I am aware of anecdotal information from my tenure at OIRA
(that has continued to this day) to the effect that some
program offices in various agencies do not propose new ICRs,
unless they are statutorily mandated, because those who favor
gathering the information believe that the process is so time
consuming and labor intensive, and the difficulty of
negotiating with OIRA is so exhausting, that it is not worth
their effort. For these reasons, I am confident that the PRA is
working to lessen the paperwork burden on all segments of the
American public--individuals, small businesses, state, and
local governmental offices, non-government organizations, etc.

I recognize that paperwork is burdensome and that the
burden poses a greater challenge to smaller firms than to large
and even mid-sized companies. There are steps that can be taken
to make a difference at the margin, but there is no magic
bullet that would dramatically change the numbers. For this
reason, I believe it is important and valuable to emphasize
burden reduction, but I would urge you to do so in a thoughtful
way that takes account of the many complications and
complexities that exits.

Thank you again for inviting me to testify, and I would be
happy to try to answer any questions you may have.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4759.026

Chairman Chabot and Ranking Member Velazquez, thank you for
the opportunity to submit written comments on behalf of the
National Automobile Dealers Association (NADA) for the hearing
record. NADA is a national trade association that represents
more than 16,000 franchised new car and commercial truck
dealerships engaged in the retail sale and lease of new and
used motor vehicles, and in automotive service, repairs and
parts sales. In 2016, America's franchised dealers collectively
employed more than 1.1 million people and sold or leased some
17.84 million new and 14.65 used light-, medium-, and heavy-
duty vehicles. NADA members operate in every congressional
district in the country, yet 40 percent sell fewer than 300 new
vehicles per year and the majority are small businesses as
defined by the Small Business Administration (SBA).

NADA welcomes the opportunity to comment on the committee's
evaluation of the Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA). The purposes
of the PRA are several, including to:

minimize the paperwork burdens for individuals, small
businesses....Federal contractors....and other persons
resulting from the collection of information by or for
the Federal Government; and

ensure the greatest possible public benefit from and
maximize the utility of information created, collected,
maintained, used, shared and disseminated by or for the
federal Government.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 44 U.S.C. Sec. Sec. 3501, et seq.

The PRA is designed to ensure that the Federal government
does not saddle small businesses with unnecessary or
inappropriate data collection or paperwork mandates. NADA
wishes to highlight for the Committee several instances where
the PRA's important constraints on government data collection
were ignored, resulting in significant paperwork burdens on
small business without little or no required benefit for the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
public.

In 2014, the Occupational Health and Safety Administration
(OSHA) announced a new injury and illness recordkeeping rule
that had the effect of imposing unnecessary and burdensome
compliance obligations on previously-exempt small
businesses.\2\ Specifically, the new rule dramatically
increased the number of industries and employers required to
keep OSHA's recordkeeping forms, despite declining injury and
illness rates across all private industry sectors and without
any evidence suggesting that expanding the recordkeeping
mandate would have a beneficial impact OSHA's laudable goal to
increase worker health and safety. In fact, OSHA's own PRA
analysis for the rule concluded that, despite the year over
year declines in workplace injuries and illnesses, the number
of establishments covered by the recordkeeping regulation would
increase by 60,210 establishments, and the total hours all
businesses would spend on this paperwork would rise from
2,967,236 per year, to 3,359,913 in the first year and
3,140,065 in subsequent years.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ 79 Fed. Reg. 56130, et seq. (September 18, 2014).
\3\ 79 Fed. Reg. 56183, et seq. (September 29, 2016).

Prior to the new rule, light-duty vehicle dealerships
enjoyed a partial exemption from OSHA's injury and illness
recordkeeping mandates due to their low (and continuously
improving) injury and illness rates. The rule had the effect of
imposing new and significant recordkeeping costs and burdens on
light-duty dealerships without any increase4d workplace health
and safety benefits. In fact, light-duty dealership injury and
illness rates have declined at the same rate since the rule
took effect as before. Since most light-duty car dealerships
are small businesses, the rule has caused them to continue to
shoulder a disproportionate share of the regulatory costs and
burdens.\4\ As the Committee knows, small businesses
consistently rank government paperwork burdens as one of their
major concerns \5\.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ See, Crain and Crain, The Impact of Regulatory Costs on Small
Firms, SBA Office of Advocacy, (2010).
\5\ NFIB, Small Business Problems and Priorities, (2008).

Last year, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC) announced a complete overhaul of its EEO-1 reporting
form, resulting in a significantly more complex and burdensome
mandate. Whereas the old EEO-1 form contained 121 data points,
the new form consists of 3,360 data points. The most
significant and burdensome change to the EEO-1 form is that it
now seeks to collect summary pay data and aggregate hours-
worked information that employers were never required to report
in the past. Since all employers with 100 or more employees are
covered by the annual EEO-1 mandate, it will impact most small
business dealerships.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Light-duty dealerships have a 200-employee SBA small business
size standard and commercial truck dealerships have an SBA standard of
250 employees.

Ironically, changes to the EEO-1 form were made through a
PRA information collection process rather than through notice
and comment rulemaking. The new EEO-1 mandate arguably violates
two key PRA goals by imposing complex and costly paperwork and
reporting burdens on small business with little or no utility
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
public benefits in return.

Mr. Chairman, America's franchised dealers commend the
Committee for holding an oversight hearing on the Paperwork
Reduction Act, a law critical to the vitality of small
businesses.

[all]
