- HIRING MORE HEROES: A REVIEW OF SBA'S OFFICE OF VETERANS BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HIRING MORE HEROES: A REVIEW OF SBA'S OFFICE OF VETERANS BUSINESS
DEVELOPMENT

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
NOVEMBER 8, 2017
__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 115-047
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

27-467                         WASHINGTON : 2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
ROD BLUM, Iowa
JAMES COMER, Kentucky
JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, Puerto Rico
DON BACON, Nebraska
BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
ROGER MARSHALL, Kansas
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
DWIGHT EVANS, Pennsylvania
STEPHANIE MURPHY, Florida
AL LAWSON, JR., Florida
YVETTE CLARK, New York
JUDY CHU, California
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
VACANT

Kevin Fitzpatrick, Majority Staff Director
Jan Oliver, Majority Deputy Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Adam Minehardt, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Steve Chabot................................................     1
Hon. Nydia Velazquez.............................................     2

WITNESS

Ms. Barbara Carson, Associate Administrator, Office of Veterans
Business Development, United States Small Business
Administration, Washington, DC.................................     3

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Ms. Barbara Carson, Associate Administrator, Office of
Veterans Business Development, United States Small Business
Administration, Washington, DC.............................    20
Questions and Answers for the Record:
Questions from Hon. Knight and Hon. Bacon to Ms. Barbara
Carson and Answers from Ms. Barbara Carson.................    27
Additional Material for the Record:
None.

HIRING MORE HEROES: A REVIEW OF SBA'S OFFICE OF VETERANS BUSINESS
DEVELOPMENT

----------

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 8, 2017

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 11:00 a.m., in Room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Steve Chabot
[chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chabot, Luetkemeyer, Brat, Kelly,
Blum, Marshall, Norman, Velazquez, Evans, Lawson, Clarke,
Adams, Espaillat, and Schneider.
Chairman CHABOT. Good morning. The Committee will come to
order.
As Veterans Day approaches this Saturday, this Committee is
reminded of the incredible contributions those who have served
have made to our country. Our Nation's veterans have made
extraordinary sacrifices, put their lives on the line, and kept
our country safe. Not only are they our fathers and mothers and
sisters and brothers and friends, they are our heroes.
Today, we will examine the Small Business Administration's
Office of Veterans Business Development and ask ourselves, what
can we do better for them? America's military men and women
defend and protect our country, and they also learn many real-
world skills needed to operate a successful business.
Leadership and discipline are instilled in every soldier from
the day they start basic training. That is why many veterans
choose to start a small business when they return home from
service.
However, veteran employment levels have historically fallen
behind those of their nonveteran counterparts. This is often
due to the difficulties veterans face when transitioning from
the military to the workforce. Research shows that veterans
face many barriers to employment that their peers do not, such
as potential employers' difficulty in understanding a military
resume or the result of a service-connected disability, for
example. We can and must do better for our veterans.
The SBA's Office of Veterans Business Development was
established to help bridge this gap. They offer training and
counseling programs, monitor Federal procurement for veteran-
owned small businesses and service-disabled veteran-owned small
businesses, and assist with access to capital.
However, as we know, there is always room for improvement,
especially when it comes to our men and women in uniform. Today
I hope that this hearing will reveal some of the ways we can
get our veterans back into the workforce.
Before we begin, I would like to take a moment to recognize
some of my fellow colleagues who have served or are still
serving in our military. Mr. Knight, Mr. Kelly, Mr. Bacon, Dr.
Marshall, thank you for your service to our country.
Unfortunately, a number of those folks are not here today, but
as always happens, we have a number of Committees going on at
the same time. We, again, want to thank them for their service.
And I would now like to yield to the ranking member, Ms.
Velazquez, for her opening statement.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
holding this important hearing regarding the SBA resources
available to veterans.
To help honor the sacrifices of our military in light of
Veterans Day, this hearing gives us the opportunity to
highlight veterans' economic contributions. Over the last
century, these brave Americans have fought in Afghanistan,
Iraq, Vietnam, Korea, and Europe, for not only our freedoms,
but for the freedoms of others. We owe them a debt we can never
fully repay. At minimum, we can help afford them the
opportunity to build a new life after their many years of
military service.
Veterans possess unique skills and experience that make
them ideally suited to entrepreneurship. Studies have shown
that it is not the military training, but the personality
traits and leadership attributes of our veterans that make them
such strong business professionals. This is evidenced by the
rate in which veterans start small businesses compared to the
wider population. For instance, the share of young veteran
business owners has grown while the rate of nonveteran owners
has dropped in recent years.
While veterans clearly have a knack for entrepreneurship,
we must ensure they have the support they need to start and
grow their businesses, whether it is help creating a business
plan, navigating the procurement process, marketing a new
product, or identifying international trade opportunities, the
SBA's veterans entrepreneurial programs provide an array of
services to help small firms flourish.
One of the most important tools we have to accomplish this
mission is the Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Business
Procurement program. In 2016, this initiative awarded more than
200,000 contracts worth over $16 billion to SDB small firms.
This amounted to twice as many contracting actions as we saw in
2015. These awards accounted for over 3.9 percent of all small
business eligible federal contracts meeting the statutory goal
of 3 percent for the fourth year in a row. These
accomplishments should be applauded.
At the same time, we should note that we can do much
better. There has been a decrease by 0.22 percent from 2015 to
veteran-owned small businesses. Given that entrepreneurship
remains a promising career path for many of these men and
women, programs like the ones we are discussing today are
critical to reducing the unemployment rate for veterans, which
remain close to 6 percent for the most recent generation who
serve in Iraq and Afghanistan. Recognizing the specialized need
of veterans, the SBA has the Office of Veterans Business
Development whose mission is to maximize the availability,
applicability, and usability of all administration small
business programs for veterans, service-disabled veterans,
reserve component members, and their dependents or survivors.
These are a range of SBA entrepreneurial development programs
targeted at our veterans, most notably the Veterans Business
Outreach Centers which serve over 600,000 clients each year.
With respect to all of these programs, it is vital that
taxpayer resources are being used wisely and to maximum effect.
That is why this Committee has long pushed for clear metrics
and accountability, especially among the newer pilot programs
at SBA. However, promoting efficiency and ending duplications
should not be an excuse to underinvest in entrepreneurial
development. I think I speak for all the members here today in
saying that we will do whatever it takes to help all veterans
overcome the challenges they face in today's economy.
I look forward to hearing how the SBA programs are helping
meet the needs of veterans and what we can do to improve them.
I thank the witness for being here today, and I yield back.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields
back.
And if Committee members have opening statements prepared,
I would ask that they be submitted for the record.
And now I will take just a moment to review our timing
rules with our one witness today, Ms. Carson. We operate under
the 5-minute rule, and there are some lights in front of you.
The yellow light will come on when you have got a minute to
wrap up and then the red light will come on and that means your
5 minutes are up. And if you could stay within that, you know,
we will give you a little bit of leverage there if you need it.
But we appreciate you being here today.
And I would now like to introduce our very distinguished
witness here this morning, Ms. Barbara Carson, who is the
associate administrator for the SBA's Office of Veterans
Business Development. She also oversees the office's staff and
their programs, including counseling, access to capital, and
Federal contracting for veteran, service-member, and military
spouse-owned small businesses. And especially significant is
Ms. Carson is a colonel in the U.S. Air Force Reserve and has
served for over 20 years as an active duty and reserve officer.
And we want to thank you not only for being here this morning,
but especially for your service to our country. We greatly
appreciate that.
And without further ado, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BARBARA CARSON, ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATOR, OFFICE OF
VETERANS BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT, UNITED STATES SMALL BUSINESS
ADMINISTRATION

Ms. CARSON. Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez, and
distinguished members of this Committee, good morning. And
thank you so much for this opportunity to testify today on the
U.S. Small Business Administration's continuing efforts to
empower veteran entrepreneurship and small business ownership
through programs and policies that optimize SBA services for
veterans, servicemembers, and their spouses, too. I am honored
to work at the SBA and to empower veterans to be the next great
generation of entrepreneurs.
As a servicemember currently in the Air Force Reserve and
the spouse of an Air Force officer for over 20 years so far, I
know the challenges and the rewards that come with military
life, and I know firsthand that entrepreneurship can be an
incredibly rewarding endeavor for people like me.
While I served on active duty and as a reservist, I have
followed my husband through multiple moves and found that it
was challenging to maintain my professional career and my own
interests. While stationed in Okinawa, Japan, a veteran friend
and I did start our own small enterprise. It was a fulfilling
experience for me that I share with other veterans and military
spouses to empower them to do what they love every day. It is
that opportunity for their success that drives my service at
SBA.
On behalf of Administrator McMahon, I am pleased by the
opportunity to represent SBA's Office of Veterans Business
Development. More than half of my team has served in uniform
and we are proud to serve veteran entrepreneur ourselves.
In addition to our program office staff, I would like to
thank and recognize the veterans who are currently working at
SBA. We are fortunate to have almost 850 veterans employed at
SBA now, and we are lucky to have these veterans in public
service. In fact, Administrator McMahon, at this very moment,
is hosting a recognition ceremony for these veterans at SBA.
Mr. Chairman, thank you and the Committee for hosting this
hearing today. The timing is perfect as we head into Veterans
Day. This is an opportunity to highlight some of the great
things that are happening at SBA thanks to your support and
also the incredible talent and dedication of my colleagues in
the field offices, as well as resource partners around the
country. These include the Veterans Business Outreach Centers
and their increased participation in transition assistance,
which is where SBA serves transitioning servicemembers and
military spouses through the Boots to Business program and
veterans of all eras through Boots to Business Reboot.
Outreach is incredibly important and we work hard to ensure
that veterans are aware of and connected to SBA resources.
These include three outreach grants focused on service-disabled
veterans, women veterans, and veterans seeking opportunities in
Federal procurement. In addition, SBA conducts robust military
community outreach. By participating at the national level and
regional as well, and by leading SBA's National Veterans Small
Business Week, we ensure that veterans know about the success
that they can achieve in small business ownership and
demonstrate how SBA can get them started.
There are 2.5 million veteran-owned small businesses in the
United States at this time, and as we honor them this Veterans
Day and thank them for their sacrifices, we at the SBA want all
veterans and military families to know about those resources
that are available to them and to help them follow their
military service with small business ownership. Each year, more
than 200,000 veterans connect with the SBA and its resources to
start or expand small businesses. Many veterans report that
owning a small business is a way to continue their mission of
serving others, first their country and then their community.
And we as a Nation continue to benefit from these
contributions that they are making. Veteran-owned small
businesses generated over $1.4 trillion in sales last year,
making them an integral part of our Nation's economy and our
identity. Research tells us that veterans do make great
entrepreneurs. Military experience equips them with leadership
and management skills they can apply to their civilian
endeavors.
I thank you again for this opportunity to be here today,
and I welcome any questions that you may have.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. And I will recognize
myself for 5 minutes to begin the questioning.
Something that we hear in this Committee a lot is the
significance, the importance of access to capital. It is one of
the greatest challenges that a lot of small businesses face,
veterans as well, and that is one of the reasons the ranking
member and I introduced the Veterans Entrepreneurship Act a
couple years back, which was signed into law by the President.
And basically what it does is to waive the upfront loan
guarantee for 7(a) loan programs, the guarantee for veterans
and military spouses under the SBA Express program. And in
addition to waiving this fee, could you discuss what your
office, the Office of Veterans Business Development does to
help entrepreneurs to find financing that they need to create
their dream, to create this business?
Ms. CARSON. You are exactly right, sir. And thank you for
the question on access to capital. That is a challenge for
veteran entrepreneurs and, unfortunately, one that is not
unique to aspiring entrepreneurs. It continues to be a problem.
Many veteran small business owners do rely on personal
credit and savings to start--and that is not a bad thing. That
is bootstrapping. But many, to be successful and sustain, need
that capital. And I am grateful for the Veteran
Entrepreneurship Act of 2015, it has been very meaningful.
Millions of dollars saved in fee relief has allowed folks to
keep more working capital in their businesses and perhaps even
hire others on their teams, rather than paying fees.
Beyond that, we have recognized through more robust
participation and transition assistance that a 7(a) loan or a
504 loan may be a little further down the road for many of
these new entrepreneurs. I have great hope for the successes we
are seeing in the Community Advantage program, and also
Microloans, for getting those smaller amounts of capital and
building that great record of credit; that will help them be
more prepared to take on growth through the 7(a) programs.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
In the past, the SBA has stated that they are working to
streamline efforts across their entrepreneurial development
programs. How has the SBA streamlined efforts? And how does
this affect veteran entrepreneurs particularly?
Ms. CARSON. There are a couple of ways that we have
streamlined. In the entrepreneurship programs, which I can
speak to directly particularly in Boots to Business, we are
making it easier for people to find us, so increased outreach,
and making it easier for them to activate by finding that once
I know about you I can connect with the programs that are
meaningful.
So we have introduced new technology in the past 2 years--
trying to better capture a veteran as soon as they know about
us, get them to a program, and then ensure that they find the
other resources across SBA to connect with and take part in
programs. That is one.
Another is recognizing our unique place in the ecosystem of
resource partners and really understanding the Veterans
Business Outreach Centers, our focus on that transitioning
servicemember and their spouse.
Chairman CHABOT. Great. Thank you very much.
And finally, many Federal agencies, namely the Departments
of Veterans Affairs, Labor, and Defense, have launched veteran
assistance programs similar to those available at the SBA. In
our view, how do SBA's programs meet a need that is currently
unmet by other Federal programs? And how does the SBA engage
with other agencies to see if duplication can be reduced? And
that is one of the, I would say, the greatest inefficiencies in
the Federal Government is duplication. What can you do about
that?
Ms. CARSON. I am confident that our interagency
collaboration between Department of Defense, Department of
Veterans Affairs, Labor, and SBA, is optimized. We have seen
incredible capabilities contributed, and we are doing more
referral among ourselves to our programs. One example is
through transition assistance. I think that veterans and
servicemembers now know that what DOL provides is unique and
different than what SBA is providing. For example, I do want
those American job centers. That is going to be the talent pool
from where small business owners can hire new employees.
At the Veteran Affairs, I am very well connected to the
vocational, rehabilitation, and employment services for those
who are eligible for self-employment. And I am ensuring that VA
knows they do not have to train people on business plans. They
are referring them to our SBA resource partners. That is the
way it should work. We have a unique place in the government
for small business and entrepreneurship and these agencies
recognize it and send them to us, and I do not foresee that we
are duplicating at this time, sir.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. My time is expired.
The ranking member is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Carson, I commend your work to extend the reach of the
VBOCs through instituting local initiatives such as VBOC on the
reservations. Given the recent natural disasters that have
taken place in Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands, do you
consider looking at that to assist veterans present in Puerto
Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands?
Ms. CARSON. The role of the Veterans Business Outreach
Center, as you said, yes, their primary mission is to serve
transition assistance programs and the members that are
eligible for that. But that local connection is valuable, as
you have said, and they have contributed to training through
both Boots to Business and Reboot in Puerto Rico.
The Veterans Business Outreach Centers this past year for
the first time have been a part of the continuity of operations
plan of the Small Business Administration, and while they will
not have a leading role in that effort, yes, they are engaged,
and they do have a significant role that they can play in
Puerto Rico.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. So going forward, will you be able to
provide us any data as to veterans in Puerto Rico, in the
Virgin Islands that have been served through these veteran
centers?
Ms. CARSON. Absolutely, I can.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Okay. So Veterans Business Outreach Centers
assist veterans in numerous areas such as business planning and
management. How often does the SBA refer veterans to these
centers? And do you have any data available for referral to
VBOCs versus the other veteran-specific programs?
Ms. CARSON. Thank you for that question. It is a valuable
one to me and one that we have put a lot of time into. Just
recently, I know it is just a form, but these are important
because it is hard to gather data without having a way to
collect appropriately, and so for the first time ever, Veterans
Business Outreach Centers are on SBA's Form 641. And we have
included where a client can say where they were referred from.
However, all of this is voluntary, so we are also expecting our
Veterans Business Outreach Centers and have made requests to
the other resource partners, that they identify referrals. And
not only the referral, but the follow-up. That is one part of
our effort through a new management system. We are using a
platform because I recognize now, with the transition
assistance population particularly, small business ownership
may not be their very next step. I need to know that I
connected with them here and I have a way to stay engaged
through their process of actually going to business creation,
getting a loan, and getting that Federal contract.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Do you have enough resources to keep up with
the veteran client demand?
Ms. CARSON. That continues to be a challenge with just the
Veterans Business Outreach Centers. There are 20 around the
United States at this time, with 50 counselors. And you see
that they served 55,000 this year. I recognize, as I have said,
that we serve a unique place in the ecosystem, particularly
with transition assistance, which is their statutory mission,
first and foremost. I want transitioning servicemembers to know
all of the resource partners. So those referrals are important,
and that is the way I stretch the value of the veterans
program.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. So do you feel that there is a need to
increase those 20 outreach centers----
Ms. CARSON. At this time----
Ms. VELAZQUEZ.--so that we could provide opportunities?
After all, we are so grateful for their service.
Ms. CARSON. At this time, there is a great opportunity to
increase our service through Veterans Business Outreach
Centers. And we have done the analysis as to where we would put
additional if we had----
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Is that reflected in the budget submission?
Ms. CARSON. I, at this time, have not submitted that in the
budget request. We have just completed our analysis for fiscal
year 2017, which was very instrumental in determining exactly
what we need.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. We discussed access to capital, access to
credit, so what are you doing in terms of increasing venture
capital opportunity for some of the businesses, veteran
business owners, who do not want to acquire debt financing, or
maybe that is not the answer for them. What are you doing in
that respect?
Ms. CARSON. Thank you for that question. Primarily, I do
rely on working with my colleagues in the Office of Innovation
and Investment to find opportunities, and I do have a member of
my team where he leads us in that portfolio in recognizing
opportunities there.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Luetkemeyer, who is the
vice chairman of this Committee, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
Ms. Carson, for your work to help our veterans be able to
assimilate back into society and be able to have an opportunity
at the American dream they have helped protect and enable the
rest of us to enjoy as well.
I want to follow up on some of the points that the chairman
made with regards to the duplication of efforts here. You know,
there is a letter from SBA dated August 2013 to the Committee.
It indicated that the SBA had created 22 programs without
statutory authority from Congress. Of the 22, three fell under
OVBD: Boots to Business, Veteran Women Igniting the Spirit of
Entrepreneurship, and the SBA Veteran Pledge Initiative. And
apparently, since 2013, SBA continues to produce more programs
that are apparently unauthorized. And while I support what they
are doing here, are you aware of the fact that you are
unauthorized to do some of this?
Ms. CARSON. Sir, thank you for your question. And I do
receive direction through statutory guidance, and it is my role
to implement it. And I have done just that. I believe of the
programs mentioned, there are several in the veterans
portfolio. I cannot speak for the rest of the agency, but I am
providing transition assistance, and also outreach programs as
indicated by statutory guidance.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Okay. When you initiate a new program,
what is the process you go through?
Ms. CARSON. I first refer to the statutory guidance, which
in this case, for Boots to Business, is the authority to
provide transition assistance and participate in that.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. What initiates the process? Is there some
thing or some incident or some group that comes to you and says
we have a void here? And do you then go to the other agencies?
I mean, the chairman indicated there are three other agencies
out there that do the same thing. And so I am not trying to be
negative about what you are doing. I am just looking at the
concern that we have here of the overlap that would seem to be
there. If you have four different agencies that provide
opportunities for enhancing the veterans' abilities to get
business up and running, and yet you have 22 different programs
here that were created by your own letter, how can you justify
continuing to put more and more and more programs on the books
when there seems to be a plethora of programs, not only in your
agency, but others as well?
Ms. CARSON. Thanks for the opportunity to respond. I will
respond with just Boots to Business because that is a clear
example.
In 2014, we did receive an appropriation that directed SBA
to fund and execute a transition assistance program. It happens
to be called Boots to Business. It is not duplicated anywhere
else in Federal Government, but you are correct in saying that
four agencies do participate in transition assistance by each
providing their unique contributions to that servicemember's
transition in one program.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Okay. The President has an initiative
right now for all agencies to review programs in each agency.
Where are you in the process of reviewing your programs?
Ms. CARSON. We are pretty far down the road. We have done a
great job of optimizing where we can, looking for places where
even within our agency we may be doing similar things that we
could better optimize by having one----
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Can you give me an example?
Ms. CARSON. Yes. We are looking at resource partners, for
example, and the Veterans Business Outreach Center is one that
I have looked at. So the differentiation I can clearly explain
now. I think, and I hope, to demonstrate that we are acting on
that differentiation.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. What kind of metrics do you use to measure
the success of a program so it can continue or needs to be
changed or needs to be eliminated?
Ms. CARSON. I feel confident that what we are measuring for
our programs are consistent across the agency both in how we
define a data field and that we value its relevance so that it
is meaningful. For the Veterans Business Outreach Centers in
particular, we are looking at their reach. So outreach is
important. The thing that I hear most frequently when I connect
with veterans and military families is that they did not even
know these resources existed for them. That is something that
is very valuable.
Business starts, of course that is a mission of our agency,
to start and sustain businesses. That is another metric that we
measure.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Okay. Well, it would seem to me that not
just starts, but the sustaining of that entity, of course, you
can never--you know, it is always roll the dice sometimes on
this. And so I understand there is going to be some successes
and some failures, but I would hope that the analysis of the
entity, the individual you are going to help and the entity
they are going to create is something that is taken into
account so that we can make sure we help people rather than
hurt them. You know, to get somebody involved in a business
that they cannot be successful in is probably more hurtful than
saying no to them. I have been in the business for 35 years of
loaning money to people and sometimes you do them a favor when
you say no.
But I appreciate all you have done to help our servicemen
and -women to be able to acclimate themselves back into our
society and be productive citizens in a different way and
enhance their ability to be able to enjoy the successes that
they have helped us with. So thank you so much, Ms. Carson.
Ms. CARSON. Thank you, sir.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentleman's time
is expired.
The gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Evans, who is the
ranking member of the Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Tax, and
Capital Access, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning. It is a pleasure to meet you.
Your Boots to Business program, I am very much interested
in really how has their move proceeded at this particular
point?
Ms. CARSON. At this particular point, is there anything in
particular, sir? Just an overview?
Mr. EVANS. Overview, yes.
Ms. CARSON. Okay. Just in this past year, for example,
17,000 servicemembers at installations around the United States
and across the globe have received this entrepreneurship
training. It is provided through our resource partners and the
local district offices and business experts. So, for example,
we want to have, as you see in my written testimony, team
teaching. The purpose of SBA's participation in transition
assistance is to introduce servicemembers and military spouses
to all of the resources available to them in this
administration, and that is exactly what we do.
Mr. EVANS. How successful in terms of a measuring stick at
this point are you able to give some kind of response about how
effective has it been?
Ms. CARSON. We have several different evaluation activities
going on at this moment. The one instrument that I have at this
point is a survey that has been approved by OMB to check in
with participants at the 1-year point. So as a survey, as you
know, there are some limitations. I only can assess those who
have responded, and at this time, about 34 percent of those who
respond to the survey have started a business. And you will see
that we use other indicators as well to see how did people feel
about their ability to take that next step once completing the
course is another assessment that we have done, which is
provided in the written testimony.
Mr. EVANS. Do you sort of target the program in certain
communities--rural, urban--any special way? Do you target it?
Ms. CARSON. Boots to Business is targeted to military
installations where there is the transition GPS program offered
at that installation. That is its purpose.
Mr. EVANS. One other thing I observed in terms of
Mississippi State University Lean for Main Street, can you talk
a little bit about that?
Ms. CARSON. Yes, there was a competition at SBA 2 years ago
to use lean startup ideology to see if we could do that for
Main Street businesses and not just the high-tech businesses.
It was a successful effort indicated by the fact that
Mississippi State University was chosen to take part in Boots
to Business follow-on training, which is meaningful.
If I may, sir, for just a moment, talk to you about follow-
on training?
Mr. EVANS. Yes.
Ms. CARSON. As was mentioned by the congressman just a
moment ago, not everybody should start a business right away.
It may not be the very next step, and we are working on how to
measure that. Saving time and treasure until you are ready to
start a venture is an important and good outcome. But for those
who are ready to take the next step, we are offering
servicemembers three opportunities. One is the Mississippi
State option. Another is a combination effort from Syracuse and
Cornell University. And the last one, that we emphasize just as
strongly, is connecting with your local resource partner. That
is for people who really think this could be my very next step.
Mr. EVANS. From an evaluation standpoint, sort of like the
same question I asked?
Ms. CARSON. Thank you, sir. We have just finished one
quarter of performance for those new grantees and we are
evaluating that. And I should have some information to provide
within 30 days as they are all new.
Mr. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the
balance of my time.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Kelly, who is the
chairman of the Subcommittee on Investigations, Oversight, and
Regulations, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. KELLY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Ms.
Carson, for being here today, and thank you for your service to
our Nation.
Thank you, Mr. Evans, for a shout out for Mississippi State
University. It is not in my district, but it is about that far
from it.
They are doing great things at Mississippi State University
with their VBOC there. They are committed to our veterans as a
university. I know the President personally is committed to
that and all the members there. I think they are doing a lot of
great things. And so I want to thank you all for having that in
Mississippi.
My first question is, of all the SBA's loan programs which
are kind of targeting veterans, which ones are most popular for
our veteran entrepreneurs?
Ms. CARSON. Popular and useful, yes, sir. Thank you,
Congressman, for the question.
We have the most participation in the 7(a) program, but
there has been almost 30 percent increase in just the last year
in veteran participation in the Community Advantage program,
which is what I would hope to see as we are starting more
businesses coming out of Boots to Business. They start at the
ideation and creation stage. Community Advantage or Microloan
is maybe a good place to start, but I am seeing good
participation in 7(a).
Mr. KELLY. And this is probably maybe a little off topic,
but I am very concerned about our veterans who are currently
serving in the Guard and Reserve. We are about to mobilize
somewhere between 3,500 and 4,200 Mississippians in the next
year or so. Many of those are small business owners. What are
we doing in the gap, and how are you counseling these veterans
when they come in to get capital? When you know in a 3- to 5-
year cycle you may be redeployed, so it is very difficult to
maintain that business. What training or what programs do you
currently know of that we have that reach out and touch when
those veterans are deployed, whether it is their wife or mother
or father or daughter or brother, whoever, that takes care of
that? What programs do we have that kind of help them through
that process?
Ms. CARSON. Again, our connection with Department of
Defense is important here, as many of those members have the
Yellow Ribbon program at the pre-deployment phase. And at the
local level, the information they should be getting at this
point is information about the Military Reservist Economic
Injury Disaster Loan. And by looking at the numbers there we
could improve, making sure that that outreach is more
comprehensive, because that really can be the difference
between a Guard or Reservist deploying and having their
business still exist when they return.
Mr. KELLY. So at places like the VBOC at Mississippi State,
if a guy is a year and a half out and he has got his business
plan in place, he is ready to start a small business, he or
she, and they are ready to open it, are they counseled as that
you may be deployed in the next year or 2 years and what impact
that has on a business? Because that is very real.
And some cannot be replaced. If you are a small private
lawyer, your spouse or mother or father cannot pick that up
unless they happen to be an attorney, also. So are you going
through that in counseling these folks about this is the
process? Because I think it is very important that they not
think about that after the fact.
Ms. CARSON. Congressman, you are exactly right. And we
could do a sustained effort in that. Yes, we counsel on
episodic basis as needed, but as you say, I do not know how
many Americans are aware of how often the Guard and Reserve are
called upon to depart and go serve overseas. And it is
something that I need to focus on and provide more consistent
and broad, so that all of us can support those people as it
comes.
Mr. KELLY. Yeah. I am not blaming you, but I think it is
something that is devastating to a small business owner to be
deployed, but we do it anyway. And so I have had friends.
I notice that the VBOC centers, the amount of budget
justification is lower in fiscal year 2015 and 2016 than in
previous years. Do you see more veterans applying for SBA loan
programs in the coming years?
Ms. CARSON. I expect to see more loans being applied for,
Congressman. And, honestly, for them to be better qualified to
get those loans. Yes, we have increased our program quality and
also the frequency of delivery.
Mr. KELLY. And I just want to thank you again for your
service. I want to thank you for serving both small business
and also in our Air Force Reserve. And I also want to give one
more shout out to Mississippi State University, which embraces
our veterans like no university that I have seen, and that is
top-driven. They are actually having Veterans Day, and I will
be at their football game and I hope we will beat Alabama this
weekend. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman yields back?
Mr. KELLY. Yes, I do.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman yields back, and we want to
again thank the gentleman for his service to our country as
well.
The gentlelady from North Carolina, Ms. Adams, who is the
ranking member of the Subcommittee on Investigations,
Oversight, and Regulations, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for calling this
meeting today, and thank you, Ms. Carson, for your testimony
and for being here, and for your service.
You know, sometimes collaboration and referrals are
required in order to provide business owners with the
assistance they truly need to grow and become successful. Are
you aware if the veteran applicants to nongovernmental training
programs hosted by universities use SBA programs like SCORE or
the Veterans Advantage Loan program in conjunction with their
training courses?
Ms. CARSON. We are working harder than ever, Congresswoman,
to make sure that we know about where we have opportunities to
introduce people wherever their program may be to the resources
available at the Small Business Administration. And yes, a bit
earlier we talked about our efforts to better track referrals
and make sure that they are meaningful referrals, that the
person is not just given a handoff to another resource. It is
the right one and the originator follows up.
Ms. ADAMS. Great. Thank you very much.
Ms. CARSON. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. ADAMS. So what differentiates private entrepreneurial
training programs from those offered by the SBA's Veterans
Business Outreach Centers?
Ms. CARSON. That is a great question, Congresswoman. And
there are many things that differentiate them. And I would say
that the government does not have a role in every aspect and
should not be providing all. I do expect our Veterans Business
Outreach Centers to be aware of the other resources, whether
they are private sector, academic, or other nonprofits, and to
make referrals and work with those organizations and programs
as required. I have an example if you would like any.
Ms. ADAMS. Okay, well, yeah, I would like you to share some
of that with me.
Ms. CARSON. Okay. One place that we have found incredible
connection is with the U.S. Chamber of Commerce Foundation's
Hiring Our Heroes program. It is accepted by the Department of
Defense as an element of the Transition Assistance Program. It
is where hiring summits take place on military installations.
They have recognized that there is a role for entrepreneurship
as self-employment is one vocation that people may choose, and
we have used that as a chance for our local district offices
and VBOCs to participate, and we are seeing great conversion
from that program, which is not government funded, to our
participation in Boots to Business and resource partners.
Ms. ADAMS. Okay, thank you.
Pilot programs are getting much of the SBA's funding even
though metrics are lacking. Considering the wide variety of
veterans programs in both the private and public sector, what
can we do to focus our efforts to grow the veteran-owned
business population?
Ms. CARSON. A few of the topics have been addressed today.
Having access to capital is important to ensure that a business
gets a strong start and has the capital they need to succeed.
So continuing to work as we have been, and I agree with you
that measuring our performance must take place before we
continue to grow programs or diversify. And that is exactly the
infrastructure work that we are doing at this time to find what
is the right way. And I believe that when others see the
opportunities provided by those who have taken our programs,
that is an indicator of our value. Others are business starts,
acquiring capital, or getting that first Federal contract. And
those are measures that we are paying attention and can
attribute to our programs.
Ms. ADAMS. Great. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I yield
back.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentlelady yields back. Thank you very
much.
And the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Norman, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. NORMAN. Thank you, Colonel Carson. Thank you for your
service to our country and for your service on the SBA.
I will just emphasize what Congressman Luetkemeyer
mentioned on regulations that do not work, calling the
attention to the different agencies within the SBA. Secondly, I
would say that I know on the bank board I serve, one useful
tool that we did every year was a survey that was given to all
the employees. It did not go to you; it went to an outside
agency that could report back problems, duplication, a myriad
of problems that were great. So I would urge you to look into
that at least.
And also, I would say saying no a lot of times is a great
thing to do because a lot of groups that come to the SBA,
either they have not had the experience or they have not had
the seasoning to go into business and borrow money.
Dodd-Frank, how has that affected lending for the SBA in
your opinion?
Ms. CARSON. I could not speak exactly to how that has
affected our lending programs. I am not aware of that impact,
but I would defer to my colleague in Office of Capital Access.
Mr. NORMAN. Okay. Secondly, I know you mentioned there were
20 outreach centers across the country. We do not have any in
South Carolina. The closest is Fayetteville, which is 210 miles
from our--well, no, 230 miles from the center part of the
State. Has any thought been given to, I guess, reevaluating
where the service centers are? And how is that based? How do
you pick where a service center either closes or does not close
and opens up?
Ms. CARSON. Thank you for your question, Congressman.
The location is important and it continues to be a
challenge, as we have discussed earlier today. At this time,
there are 20 Veterans Business Outreach Centers, and within the
next month there will be a funding opportunity on grants.gov.
We will be re-competing the entire program because every one of
their agreements ends next year, in May of 2018. The criteria
that we are evaluating as we search for new Veterans Business
Outreach Centers is going to be the military installations in
their area that are providing transition assistance, as that is
the statutory direction and first priority for Veterans
Business Outreach Centers is to serve transitioning service-
members. We are then looking at the veteran population in
total. You have highlighted one of the challenge, which that is
with the current resources we are stretching as much as we can,
but most VBOCs at this time are covering three States. We are
bridging that as best we can with technology and resource
referrals within our resource partner network.
Mr. NORMAN. Is the procedure to lease space, existing
space?
Ms. CARSON. We have a mix of academic hosts for the
Veterans Business Outreach Centers and independent nonprofits,
so if they are on an academic institution, space may be part of
their indirect support, but others are leasing space.
Did I answer your question, sir?
Mr. NORMAN. Yes, ma'am. And I would urge, a lot of places I
think, I do not know how many square feet you need, but a lot
of places would donate space just to get your agency in there
along with the feeling that to help a veteran out is a great
thing and they would do that.
Ms. CARSON. Thank you, Congressman. That is an excellent
point. And you are right, our Veterans Business Outreach
Centers are spending most of their time on military
installations and covering that geographic territory. I would
say that real estate is not something that they need a lot of.
Mr. NORMAN. Right.
Ms. CARSON. Yes, sir.
Mr. NORMAN. Brick and mortar are not needed. Well, thank
you again for your service, and thank you for what you are
doing.
Ms. CARSON. Thank you, sir.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields
back.
The gentleman from Florida, Mr. Lawson, who is the ranking
member of the Subcommittee on Health and Technology, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. LAWSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome to the
Committee.
This year I have had the opportunity to introduce H.R.
3345, the Veteran Job Opportunity Act, which provides tax
credits for veterans who open businesses in underserved areas.
I also had the opportunity to introduce a bipartisan bill with
Congressman John Rutherford, H.R. 3965, the Veterans Armed for
Success Act, which provides job training for our Nation's
veterans, and worked with Republican Congressman Mike Bost to
introduce a bill that provides resources to help veterans
become involved in agricultural industry.
Ms. Carson, I am heavily involved in the small business
veteran space, and would like your thoughts on how Congress can
better engage SBA to increase resources for veteran
entrepreneurs.
Ms. CARSON. Thank you for the opportunity to share an
answer with that, sir.
One is helping us ensure that the outreach is adequate,
that people know about all the resources that currently exist,
because they are meaningful and, in many cases, plentiful. I
appreciate also your work with the agricultural opportunities
for veterans. We are including, for example, U.S. Department of
Agriculture information now in the Boots to Business program to
ensure that there are some small business similarities in
starting farms and also being in agricultural production. So
that is another area where we intend to grow without creating
another separate program. So looking for those synergies and
hearing about where you think we have chances to do more is
extremely helpful.
Mr. LAWSON. Okay. And I am going to see if I can get in one
other question. And I guess you did a little bit of it
highlighting some of the SBA and other programs at other
agencies that work particularly with serving veteran
entrepreneurs.
Ms. CARSON. I believe, Congressman, that we are unique in
what we provide to aspiring business owners and that there is
not another service that is similar to what the SBA does across
the Federal Government. But I do know that there are some who
provide services that could help them be more successful. And
one example would be the Vocational Rehabilitation and
Employment team at the Department of Veteran Affairs who I work
closely with at both the national level and also local. It is
not duplicative, but there must be meaningful referral, and to
do that I need to know what they offer.
I would say the same in the Department of Defense. For
example, the Military Spouse Employment Partnership, they also
offer employment options for military spouses. We offer
entrepreneurship. They are very different, and we collaborate
with them to ensure that our differentiated service, military
spouses are aware of it and can participate in it, but we do
not try to do the same thing as any other.
Mr. LAWSON. And a quick question before my time runs out.
Have you been able now to see more and more veterans that are
coming in wanting to utilize the services that you provide?
Ms. CARSON. We had a significant increase. And at this
time, approximately 10 percent of the transitioning
servicemember population is taking advantage of the Boots to
Business program. And even more are following up through the
Boots to Business Reboot, which is once a veteran is a part of
their community that is how we reach them off a military
installation. Yes, it is growing in interest, and we hope to
see business success in start and sustainment.
Mr. LAWSON. And real quick, are you able to keep records of
the amount of success that some of them had in the past and how
they have helped create job opportunities in the community?
Ms. CARSON. It continues to be an area where SBA can
improve and that is what we are working on, particularly with
the Boots to Business program, is having a unique client
identifier so that I can see when did you first connect with
SBA? When did you connect with a resource partner, get that
loan, or get a Federal contract? So yes, we are at the
beginning of that process and I hope to continue improving.
Mr. LAWSON. And finally, before I yield back, what can we
do more to help you?
Ms. CARSON. I am grateful for the support we have received
so far, and continuing to work on the challenges and access to
capital would be most meaningful to our population, sir.
Mr. LAWSON. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields
back.
The gentleman from Iowa, Mr. Blum, who is the chairman of
the Subcommittee on Agriculture, Energy, and Trade, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. BLUM. Thank you, Chairman Chabot, and thank you, Ms.
Carson, for being here today, and for your service to our great
Nation.
First question I have is, do you know what the overall
labor participation force rate is for veterans?
Ms. CARSON. I do not know that, sir.
Mr. BLUM. Because I am curious as to if it is higher or
lower than the labor participation rate of the country in
general as a whole. Are you aware of that?
Ms. CARSON. The unemployment rate for veterans has been
falling dramatically. And I believe we are at least at parity
with nonveterans, if not more successful in the employment
arena at this time.
Mr. BLUM. That is good to hear----
Ms. CARSON. Absolutely.
Mr. BLUM.--that the unemployment rate has fallen amongst
veterans. But we are not sure about labor participation rate,
because if they stop looking for a job, which some of them do,
then they are not counted anymore, I do not believe.
Ms. CARSON. That is an excellent point, sir, and I do not
have that particular detail.
Mr. BLUM. Are there programs in your area or in the SBA to
increase the labor participation rate for veterans? Because I
visit a lot of veteran shelters and volunteer centers and some
of them, they have not given up hope, but they are giving up
hope. And part of it is, I think, that they are out of the
labor force. And I personally think it would be very helpful if
we had programs to get them back into the labor force. Do those
exist?
Ms. CARSON. Yes, they do, Congressman. And one role that we
play, particularly in the Boots to Business Reboot program
where, as I mentioned, we are with veterans of all eras in
their communities--if self-employment is not the right option
and their next step is really to find a job, then we would
refer them to the American Job Center through the Department of
Labor. That really has been a great collaboration and a place
where that is the right next step for them.
Mr. BLUM. I noticed in the notes, Ms. Carson, that the
veterans counseled fiscal year 2013 was around 50,000, and in
fiscal year 2016, 50,000 had dropped to 19,000 and change. Can
you comment on that, first of all?
And secondly, how do you measure success? How do you know
when you are successful? Does your Department have goals? And
if they do, what are the big goals?
Ms. CARSON. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. BLUM. That is a three-part question, I guess.
Ms. CARSON. I will do my best to not miss any part of that.
For the first question that you mentioned and the data,
yes, over the years I would say we have been able to increase
the performance expectations of Veterans Business Outreach
Centers and align them with their statutory mission, which is
transition assistance and which SBA defines as training. I
expect their counseling numbers to drop as they are not going
to have the long-term clients as they are on the road at
military installations providing transition assistance. So that
is the differentiation and why you see that number coming down,
and you do see the number of trained going up or steady and
their participation in Boots to Business increasing.
Mr. BLUM. So the counseled number coming down is not reason
for alarm?
Ms. CARSON. Not at this time because they do have a unique
role in the SBA resource partner network and I am counting on
VBOCs to make connections and know the right resource for the
veteran when they refer them to another partner.
Mr. BLUM. Second part of the question?
Ms. CARSON. Second part, if I recall, sir, was how do I
know----
Mr. BLUM. How do you measure success and goals?
Ms. CARSON. Yes. Our goals are to participate, the Veterans
Business Outreach Centers, 100 percent participation in Boots
to Business within their home State at a minimum. And at this
time, as they are stretched multiple States, to participate at
least 50 percent of the time out of their primary territory.
And yes, we do measure things such as business starts and
capital acquired, but because of the mission alignment that I
just described, that is going to be tougher for that group.
Mr. BLUM. That is great you measure that. And the results
have been?
Ms. CARSON. The results have been increased participation
in Boots to Business. So we are doing what we said we would do.
Mr. BLUM. Increase, I mean, do you have that number? Do you
have that statistic? How much has it improved?
Ms. CARSON. An increase of 12 percent just in the last 3
years, and 55,000 approximately were trained in this past year
by Veterans Business Outreach Centers.
Mr. BLUM. And the 55,000, is that an increase as well?
Ms. CARSON. I would have to look at my numbers, sir.
Mr. BLUM. Because what we measure in business we improve
on, correct? So I am glad to hear you are measuring and you
have a definition of success.
Ms. CARSON. It is also meaningful to not have just
throughputs, and I understand that, the difference between an
output and an outcome. So understanding exactly what is the
right outcome when we are working with clients who are
primarily at ideation and deciding whether they should even go
into business or not, that continues to be an area that we need
to understand better and we are working on some program
evaluation right now to decide what is the right way to measure
success in a program such as that.
Mr. BLUM. Very good.
I would just like to say, Mr. Chairman, my day has been
made with my colleague entering the hearing here with her
colorful hat. It is always good to see and it makes my day. Her
hat is beautiful today. And I yield back. It is beautiful. It
makes my day. I yield back my time, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman yields back.
And I think all members on both sides have had an
opportunity to question the witness. And we want to thank you
for your hard work, being a veteran yourself, and also in your
capacity now helping those who have worn the uniform of our
country come back here. Some are starting businesses.
Hopefully, they will be successful. And those who need
assistance, you are there to help them and we are there to help
you.
So if there is anything that you think this Committee
should be working on, we are happy to do that. We want to work
cooperatively. We look forward to continuing to improve the
programs at the SBA so that they can continue to help our
veterans who have paid the price to receive that help by
wearing the uniform, putting their lives on the line.
So to all the veterans on the Committee, all in the room,
to yourself, thank you for being here.
And all members will have 5 legislative days to submit
statements and supporting materials for the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
And if there is no further business to come before the
Committee, we are adjourned. Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 11:56 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X

Testimony of Barbara E. Carson

Associate Administrator

Office of Veterans Business Development

U.S. Small Business Administration

Before the

Small Business Committee

U.S. House of Representatives

Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez, and
distinguished Members of the Committee, good morning, and thank
you for the opportunity to testify today on the U.S. Small
Business Administration's (SBA's) continuing efforts to empower
veteran entrepreneurship and small business ownership through
programs and policies that maximize the availability of SBA
services for veterans, service members, and their spouses. I am
honored to work at the SBA and to empower veterans to be the
next great generation of entrepreneurs.

As a former small business owner, current member of Air
Force Reserve, and the spouse of an Air Force officer, I know
the challenges and excitement that come with both military life
and entrepreneurship. I know firsthand that entrepreneurship
can be an incredibly rewarding endeavor.

Many military members have the skills to start and grow
small businesses and the SBA provides resources for them to do
just that. Today we will cover some of the great things
happening at SBA, thanks to your support, and to our team of
district offices and resource partners around the country.
Those include the Veterans Business Outreach Centers (VBOCs)
and their increased participation in transition assistance, as
well as SBA's grant programs for service disabled veterans,
women veterans, and those seeking opportunities in federal
procurement. We have a number of success stories which I will
highlight where these programs have made a real difference in
helping veterans launch or grow small businesses.

The SBA is dedicated to serving aspiring and existing
veteran business owners. About 2.5 million businesses are
majority-owned by veterans, and nearly all veteran-owned
businesses are small businesses and contribute approximately
1.4 trillion dollars to the nation's total sales/receipts per
year. Many veteran business owners have gained important skills
and leadership abilities that are often directly relevant to
business ownership. The SBA promotes and supports veteran small
business ownership by administering programs, formulating
policy, and administering grants to Veteran Business Outreach
Centers and other partners. The Agency ensures resources are
accessible and available to veterans, active duty, National
Guard and Reserve service members, and veteran or military
spouses.

The SBA provides direct assistance to veterans through our
veteran business development officers stationed in 68 district
offices and indirectly through a network of 20 Veterans
Business Outreach Centers. As part of the Transition Assistance
Program (TAP), provided alongside the Departments of Labor and
Veterans Affairs, SBA serves transitioning service members
through the Boots to Business (B2B) program. SBA also provides
assistance to veterans of all eras through the B2B Reboot
program. SBA also assists veterans through three grant
programs: the Service-Disabled Veteran Entrepreneurship
Training (SDVET) program, the Women Veteran Entrepreneurship
Training (WVET) program, and the Veteran Federal Procurement
Entrepreneurship (VFPET) program. In addition, SBA conducts
outreach to connect veterans, service members, military
spouses, and members of the Reserve and Guard with
entrepreneurship resources and stakeholders, and by leading
SBA's National Veterans Small Business Week.

Veteran Business Outreach Centers

The VBOC program provides entrepreneurial development
services such as business training, counseling, and resource
partner referrals to transitioning service members, veterans,
National Guard and Reserve members, and military spouses
interested in starting or growing a small business.

Since 2014, VBOC's have taken a larger role in B2B
training, and thanks to your increased support, the number of
VBOCs grew from 15 to 20 in just three years and B2B
participation has increased by 12 percent from FY 2015 to FY
2017. Their role within the resource partner community has also
been growing, as they are a source of referrals for clients to
our other partners. SBA has instituted performance goals for
the VBOCs to better align and track participation in transition
assistance programs, the primary mission of the VBOC program.
The VBOC performance goals track B2B participation, B2B and B2B
Reboot events, and counseling interactions (including referrals
to resource partners).

In FY 2017, VBOCs extended their reach by instituting local
initiatives such as VBOC on the Reservation (Native American
Outreach), Commercial Supply Chain training, and VBOC on the
Road (Rural Communities) while also incorporating technology
platforms to provide consistent and meaningful support across
their entire coverage area. To assist with this effort, SBA
launched the VBOC 2.0 initiative. VBOC 2.0 is a one year pilot
program that will provide select VBOCs with tools to help them
better provide services across their geographic coverage areas
and track client referrals to local SBA resource partners.

Overall, in FY 2017, VBOCs provided counseling and training
to more than 54,800 veteran small business owners and
entrepreneurs. The centers are unique in their ability to
address veteran-specific challenges while integrating SBA
services and referring clients (when appropriate) to other
organizations that provide specialized and needed services.
VBOCs bring together local and regional service networks that
are most effective in creating small business ecosystems and
help augment SBA district office efforts.

One challenge for VBOCs is the ability to provide
counseling and training to veterans across assigned coverage
areas with a total of 50 VBOC advisors nationwide. While the
services that the VBOCs provide have resulted in many success
stories and contributed to local economic development through
business starts, approved loans, contracts awarded, and jobs
created or retained, the average VBOC is responsible for
service coverage in at least three states. To address this
challenge, VBOCs are leveraging the support of, and reciprocal
referrals among, other SBA resource partners, district offices,
and non-profit, academic, and private organizations that serve
veteran entrepreneurs.

Boots to Business Program

The Boots to Business (B2B) program is an entrepreneurial
training program offered by the SBA as a training track within
the Transition Assistance Program. In FY 2017, the SBA
continued to sustain and develop the B2B Program; more than
17,300 veterans, service members, and military spouses at
military installations worldwide benefited from the B2B
Introduction to Entrepreneurship course. In total, 70,000
participants have benefited from B2B since the program began in
2013.

In FY 2017, the SBA conducted a competitive funding
opportunity for the B2B program and sought proposals for
curriculum development, outcomes assessment, follow-on
training, and overseas instruction. Upon evaluating the
eligible proposals, SBA determined no award was necessary to an
outside vendor for curriculum development and outcomes
assessment as those could be conducted with existing SBA
resources, allowing us to focus on the other areas of need. The
SBA awarded funding to two nonprofit organizations to provide
follow-on training and overseas instruction:

Syracuse University's Institute for Veteran
& Military Families (IVMF) in partnership with the
Cornell University's Johnson College of Business. IVMF
provides B2B instruction to service members and
military spouses stationed overseas at 34 military
installations in nine countries. Additionally, IVMF has
partnered with Cornell University to provide B2B
follow-on entrepreneurial instruction which will
include market research and business fundamentals to be
delivered globally via Cornell University's eCornell
platform. IVMF and Cornell University work with SBA to
develop specialty business development tracks such as
franchising or federal procurement based on participant
demand and market opportunity.

Mississippi State University (MSU) delivers
B2B follow-on entrepreneurial instruction with a new
online training course, B2B Revenue Readiness. Based on
curriculum that MSU developed as part of their 2016 SBA
award for the ``Lean for Main Street'' challenge,
participants in this program will learn how to develop
a clear vision of their individual business model and a
multi-faceted business plan.

Experience has shown us that a best instruction practice is
teaching B2B modules with more than one instructor (``team
teaching''), which often results in a more dynamic learning
experience and helps foster class discussion. The B2B program
encourages this practice as a way to introduce the
transitioning service member population to the wide variety of
SBA resources and partners throughout the nation. Eligible
instructors include advisors drawn from SBA's resource partner
network. SBA is refining the B2B curriculum by leading a
collaborative effort to tap into the existing subject matter
expertise among SBA's extensive resource partner network and
instructors.

In FY 2017, we developed a learning agenda with specific
research questions which provides a framework for the B2B
program's evaluation activities. As part of this effort, the
B2B program continues to collect outcomes and course quality
assessment data. To date, survey findings indicate that B2B
graduates started over 400 business that have succeeded in
staying in business for at least a year. This results beats
national averages that indicate eight out of ten small business
fail in that same time period.\1\ Additionally, B2B survey
results indicate:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. Small Business Administration, White Paper: Operation
Boots to Business Veteran Entrepreneurship Assessment, Syracuse, N.Y.,
Jun. 2106 (https://www.sba.gov/sites/default/files/
b2b
--
vet
--
entrepreneurship
--
assessment.
pdf)

92% of respondents are motivated to start a
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
business;

87% of respondents are confident in starting
a business; and

57% of respondents participated in some form
of follow on training.

Also, in FY 2017, the B2B program began two different types
of program evaluations:

In partnership with SBA's Office of the
Chief Financial Officer (OCFO), the B2B program is
undergoing a formative evaluation that aims to use
predicative analysis to determine how program design
elements and activities affect B2B course
participation.

The US Military Academy at West Point
(specifically, the Office of Economic Manpower Analysis
or OEMA) is conducting an impact evaluation of Army
transitioning service members and veterans who have
used B2B services in order to determine the program's
impact on transition success by looking at employment,
education, and small business start-up numbers.
(Historically, the Army is the largest customer of B2B
services, compared to other service branches.) OEMA has
a number of established interagency memoranda of
understanding which can be leveraged to inform OEMA
analytical projects.

Challenges remain with data sharing between SBA resource
partners and other federal agencies and with the longitudinal
tracking required to measure outcomes in the entrepreneurship
domain. SBA continues to work with the DOD's Defense Manpower
Data Center to refine a data-sharing business case, seek a
unique identifier for individuals participating in SBA programs
or counseling, and pursue other interagency agreements or
research projects that will ensure the ability to study
longitudinal outcomes on an individual level.

Veterans Entrepreneurship Training Programs

Veterans play an important role in stimulating economic
growth in local communities. The SBA offers a variety of
entrepreneurship training programs designed to assist
transitioning service members, veterans, National Guard and
Reserve members, and military souses in developing the skills
and knowledge needed to start, grow, and succeed in business.
In addition to the broader assistance provided via the Agency's
VBOC and B2B program, in FY 2017 SBA administered three grant
programs that serve veteran entrepreneurs in specially targeted
demographic and business sectors:

Service-Disabled Veteran Entrepreneurship
Training Program (SDVETP)

Women Veteran Entrepreneurship Training
Program (WVETP)

Veteran Federal Procurement Entrepreneurship
Training Program (VFPETP)

SDVETP \2\ provides service disabled veterans, military
spouses, and caregivers with entrepreneurial training, business
development assistance, and counseling and management
assistance.

\2\ Release No. 16-72, US Small Business Administration (SBA
Provides Grants to Support Entrepreneurship Training Opportunities for
Service-Disabled Veterans (9/26/16), https://www.sba.gov/about-sba/sba-
newsroom/press-releases-media-advisories/sba-provides-grants-support-
entrepreneurship-training-opportunities-service-disabled-veterans).

WVETP \3\ provides entrepreneurship training to women
veterans and service members, as well as to women spouses of
service members and veterans, who are interested in starting,
growing and diversifying new and established small business
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
concerns.

\3\ Release No. 17-43, US Small Business Administration (SBA Awards
Funding to Nonprofit Organizations Providing ``Boots to Business''
Entrepreneurship Training (6/19/17) https://www.sba.gov/about-sba/sba-
newsroom/press-releases-media-advisories/sba-awards-funding-nonprofit-
organizations-providing-boots-business-entrepreneurship-training)

VFPETP \4\ is a vital component of the Agency's efforts to
assist veteran and service-disabled veteran small business
owners and entrepreneurs in securing federal government
contracts. The three-day certification program is designed for
veteran-owned companies to increase their ability to win
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
government contracts by establishing best business practices.

\4\ News Release 17-53, US Small Business Administration (SBA
Awards Funding Grant for National Veteran Federal Procurement
Entrepreneurship Training Program (9/6/17) https://
content.govdelivery.com/accounts/USSBA/bulletins/1b56ebb)

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
OVBD's Role in Government Contracting Oversight

Small businesses are more likely to engage in federal
contracting when barriers to entry are removed and the process
is simplified. The federal government is the largest procurer
of goods and services in the world, averaging $90 billion in
small business contracts each year between FY 2006 and 2016.\5\
SBA provides support to veteran-owned small businesses (VOSB)
and service-disabled veteran-owned small businesses (SDVOSB)
who want to participate in the federal market through
entrepreneurship training and counseling services, mentor-
protege programs, innovative research, set-aside programs, and
engagement opportunities at the local level. SBA also works
with other federal agencies to expand opportunities for small
businesses to compete for and win federal contracts.\6\ SBA's
oversight role reaches beyond merely monitoring and assisting
other agencies in achieving the government wide goal of
awarding 23 percent of all federal contracts to small
businesses, to also helping ensure that 3 percent of all
federal contracts are awarded to SDVOSBs. For the fourth
consecutive year, federal contract awards to SDVOSBs surpassed
the mandated 3 percent goal, resulting in 3.98 percent of all
government contracts being awarded to SDVOSBs for a total of
about $16.34 billion in federal procurement dollars.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Small Business Agency Scorecards 2016. U.S. Small Business
Administration, May 2017 (https://www.sba.gov/contracting/finding-
government-customers/see-agency-small-business-scorecards).
\6\ News Release 17-38, U.S. Small Business Administration (The
Federal Government Achieves Small Business Procurement Contracting Goal
for the 4th Consecutive Year, May 18, 2017, https://www.sba.gov/about-
sba/sba-newsroom/press-releases-media-advisories/federal-government-
achieves-small-business-procurement-contracting-goal-4th-consecutive-
year).

\7\ Id.

In addition to overseeing the programs detailed above,
SBA's Associate Administrator for the Office of Veterans
Business Development also advocates for full consideration of
veterans in all of the Agency's programs.\8\ In this role, SBA
ensures that SDVOSBs and VOSBs have access to a wide range of
resources to help them succeed in the federal marketplace.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ The Veterans Entrepreneurship and Small Business Development
Act of 1999, Pub. L. No. 106-50 (Aug. 17, 1999)

SBA's All Small Mentor Protege Program (ASMPP) program and
the VFPETP grant are two areas where SDVOSB participation in
experiencing notable growth. The ASMP program was established
to develop strong protege firms through mentor-provided
business development assistance, and to help proteges
successfully compete for government contracts. SDVOSBs are
taking full advantage of this program. In its first year of
operation, SDVOSBs make up the majority of protege firms in the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASMP program.

The VFPETP provides business development and technical
assistance support for SDVOSBs, both at the prime contractor
and subcontractor levels. Program graduates have reported
recent success in competing for awards on the U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs $25 billion VECTOR IDIQ contract.\9\ Of the
68 VECTOR awardees, 23 (over one-third of all awardees) are
VFPET graduates.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Federal Business Opportunities.gov https://www.fbo.gov/spg/VA/
AFMLOVASS/VASSMD/VA119A16R0349/listing.html

The SBA is committed to expanding business development
opportunities for veterans, and convenes two federal advisory
committees that provide guidance on veteran-owned small
business development policy issues. The Interagency Task Force
on Veterans Business Development and the Advisory Committee on
Veterans Business Affairs meet regularly in public forums to
address issues such as access to capital, federal procurement
opportunities, barriers to marketplace entry, and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
entrepreneurial development and growth opportunities.

In FY 2018, SBA will continue to support military community
outreach to connect veterans, service members, military spouses
and members of the Reserve and Guard with entrepreneurship
resources by participating in national and regional
entrepreneurial programs offered by stakeholders, and leading
SBA's National Veterans Small Business Week.

One area of concern is access to capital for veteran-owned
businesses. Many entrepreneurs or small business owners do not
have the same access to credit as larger businesses, especially
on a new or innovative product.\10\ Veteran entrepreneurs often
rely on personal savings or credit cards to sustain their
business.\11\ SBA offers many loan programs for underserved
populations, and assists veteran-owned small businesses by
offering fee reductions, or zero-fees, on certain SBA loan
products.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Access to capital among young firms, minority-owned firms,
women-owned firms, and high-tech firms. US Small Business
Administration Office of Advocacy, April 2013 (https://www.sba.gov/
sites/default/files/files/rs403tot(2).pdf).

\11\ Veteran-owned businesses and their owners--Data from the
Census Bureau's Survey of Business Owners. US Small Business
Administration Office of Advocacy, March 2012 (https://www.sba.gov/
sites/default/files/393tot.pdf).

Thank you for the opportunity to testify before your
committee today. I welcome any questions you may have.
Questions for the Record

Committee on Small Business

Hearing: ``Hiring More Heroes:

A Review of SBA's Office of Veterans Business Development''

November 8, 2017

Representative Knight:

1. Can you please outline the process a veteran must go
through to register their business with SBA as a veteran-owned
small business or service-disabled veteran-owned small
business. What is the average cost and time an entrepreneur
must spend to receive this qualification?

Firms do not currently register with SBA as a veteran-owned
(VO) small business or service-disabled veteran owned (SDVO)
small business. Instead, as authorized under the Federal
Acquisition Regulations, firms self-certify their VO and SDVO
status when they register in the System for Award Management
(SAM) to do business with federal government agencies. SBA
handles the protest and appeal processes for firms that use
their self-certification to qualify as SDVO for procurements of
agencies other than VA and FAA. There is no cost for self-
certification and time to self-certify is limited to the time
spent to register on SAM. Note. Currently only the VA and FAA
require VO and SDVO to be certified by the VA in order to
compete for their respective procurements.

2. Currently, the federal government has a statutory goal
of awarding 3 percent of all prime contract dollars to service-
disabled veteran-owned small businesses. This goal has either
been met or exceeded every year since FY2012. Has there been
any discussion at SBA of raising the goal?

SBA has not discussed raising the SDVO prime contract goal
while other small business program goals are still not being
attained consistently. For example, in FY 2016 the federal
government did not meet the government-wide Women-Owned Small
Business or HUBZone prime contract goals.

3. The FY2017 National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA)
directed the SBA and Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) to
harmonize their definition of and regulations surrounding a
service-disabled veteran-owned small business (SDVOSB). Has SBA
been in contact with VA regarding this? What specific actions
has SBA taken to collaborate with VA to comply with the NDAA?

SBA and VA have met several times to discuss the proposed
rule, and SBA has drafted a proposed rule with VA's assistance
and input. The proposed rule is under SBA and VA review.

a. On what date can we expect SBA and VA to reach a
consensus?

The SBA & VA have reached consensus. It is hard to predict
when a rule will be published, because it depends on many
factors. However, we are targeting completion this fiscal year.

b. How will this affect government contracting decisions
for service-disabled veteran-owned small businesses going
forward?

Once the rule is finali8zed and effective, the VA will
apply the SBA rule to its certification decisions, the SBA's
Office of Hearings and Appeals (OHA) will apply the SBA rule to
VA protests and appeals, and SBA and OHA will apply the rule to
SDVO protests or appeals with respect to non-VA procurements.

4. Do you believe the SBA Office of Hearings and Appeals is
equipped to handle appeal cases surrounding certification
decisions for SDVOSBs?

Yes. On September 28, 2017, SBA proposed new regulations
that would enable the Office of Hearings and Appeals (OHA) to
adjudicate these disputes. The proposed rules are published at
82 Fed. Reg. 45212. Several comments were received, and SBA is
in the process of reviewing those comments and preparing final
regulations. OHA also has been evaluating its staffing and
other needs to ensure that it has adequate resources to handle
these new cases.

Representative Bacon:

1. What has SBA done to try to increase the labor force
participation rate for veterans?

SBA works with the Department of Labor's (DOL) Veterans'
Employment and Training Service (VETS) to increase cross-
referral among VBOCs and the DOL-funded American Job Centers to
better serve aspiring business owners as well as current
business owners who seek to hire employees. SBA provides
entrepreneurial training to veterans of all eras who choose to
pursue self-employment as a vocation via the Boots to Business/
Reboot program.

2. Walk me through the typical first visit of a veteran to
a Veteran Business Outreach Center. How do they begin? Does SBA
follow up with them after?

Veterans and military service members will most likely meet
Veterans Business Outreach Center (VBOC) staff at a Boots to
Business (B2B) or Boots to Business/Reboot (B2B/R) program and
follow-up on site or virtually with the VBOC to pursue the next
steps. A typical first visit would start with a discussion of
the veteran's goals and current business needs and the
completion of the SBA Form 641 (client intake form). VBOC staff
is prepared to offer long-term counseling and a variety of
training courses to veterans and service members and also serve
as a trusted referral source to other SBA resource partners,
federal, state and local agencies, and organizations that
support veteran entrepreneurship.

[all]
