- FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AND SMALL BUSINESSES: PROMOTING GREATER INFORMATION SHARING FOR STRONGER CYBERSECURITY

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AND SMALL BUSINESSES: PROMOTING GREATER INFORMATION
SHARING FOR STRONGER CYBERSECURITY

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
NOVEMBER 15, 2017

__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 115-048
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

27-719                   WASHINGTON : 2018
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
ROD BLUM, Iowa
JAMES COMER, Kentucky
JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, Puerto Rico
DON BACON, Nebraska
BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
ROGER MARSHALL, Kansas
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
DWIGHT EVANS, Pennsylvania
STEPHANIE MURPHY, Florida
AL LAWSON, JR., Florida
YVETTE CLARK, New York
JUDY CHU, California
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
VACANT

Kevin Fitzpatrick, Majority Staff Director
Jan Oliver, Majority Deputy Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Adam Minehardt, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Steve Chabot................................................     1
Hon. Nydia Velazquez.............................................     2

WITNESSES

Mr. Rob Arnold, Founder & Chief Executive Officer, Threat Sketch,
LLC, Winston-Salem, NC.........................................     4
Ms. Ola Sage, Chief Executive Officer, e-Management, Silver
Spring, MD.....................................................     5
Mr. Morgan Reed, President, ACT/The App Association, Washington,
DC.............................................................     7
Mr. Thomas Gann, Chief Public Policy Officer, McAfee, LLC,
Reston, VA.....................................................     9

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Mr. Rob Arnold, Founder & Chief Executive Officer, Threat
Sketch, LLC, Winston-Salem, NC.............................    22
Ms. Ola Sage, Chief Executive Officer, e-Management, Silver
Spring, MD.................................................    30
Mr. Morgan Reed, President, ACT/The App Association,
Washington, DC.............................................    38
Mr. Thomas Gann, Chief Public Policy Officer, McAfee, LLC,
Reston, VA.................................................    46
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
None.

FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AND SMALL
BUSINESSES: PROMOTING GREATER
INFORMATION SHARING FOR STRONGER CYBERSECURITY

----------

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 15, 2017

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 11:00 a.m., in Room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Steve Chabot
[chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chabot, Brat, Radewagen, Kelly,
Blum, Marshall, Velazquez, Evans, Murphy, Lawson, Adams,
Espaillat, and Schneider.
Chairman CHABOT. The Committee will come to order.
I want to thank everyone for being here this morning.
This Committee has made cybersecurity a top priority in
recent years and with good reason. It has become one of the
most serious challenges for small businesses and major
corporations and the Federal Government itself. We have heard
from cybersecurity experts, government officials and small
business owners on numerous occasions and the message is clear,
cyber threats remain a top concern for America's small business
community.
Advances in information technology, IT, have helped small
businesses rapidly increase their productivity, enter new
markets that were once out of reach, and offer consumers new
and innovative services and products. However, IT has advanced
so quickly that it has been difficult to keep pace with the
ever-growing cyber threats. Cybercriminals and foreign bad
actors have more opportunities than ever to steal intellectual
property, consumer data, and hold small business IT systems
hostage for financial gain.
In 2016 alone, the United States Department of Justice
recorded nearly 300,000 cybersecurity complaints. Our
Committee's examinations of these increasing concerns have
revealed that federal agencies are making a serious effort to
better coordinate and distribute cybersecurity resources
directly to small businesses. However, there are still
challenges to ensuring that small businesses are as protected
as possible from cyber attacks. One of the major hurdles
continues to be the lack of information sharing between public
and private sectors. Information sharing is a fundamental
component for a strong and effective cybersecurity defense, not
just for small businesses, but for America's network as a
whole. The federal government must make every effort possible
to ensure that small businesses have both the resources and the
confidence they need to actively engage with the federal
agencies tasked with protecting our critical infrastructure.
Today, we will hear from several members of the small
business community about what steps we can take to encourage
greater information sharing. We will examine how Federal
agencies can provide assistance and resources more quickly to
small businesses suffering from a cyber attack.
Earlier this year we learned that the federal government
has become increasingly active in protecting our nation's
critical infrastructure and IT systems, and has gone to great
lengths to develop an overall framework for cybersecurity
protocols to incentivize information-sharing practices with
businesses. However, it has also become abundantly clear that
the development of this framework is not enough. Last Congress,
the President signed into law legislation aimed at increasing
information-sharing practices through the Cybersecurity of
Information Sharing Act, CISA. This legislation provided some
important liability protections to small businesses to give
them trust and confidence in their federal partners.
Yet many businesses continue to be slow to adopt these
practices. That is why this Committee has been working on
legislation to provide small businesses with greater assistance
in their cybersecurity needs. In July, my colleague
Representative Dwight Evans and I introduced H.R. 3170, the
Small Business Development Center Cyber Training Act of 2017,
perhaps the longest name for a bill in congressional history.
This bill will direct SBDCs to establish a program for
certifying some of their employees to provide cybersecurity
planning assistance to small businesses. It is my hope that
through this program we will be able to encourage even more
small businesses to start partaking in information-sharing
activities and create a comprehensive cybersecurity defense for
all Americans.
I would now like to yield to the Ranking Member for the
purpose of her making her opening statement.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The frequent recurrence of cyber attacks reminds us just
how fundamental it is for individuals, businesses, and
governments to guard against unwanted foreign interception.
From hackers orchestrating the Equifax breach to Russia's
attack on our democratic institutions, cybersecurity merits our
attention more than ever before. The truth is, online commerce
has facilitated business opportunities and growth for mom-and-
pop shops across America, but few small businesses make
investments in security solutions to protect the data they
hold. Many entrepreneurs do not even view themselves as
targets. Criminals, on the other hand, view them as
particularly attractive. The combination of customer data and
the lax implementation of cybersecurity make them much more
appealing to cybercriminals.
While it is widely known that cyber attacks often result in
personal and business losses, small firms often do not
recognize their exposure until it is too late. Given that small
firms make up over 99 percent of businesses, the small business
community plays a critical role in ensuring the nation's
internet infrastructure is secure. And preventing the harsh
financial consequences that cyber intrusions have is critical
for their survival because criminals will continuously seek to
profit by stealing data from both their government and the
private sector.
Cyber incidents are not diminishing in the near future.
That is why we all must take the appropriate steps to
strengthen cybersecurity.
For nearly two decades, the federal government has actively
created a policy framework that seeks to prevent cyber attacks
by incentivizing data sharing and collaboration between federal
and private actors. Doing so is just one step to enhance
readiness against external threats. Encouraging businesses to
share information regarding cyber intrusions could help federal
agencies design solutions before problems occur. If the private
sector and the government collaborate to identify
vulnerabilities, both small businesses and the government will
be better prepared.
Mr. Chairman, over the last year we have seen
cybercriminals prey on one of the largest credit rating
agencies. We have witnessed hackers publicly releasing tools
stolen from the National Security Agency, and most disturbing,
as we all know, our democratic institutions were remarkably
vulnerable to Russia's cyber meddling, potentially impacting
the outcome of our elections. This event make clear
cybersecurity issues will become more prominent every day in
all aspects of our society.
In that regard, I look forward to learning how we can
better maximize the flow of information between small
businesses and the federal government to help improve the
resiliency of our cyber infrastructure.
Thank you all for being here today and offering your
insights.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields
back. And if Committee members have opening statements prepared
we ask that they be submitted for the record.
And I would now like to take just a moment to explain our
lighting system and rules. You get 5 minutes basically. The
green light will be on for 4 minutes. The yellow light will
come on to let you know you have a minute to wrap up, and then
the red light will let you come on and let you know you are
supposed to stop. We will give you a little bit of leeway
there, but do not take advantage of it.
And I would now like to introduce our very distinguished
panel here this morning. Our first witness is Rob Arnold. Mr.
Arnold has worked in internet security of over 20 years and is
the Founder and Chief Executive Officer of Threat Sketch, LLC.
Threat Sketch provides risk management tools and education to
small businesses to help them prevent cyber attacks. We
appreciate you being here with us today.
Our second witness is Ms. Ola Sage. Ms. Sage is the CEO of
e-Management in Silver Spring, Maryland, where she oversees e-
Management's information technology and cybersecurity services.
In addition to her role as CEO, Ms. Sage chairs the Executive
Committee of the National IT Sector Coordinating Council and
serves on the board of the George Mason University Women in
Business Initiative. And we welcome you here as well this
morning.
Our third witness will be Mr. Morgan Reed. Mr. Reed serves
as the President of ACT/The App Association. The App
Association represents more than 5,000 app companies and
information technology firms in the mobile economy. Mr. Reed
has previously appeared before the Small Business Committee
last year, and we welcome him back here today.
And I would now like to yield to the Ranking Member for the
introduction of our fourth witness.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is my pleasure to introduce Mr. Tom Gann, the chief
public policy officer for McAfee, a computer security software
company. Mr. Gann has over 20 years of experience in the
technology industry, 12 of which have been focused on
cybersecurity issues. Mr. Gann holds a bachelor's degree from
Stanford University in political science and a master's degree
from the London Business School. Welcome and thank you for
being here today.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Arnold, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF ROB ARNOLD, FOUNDER & CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
THREAT SKETCH, LLC; OLA SAGE, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, E-
MANAGEMENT; MORGAN REED, PRESIDENT, ACT/THE APP ASSOCIATION;
THOMAS GANN, CHIEF PUBLIC POLICY OFFICER, MCAFEE, LLC

STATEMENT OF ROB ARNOLD

Mr. ARNOLD. I would like to thank the chair, ranking
member, and the entire Committee for the opportunity to testify
today. It is truly an honor.
My company, Threat Sketch, makes extensive use of shared
information to educate small businesses and guide their
investments in cybersecurity. We are a small business
ourselves, thus I truly understand the needs and challenges
around sharing cybersecurity information.
The most fundamental problem in accessing data right now is
fragmentation. The DHS, FBI, NIST, and the NSA are just a few
of the agencies collecting cyber information. Each has multiple
repositories and programs. Some are well advertised, while some
are part of work groups and not widely available. Others are
hidden by classification. Simply having a list of all the data-
sharing initiatives available would help us tremendously.
Another problem with sharing information is the overuse of
classification. There is a myriad of rules governing the
declassification of information, but declaring valuable
information as secret is almost effortless. It takes no more
than two words uttered with a grave tone to play keep away with
vital information. ``That is classified,'' and just like that,
our cyber equivalence of neighborhood crime statistics and sex
offender registries are taken away in the name of national
security. While secrets definitely have their place, we have a
right to know what is going on around us, and every data point
that gets classified degrades our ability to make good
decisions.
But there is a more pressing issue which I need to draw
your attention to, and it is the byproduct of two distinct
disadvantages that small businesses face.
First, as these larger companies armor up, attackers are
turning to less protected small businesses.
Number two, small businesses cannot afford to compete with
big companies for the cybersecurity talent and solutions they
need to protect themselves. These are circular issues with one
begetting the other. In their wake, the demand for affordable
solutions will rise dramatically, creating yet another threat.
Small businesses, desperate to meet the cybersecurity demands
of larger clients, government regulations, insurance carriers,
and lending institutions, are going to become victims once
again. Adversaries will use this opportunity to sell cheap
software and services that are subsidized by selling data and
secrets out the backdoor, while giving them a toehold into the
supply chain of larger organizations.
My written testimony offers one possible solution, which is
to deputize small businesses that commit to providing services
that are all-American in origin. In addition to tapping our
SBDCs, I believe the government has two resources that can help
in the collection and dissemination of cybersecurity
information. Our Bureau of Labor Statistics is very good at
aggregating, summarizing, and making data available in easy to
digest forms. Meanwhile, the IRS is the one agency to which
every small business owner is happy to report some losses.
In summary, small businesses need local solutions that can
tap into a national network of trusted solution providers. The
SBDCs have proven effective in helping small businesses
navigate a myriad of State, Federal, and local resources, and
with training, I think they can rise to this challenge as well.
Thank you for allowing me to testify before you today. I
look forward to answering your questions after we hear from my
fellow witnesses.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
And Ms. Sage, am I pronouncing it correctly?
Ms. SAGE. You are, Chairman. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Okay. Very good. You are recognized for 5
minutes. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF OLGA SAGE

Ms. SAGE. Good morning, Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member
Velazquez, and the distinguished members of the Committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today as a small
business CEO.
In the last 12 months, 61 percent of small businesses have
reported that their companies have experienced a cyber attack,
and a stunning 71 percent of small businesses are not prepared
to address cybersecurity threats to their organizations.
Solving this problem requires greater information-sharing
between the Federal Government and the small business community
to help our companies better identify threats, protect our
infrastructure, detect anomalies, respond to and recover from
significant cyber events.
The Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act, which I will
refer to as CISA, can help, but small businesses do not know
about it. While significant progress has been made in
implementing the law in general, several challenges still
persist for small businesses.
First, small business are still unaware of CISA or how it
helps them. The government has the opportunity to increase the
visibility of the law through its existing outreach and
awareness programs to the small business community and to
highlight the law's protections, particularly in the area of
liability protections. Small businesses are still confused by
the myriad of information-sharing initiatives. A small business
guide for cybersecurity information sharing would be a useful
tool to help companies better understand the value these
various public and private information-sharing options provide.
Third, cybersecurity information can be costly. While data
provided by the government may be free, many small businesses
do not have adequate resources to make the best use of this
data. For some, signing up with a commercial information-
sharing organization may be the best option. However, many of
the options available today cost thousands of dollars per year
putting them out of reach for many.
Let me now turn to some ideas for incentives that Congress
might consider to encourage greater information sharing and
cyber threat reporting between small businesses and the Federal
Government.
First, expand CISA to add additional protections for small
businesses. CISA does not currently shield companies from
potential liability in the event of a data breach or cyber
attack. Congress might consider providing a positive incentive
by extending liability protection up to a maximum threshold to
small businesses that exhibit a measurable commitment to
voluntary information sharing. This could be through
demonstrated use of the NIST cybersecurity framework, voluntary
participation in one or more public or private information-
sharing forums, and maintaining active cybersecurity insurance.
Second, introduce tax incentives. Congress might consider
introducing incentives that could include deductions and
credits for cybersecurity and information-sharing related
capital investments and personnel among others.
Third, include participation in a public or private
information-sharing program as a selection criteria for
government procurements. The government has and continues to
use preferential consideration in the procurement process to
promote or influence desired behavior. These include
considerations for minority groups, quality and process
improvement standards, and research priorities. The GSA Alliant
Small Business Governmentwide Acquisition Contract provides one
example for quality standards.
Four, recognize small businesses that commit to
cybersecurity information sharing. Voluntary programs, such as
Energy Star, which is a joint program of the Environmental
Protection Agency and the Department of Energy, can serve as a
blueprint to design a public recognition program for small
businesses participating in voluntary information-sharing
programs.
Lastly, simplify the entry point for cyber threat reporting
for small businesses. Most small businesses either do not know
who to call or are overwhelmed by the choices and, therefore,
will not bother reporting. Last year, the Critical
Infrastructure Partnership Advisory Council, CIPAC, formed a
working group with the DHS Office of Infrastructure Protection
to investigate how to get a national tip line started that
would serve as a single point of contact for reporting
emergency cybersecurity information. Using this example, one
could envision a scenario where a small business calls a
national emergency response number, and based on information
provided, is immediately connected to the appropriate resource
or resources.
In conclusion, CISA is still early in its life cycle, but I
believe holds tremendous promise for the small business
community as more companies become aware of the law and how it
can help them. Thank you again for the opportunity to testify
and I look forward to your questions.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Reed, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MORGAN REED

Mr. REED. Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez, and
distinguished members of the Committee, my name is Morgan Reed,
and I am the president of ACT/The App Association. I thank you
for holding this important hearing.
I represent more than 5,000 companies who make the apps you
love in the devices you depend on. We are the driving force
behind a nearly $150 billion industry and we continue to grow
and create American jobs in every congressional district. And
our members are building the tools that underpin this jump from
the desktop world to our new world of mobile plus cloud. But
for small businesses trying to create new products and sales
opportunities, cybersecurity threats seem incomprehensibly vast
and inevitable. In 2014, 71 percent of companies admitted they
fell victim to a cyber attack. Moreover, the amount of data
online is expected to increase fiftyfold by 2020, adding new
attack vectors and, frankly, sweetening the pot for potential
cybercriminals. And we have not even mentioned the new world of
IOT and self-driving everything that is right around the
corner.
At The App Association, we sit at the crossroads of this
topic. We have dozens of members who are key players in
cybersecurity, like PhishLabs, Alchemy Studios, and Citara, and
on the frontlines of anti-phishing, anti-botnet, and DDOS
attacks. But we also have members who build all the amazing
apps you use every day, that you rely on to do your banking, to
monitor your child's homework, buy a house, and communicate
with your doctor. With a foot firmly in both sides of the
industry, we know policymakers must remain mindful of the fact
that large companies have budgets and staff available. For our
members, chief security officer may be just one of five hats
that they wear.
Small- and medium-size tech companies, like our members,
exist to solve problems. Take Canned Spinach, for example. It
is a company in your district, Mr. Chabot. Canned Spinach, led
by Andrew Savitz, built a product called Speak Easy. It allows
for people inside of a company to distribute coupons and secret
deals that their family members might want. The problem he ran
into is based on phishing attacks and other cybersecurity
attacks. Users were unsure where they were getting this from,
who provided it, and so he had to essentially design the
product from the ground up to deal with the cybersecurity
threats so that people could get good deals from their friends
inside of companies. And our clicks-and-mortar businesses have
this problem as well. For Chairman Velazquez, she knows Etsy
quite well, headquartered in her district. They have
requirements for strong data security methods to handle the
consumer data on their platform.
And I should point out that Mr. Brat and Mr. Schneider, you
both have health companies in your district that deal with
thousands of patient records. For you, Mr. Kelly, there is a
company in your district that does home restorations. They go
into a house, take pictures of the damage. But think about what
they now know about that person. They know their address. They
have photos of their valuables, and it is all stored on their
cloud service. It is a great product, but what do they do about
cybersecurity?
And so when you think of it from their perspective, of
problem-solving, and then thinking about it on how do they
enter the space, you can see how government information sharing
is really not meeting the challenge that we have today.
The first thing that we do in private sector is we rely on
our private sector platform partners. We use products like
Microsoft cloud services and Azure for cloud, Apple Health Kit
for health, the latest Intel Sawtooth chip for making block
chain more practical and efficient. But that symbiotic
relationship only takes us so far. We need Congress to do some
major changes to how we do info sharing.
First, we need to improve the sharing activities. The
Federal Government should make the cybersecurity threat
information it shares timely, more accessible, and, frankly,
more useful to SMEs. When a business is hit with a cyber
attack, with whom do they share it? Do they call the attack
while the attack is occurring as opposed to after the fact? Do
they call somebody at Endkick? Do they even know what Endkick
is? Somebody at their local fusion center or their ISAC? And
where are these entities located and how do companies share the
information with them?
Second, the Federal Government should take steps to make
cybersecurity frameworks and best practices more workable for
SMEs. Helping SMEs to improve their understanding, whether it
is through Lunch and Learns at SBDCs or other activities, we
need to see developed, widely published, targeted, and user-
friendly best practices and guidance built on the NIST
framework.
And third, the Federal Government needs to ensure a legal
and policy environment that enhances SME's ability to manage
the dynamic cybersecurity risks, and this part falls squarely
on Congress. Congress must take steps to provide legal and
policy certainty that SMEs can rely on. Specifically, Congress
should pass the International Communications Privacy Act, known
as ICPA--for this year's Congress it is H.R. 3718--to clarify
SME's legal liability and data requests especially with data
abroad, and they need to maintain this legal environment to
help support our investment in cybersecurity.
And I would like to take a moment to thank Chairman Chabot
and Ranking Member Velazquez for cosponsorship of this
legislation in the last Congress, and I ask all of you to join
with them in support for it in the 115th.
Thank you very much, and I look forward to an engaging
conversation on this topic.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. That was very
interesting.
Mr. Gann, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THOMAS GANN

Mr. GANN. Good morning. Thanks for the opportunity to
testify today. I am Tom Gann, the chief public policy officer
from McAfee. McAfee is one of the largest cybersecurity
companies in the world. Indeed, we take great pride in
protecting consumers and businesses and organizations of all
sizes.
As the Committee has ably pointed out in the past, small
businesses face many of the same cybersecurity risks as large
ones. Some cyber attack methods, such as malware and those that
begin with spear phishing are particularly well suited for
small businesses who might be an easy target because of their
lack of cybersecurity resources. Small businesses store
information, implement operational requirements, and own
valuable intellectual property just as large enterprises do, so
they need to have strong cybersecurity protections.
Investing in more than just very basic cybersecurity tools
requires time, money, and other resources, like an IT staff,
that too often small businesses just do not have. We have to
acknowledge the fact that for most small businesses,
cybersecurity is an expense that they do not want to incur when
they are simply trying to make payroll and be profitable.
So what is the solution? Should small businesses
participate in DHS's cyber threat information-sharing program
that was mandated by CISA? This is a question worth exploring.
In talking with our customers, it is clear that many small
businesses are unaware of CISA. They often do not understand
how the law can help them and they are confused by the many
information-sharing initiatives that are out there. However, I
do believe that we should consider how information-sharing
efforts, such as those mandated by CISA, can benefit businesses
of all sizes.
The DHS initiative, known as the Automated Indicator
Sharing Program is open to small businesses, but many small
businesses do not have the resources or an educated IT staff to
make use of it or benefit from it. Any information-sharing
capabilities require time, money, and people that small
businesses sometimes are stretched to staff.
This does not mean that small businesses do not need or
cannot benefit from cyber threat intelligence. They certainly
can, but perhaps we would focus our discussion more on
information sharing of a different kind, information that is
informative and educational right off the bat.
According to the Better Business Bureau, when asked to
judge 10 cyber statements as to being true or false, the
average small business owner's score was around 60 percent.
This means that for many small business owners there is really
a lack of understanding of the cyber challenge at all. The
Federal Government should help develop and fund the standup of
a nonprofit, information-sharing, and analysis organization for
small businesses. Such an entity could provide education such
as basic cyber hygiene and more advanced topics, like
incorporating the NIST cybersecurity framework into members'
programs. It could share best practices, lessons learned,
templates, and processes for addressing threats and assist in
understanding problems. Additionally, this organization could
serve as a hub in the event of a breach and the first point of
contact in determining whether or not to reach out to law
enforcement. It could assist the business in addressing the
incident and communicate the situation to other members.
Further, we recommend outsourcing IT to a cloud provider
that would be responsible for security. That is a real
advantage for small businesses. The cloud provider would
benefit from an ever-growing network effect of more and more
threat data, improving the very cybersecurity capabilities and
protections they deliver to their customers' small businesses.
Both infrastructure as a service and security as a service
can be economical ways to provide efficiencies and security so
that small businesses really can benefit from an ecosystem of
information sharing that is bidirectional with the government
and the private sector.
Small business owners, however, cannot contract all of
their security obligations out, particularly in the area of
strong blocking and tackling, making sure that passwords are
updated and information is backed up on a regular basis. Small
businesses would also benefit from more cyber insurance. The
government could act as a reinsurer for the cybersecurity
market that really in many cases is in early stages. Indeed,
the idea of providing tax benefits and credits to small
businesses so they can purchase cyber insurance is a very good
idea and would help pump prime what is today still an emerging
market.
Finally, the government should devote additional resources
to fighting cybercrime. Too often it is our small businesses
that are impacted by ransomware attacks, and small businesses
need all the help they can get. Investing in additional
Federal, State, and local crime-fighting capabilities to help
take down the bad guys to protect our small businesses, well,
those are good investments that should be made.
In conclusion, I would like to thank you for inviting us to
testify. It is very kind. We take very seriously our small
business customers, and I welcome the opportunity to answer any
questions you may have.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. I would like to thank
all the witnesses for their really excellent testimony here.
And Mr. Arnold, I will begin with you. I recognize myself
for 5 minutes.
You noted that the large number of data-sharing initiatives
offered by the federal government in nongovernmental
partnerships can be pretty overwhelming for a small business.
Do you believe it would be beneficial if there was a single
portal for small businesses to engage federal agencies to begin
the information-sharing process? And if so, could you identify
any particular agency or entity that would be best suited for
that task, specifically for handling requests from small
businesses?
Mr. ARNOLD. Sure. So I do think at a base level we need
just a simple directory. What information is out there and for
each of these? What kind of information is being consumed by
that sharing initiative? What kind are they making available
and what are the membership requirements? And I think that the
SBDCs actually are well positioned for that because they
already do this with so many other government programs and
initiatives. They seem like a logical fit.
Chairman CHABOT. Okay. Thank you very much.
Ms. Sage, I will turn to you next. In your testimony, you
mentioned that one reason small businesses are reluctant to
share cybersecurity information is the perception that shared
information gets lost or goes into a black hole causing
companies to worry about the security or uses of their data.
Can you please elaborate on that concern, and do you have any
suggestions for how information-sharing portals could be more
transparent in their receipt and use of shared data?
Ms. SAGE. Thank you, Chairman, for that question.
I think that is the reality for a lot of small businesses.
It is sometimes referred to as the Black Hole. You know,
information is sent in and not exactly sure what happens to it.
And it certainly has not helped with some of the recent
compromises that have occurred where information has been
breached and released. So I think that on the other hand, there
have been efforts to really try and address that concern.
I was presenting that comment in the context of cyber
information sharing so that if there are general concerns about
information sharing, regardless of whether it is cyber or not,
my goal was to really highlight the fact that cyber just adds
another element of concern because that is even more
potentially damaging to an organization. And I think that some
of these protections that I mention in my recommendations can
help with that. If companies feel like there are protections
for them if their information is breached, and they are the
victim of this situation, they are not necessarily responsible
for also addressing it.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Reed, can you provide any example of how small business
data or shared information practices might invite unwanted
regulations for small businesses, particularly in the tech
industry? What steps can we, policymakers, take to ensure that
small businesses' personal information and IT data is protected
from regulatory action?
Mr. REED. Well, I think one of the key elements to start
with for this Committee and for Congress in general is our
catchphrase at ACT, which is nobody wants technology at the
speed of government. And so when you think about where we stand
on the regulatory framework, I think you start off on the right
foot and ask the question of if we increase the methodologies
and reporting requirements and the pathways forward for
companies and how they have to engage, then we know what will
happen. Either we will not innovate new products at all or the
products you see on the shelf will be incredibly limited, or
worse, really expensive.
And really quickly, to go to an example that Ms. Sage hit,
we took a staff down to South Carolina and we met with a
company, PhishLabs. And PhishLabs is one of the leading anti-
spear phishing companies out there. And I worry about this talk
about regulatory bodies and new agencies. The CEO of PhishLabs,
in this room full of staff, including DHS, said, by the way,
guys, I want to show you something. Clicked over to US-CERT. So
the Anti-Phishing Working Group has this email where you send
data if you have a phishing attack. I am a leading phishing
expert. I have no idea how to get that data. I have spent
months in contact with DHS. They will not provide it. I do not
know what is going on, and yet here is this government agency
collecting data on phishing. And to Mr. Arnold's point, how is
that not something that gets in?
So to your question, Mr. Chabot, I think we see that there
is often a gap between the regulatory intention of Congress and
how it gets played out. And, therefore, I would look to caution
additional regulations that could harm small business.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. And unfortunately,
Mr. Gann, I ran out of time before I got to you. I had a pretty
good question, but my time is expired.
And I will now recognize the gentleman from Illinois, the
Ranking Member of Subcommittee on Agriculture, Energy, and
Trade, Mr. Schneider.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Thank you, Chairman Chabot. And again, thank
you to the witnesses for joining us today and sharing your
insights.
Cybersecurity for a small business, it is not a one-time
transaction. It is not a decision you make at a point. It is
not an action you take just once like rent or buy. It is not an
investment you make one time. It is a business constant, no
different than sales, marketing, or finance. And to be
effective, I think it has to start with, as you guys have
touched on, it starts with design. It includes implementation.
It requires ongoing vigilance. And then if something happens
you have event management and ultimately recovery and a
response and recovery. For a small business, just the thought
of that can be overwhelming. A small business, oftentimes the
founder is going to be the chief marketing officer, the chief
finance officer, and the chief bottle washer. That is the
problem. Those small businesses are going to look to outside
resources.
So my question for the panel is, as many small businesses
look at the need for cybersecurity understand it, but that the
investment and ongoing maintenance of that is somewhat
overwhelming, what resources are available for them? What role,
Mr. Gann, does insurance play? I know it has changed since the
last time we were here. And how do we make sure that we go from
not just information sharing, which is important, to helping
these businesses have solutions?
Mr. GANN. Well, a couple big recommendations I think can
make a difference. The first one is for most small businesses,
their priority first and foremost is to make payroll, grow the
business, and hopefully become an even larger, more successful
business over time. Toward that end, we recommend outsourcing
to IT data centers, cloud providers. By doing that it can be
cheaper, better, faster. Those large institutions can help with
security.
That said, small business owners are still responsible for
their endpoints. And so getting basic education in place,
putting in place basic blocking and tackling of passwords,
really important. Those things can add a lot of value rapidly.
The last point I would make--I did not include it in my
testimony, but it is vitally important for all IT organizations
that are developing new products to bake security and privacy
into their products in the first instance. By doing that first
off it can reduce the burden on all businesses and really bring
forward the benefits of a much easier look and feel to
technology that is secure such that small businesses and all
businesses can focus on what they really need to do, and that
is growing their businesses and satisfying the needs of their
customers.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Mr. Reed?
Mr. REED. I think one of the key elements that we learned
is that we have to divide it between small businesses that are
involved in solving cybersecurity problems and small
businesses, who, as Mr. Gann pointed out, are busy moving a
different product. And I think that platforms play a critical
role, but I also think given this Committee's jurisdiction,
there is more that can be done out of SBA and SBDCs to provide
a Lunch and Learn opportunity.
The number one thing in having started some businesses
myself that you run into is that feeling of alone. I do not
know what to do. I am not sure who to turn to. And frankly, as
you point out, when these things happen you are underwater, so
you need to have a friendship circle, so to speak, a circle of
trust that you can go to. And I think SBDCs can provide some of
that because I think at a certain point the main thing a small
business needs from an incident report, and as you say, baking
it in early, is to know who to call, how to react, and how to
clean up. And so I think there is more that can be done.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Ms. Sage?
Ms. SAGE. Thank you, Mr. Schneider. I actually agree with
Mr. Reed on the point of the different categories of small
businesses because a lot of it depends on what kind of business
you are.
I would just say, I think incentives are great motivators
for small businesses. Fundamentally, what we care about is can
we get a new customer? Can we keep our existing customers? And
can we stay in business? And so whether it is cybersecurity or,
potential lawsuits or sales and marketing, anything that is not
going to help us advance one of those three objectives is
something that we are less likely to do.
And so to the extent that Congress can provide incentives
for us to want to do better in the area of cybersecurity, I
think that would help.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Mr. Arnold?
Mr. ARNOLD. I think one of the best things that the
government can do is simply be as transparent as possible with
information, allow it to come down to us, and give the small
business community an opportunity to wrought solutions for
themselves from that raw data. This a role that both myself and
Olga Sage play in this, is taking that data and making it
accessible.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Great. Thank you. My time is expired. I
yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentleman's time
has expired.
The gentlelady from American Samoa, Mrs. Radewagen, who is
Chairwoman of the Subcommittee on Health and Technology, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. RADEWAGEN. Talofa. Good morning. I want to thank you,
Mr. Chairman, for holding this important hearing today, and I
want to thank you all for testifying. All of you can answer my
two brief questions.
Do you believe the government's responsibilities and small
business owners' responsibilities in protecting businesses are
balanced?
And as a follow up, what educational outreach efforts
should the Federal Government be making to inform small
business owners about cybersecurity information-sharing
practices?
Mr. Arnold?
Mr. ARNOLD. Yes. So, I think the question of balance, it is
very hard to balance the desire to keep information secret in
the name of national security, yet also make it available to
the people that need it. And I would encourage the government
to err on the side of making it available. Unfortunately,
security by obscurity does not work and I think the best policy
the government can take is one of transparency.
And then with regard to education, I think we need to
broaden the topic of cybersecurity to include legal, insurance,
and even marketing, because there is a need to reestablish a
tarnished image after an attack.
And I will yield to the other witnesses.
Mrs. RADEWAGEN. Ms. Sage?
Ms. SAGE. Thank you, Mrs. Radewagen.
On the question of balance, I think that is something that
we are constantly trying to, for lack of a better word,
balance. I think to Mr. Arnold's point in the whole area of
classification, one of the things we see is that information
may be classified when it comes to sources and methods, but the
actual issues or concerns are not necessarily classified. The
challenges that perhaps with all of the information overload
that we all have, sometimes it is not apparent which of these
unclassified areas or topics or issues really need to be paid
the most attention to. So I think that is an opportunity for
our government partners as they are putting out this
information, even in an unclassified format, to be able to
provide some level, I do not know if it is a ranking or scoring
or some level of identification to help companies understand
while everything is bad, you know, but here are the things that
we want you to pay particular attention to.
When it comes to education awareness, I actually think that
several agencies are really doing their best to really get the
word out there. It is a big issue. It is a big topic. So
whether it is SBA or DHS with their CQ program, NIST, Federal
Trade Commission has some really good products, I think this is
going to be a whole-of-government effort. I do not necessarily
think that just one agency will be able to address all of the
educational awareness needs.
Mrs. RADEWAGEN. Mr. Reed?
Mr. REED. I want to agree with Mr. Arnold and Ms. Sage
about the issues about classification. And let me put a fine
point on it. You ask about balance. If an agent decides to
classify something, what happens to him if he is wrong?
Nothing. If a small business does not have that information,
they go out of business, and worse, their consumers and their
customers, and frankly, your constituents, are harmed. And so
when you ask the question about balance, I think that we do not
have a good balance on it because ultimately, the small
business goes away and people are harmed and the government's
impact of making the more cautionary decision is nothing. So I
think we have to remember what the impact of not sharing
equals.
On the education side, I would say that it is important to
not undervalue the platforms. Most of us are looking to build
some cool, interesting product on top of other technologies.
And whether it is a cloud provider or another security company
or anyone else in the space, look at ways that you can do
public-private partnership with platforms to push that
education to their customers. And if it is meaningful for them
in an economic sense, it will be meaningful for us as small
businesses.
Mrs. RADEWAGEN. Mr. Gann?
Mr. GANN. So on the question of balance in the area of
information sharing, the big thing that one needs to remember
is that small businesses are part of a much larger information-
sharing ecosystem, whether they are interacting with a cloud
provider, whether they are interacting with an endpoint
security provider, making sure the government is doing a very
good job of managing equities in terms of what data to release,
what data not to release in the cyber domain is absolutely
critical to the health of that entire ecosystem. We always
encourage the government to be prudent in what it classifies.
If you are at the NSA or one of those organizations, you may be
seeing 3 or 5 percent of the threats that are truly----
Mrs. RADEWAGEN. I am out of time, Mr. Gann.
Mr. GANN. Oh, sorry. That are truly driven from sources and
methods. Those need to be held back. The other types of data
that are more mundane should be shared.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mrs. RADEWAGEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentlelady's time has
expired.
The gentleman from Florida, Mr. Lawson, the Ranking Member
of the Subcommittee on Health and Technology, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. LAWSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome to the
Committee.
This discussion underscores the dilemma that small firms
have in protecting their companies' and their clients' data,
while also sharing information not only with each other, but
with the Federal Government. And I want you to know I am from
the government and I am here to help you.
Can the panel please explain what a good balance looks like
for companies to have adequate protection while also working
cooperatively with various agencies and authorities to share
data?
Mr. ARNOLD. Thank you for the question.
So how do you achieve this balance? I think that, again,
erring on the side of transparency first, one of the things I
suggested in my written testimony is that maybe we let the
frontline responders classify everything initially, but then
have some central clearinghouse like DHS that can go through
with the specific objective of declassifying everything to the
point where it gets good information out without undermining
the needs of the Nation state security.
Mr. LAWSON. Anyone else care to respond?
Ms. SAGE. Thank you, Mr. Lawson.
Actually, in my testimony I really kind of focused on the
area of liability protection and explicitly asked for your
consideration of expanding that liability protection to small
businesses in the event of a data breach or attack, because I
think part of the concern, and it kind of speaks to part of my
earlier written testimony, where I talked about some of the
concerns small businesses have with providing information,
particularly negative information to the government, that in
some way it can either be lost or misused, et cetera.
And so I think that that combination of the worry of
providing information that may someday come back to haunt you,
and God forbid you actually have an event, I think that would
help small businesses to feel more comfortable sharing.
Now, in my written testimony I do not say, well, just give
us liability protection. I do say that there has to be some
measurable commitment by these small businesses to cyber
hygiene and cyber readiness. And so I think it is a formula of
both requiring or asking or incentivizing small businesses to
share information, but also providing protections in the event
that there is a breach.
Mr. REED. I think most of everything has been covered, but
in thinking about it, I think part of it is also how do people
assemble what they view as valuable information? In your
district there is a company that is called Tech for Vets that
works with a lot of veterans' information. As you can imagine,
they do great work for the veterans community, but that also
means they have access to an enormous amount of very sensitive
data. And so when considering what that balance looks like and
how do we engage, we agree with Ms. Sage that I think liability
protection is absolutely essential, but it also, it reflects
the fact that when you have that data and it is breached, your
reaction is going to be, oh, my goodness, how do I staunch the
bleeding? How do I stop the pain? And oftentimes your first
reaction is not to tell everybody how you are in pain.
And so finding a way that removes that liability or creates
other frameworks where you can say I tried my best, I did not
make it, help me next time. And so whether it is through
incentives or liability protection, I think you have to
understand the emotional state of somebody when they are going
through an incident because I think it helps inform how you do
a better job the next time.
Mr. GANN. So the single best thing that policymakers can do
in the area of cybersecurity is continue to keep the issue very
bipartisan. If you go back 10 to 15 years and move forward from
where we have started to where we are today, an awful lot of
progress has, in fact, been made. CISA was passed. We have
stood up authorities in the civil government domain, putting
DHS in the first chair on cyber. We have increased information
sharing. We have broadly educated the population, large
business, small business to some degree on the cyber threats.
Keep that work up and continue to update laws. Continue to
update CISA. Allow more robust sharing of information beyond
simple indicators of compromise. Look at creative ways to put
in place the right incentives to increase security. Keep the
work up and I think we will make a lot more additional
progress.
Mr. LAWSON. My time is about to run out, but one other
thing after hearing the testimony from Mr. Reed, I was trying
to equate how small--and you do not have to answer because my
time has run out--how small of businesses are concerned with
cybersecurity? And that is the ones that are 45 and stuff
before we get into the level that you are talking about. Maybe
at some point in time, Mr. Chairman, he might be able to
answer.
Mr. REED. Can I give a really short answer? Companies of
one person can have records of hundreds of thousands of people.
Mr. LAWSON. Wow. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields
back.
The gentleman from Kansas, Dr. Marshall, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. MARSHALL. Good morning, everybody.
Mr. Reed spoke of fusion centers. Are the other witnesses
familiar with fusion centers as well? Okay. When I visited our
fusion center in Kansas, terrific facility, it is more of a
regional facility I would describe it, the private sector
interaction were several big utilities as I can recall, maybe a
big bank. How are small businesses accessed? Ms. Sage, are you
familiar with the small business access to the fusion centers?
Ms. SAGE. It is a challenge because, first of all, a lot of
these fusion centers are used for briefings at the classified
level, et cetera. And so if you do not have those credentials
to get in, you are not even in----
Mr. MARSHALL. Right. Getting the top secret clearance.
Ms. SAGE. Exactly.
Mr. MARSHALL. And you cannot participate with them unless
you have--you cannot say here is our problem without them
divulging stuff to you in any way.
Mr. Reed, you mentioned----
Mr. REED. Right. I think that gets to the education. And
having recently been in your wonderful district and talked to
some of your small businesses there, I think there is a huge
education gap on how those fusion centers can play a role. And
so I think that the questions we have to ask is, is there
something that can be done to give them the credentialing and
the entry point? Because as you point out right now it is
primarily critical infrastructure that understands how they fit
into this equation, but as we have talked about here, literally
hundreds of thousands of small companies have the information
that could compromise critical infrastructure if we are not
careful. So yes, we need to do a better job with getting access
to those fusion centers.
Mr. MARSHALL. My next question centers around it seems like
we are always on defense when it comes to this rather than
going on offense. It is almost like someone is trying to rob
the bank 10 times a day, 20 times a day, and it seems like we
have accepted that is okay and we do not go after those people
hard enough and we are not going on the offense with them. We
are not releasing these hunt viruses back at them and trying to
be more aggressive. Maybe I am wrong. But who is out there
doing a great job saying we are not going to take this anymore?
We are not going to sit there and just get attacked. I will sit
there and watch 20 or 30 attacks on some of my companies back
home in the matter of an hour when I am there.
Anybody have a comment about who is doing a good job on
offense? Mr. Arnold does.
Mr. ARNOLD. Well, actually, I was going to say that I do
not think the small businesses are actually equipped to do
offense at that level because they are going to invite a
counterattack by going on the offensive.
Mr. MARSHALL. So we need to empower them. Who is trying to
say here is the software to go on the offensive?
Mr. Gann?
Mr. GANN. So let me take that one on. It depends on how you
define offensive activity. We actually have to be careful with
overbroad rules that allow unqualified people to hack back
because you never quite know who the attacker is and you can
get subsidiary effects.
That said, there is a lot of innovative work being done in
the cybersecurity sector on machine learning, on analytics, on
doing a much better job of understanding threats as they are
starting to occur and starting to react early on to zero day
attacks that have not been seen before. The science is really
moving much beyond the traditional blacklisting anti-virus
model.
So that innovation is occurring in large companies and you
are seeing a lot of small players doing a lot of innovating,
and you have seen a massive increase in the amount of venture
capital money flowing through the cybersecurity sector.
Billions of dollars, in fact. And so I think the trend lines
overall are pretty good, but we still have some rough spots.
Mr. MARSHALL. I need to move on to my next question.
My opinion is most companies are afraid to report. They are
afraid if they report it shows a weakness. Their customers
might find out how vulnerable they are. How do we overcome
that?
Mr. ARNOLD. We need to help them plan ahead for the
eventuality of that happening. Small businesses do not even do
the normal tabletop exercises that larger organizations do that
generally put larger organizations in a better spot to respond
to an adverse event, even just from a marketing and PR
standpoint. So helping educate small businesses on how to do
that would be very helpful.
Mr. MARSHALL. Any other?
Mr. REED. And I think it ties back to your previous
question, which is where do you find the consultants and others
in the space that can help you build ahead? I think you work
through platforms that exist, larger platforms, but also you
look at some of the consultancies that exist out there and find
ways to do, as you said, table-topping, but remembering always
the primary goal of the business. So I think it is about
informing the IT professionals that set up that web presence or
that customer store or your database and saying to them, how
are we prepared? And I think that goes to Ms. Sage's point,
which is we have got to change the incentive structure.
Ms. SAGE. I agree with both gentlemen. And I would just
like to add, Dr. Marshall, that the cybersecurity framework
that was developed by NIST in industry I think really provides
a good model to help both large and small because it addresses
that specific area of how do we respond to and recover from
some of these cyber events?
Mr. MARSHALL. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
Those are some excellent questions, really, and the answers
were good, too. Thank you.
The gentlelady from North Carolina, Ms. Adams, who is the
Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on Investigations,
Oversight, and Regulations, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all very much
for your testimony. I have learned a lot just listening.
Let me ask Mr. Gann this question. Why should it be a
priority for the Federal Government to pay attention to the
vulnerabilities that small businesses face against cybercrimes?
Mr. GANN. Well, it is a great question. Indeed, we have
gotten so many great questions. It has been really a very fine
hearing.
Small businesses, it is worth remembering, oftentimes can
be part of the most innovative pieces of the economy. Small
businesses, whether in tech, biotech, machining, any number of
areas, are oftentimes there because their founders left big
companies because they wanted to do something new that maybe a
large organization did not allow them to innovate on. So
protecting those assets, those pieces of intellectual property
that are really the seed corn of the future of our economy,
that is absolutely essential. That is, I think, number one.
Beyond that the issue of PII that so many small businesses own
today, that is number two. But small business is absolutely a
piece of the challenge that needs to be addressed.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you.
Mr. Arnold, how can small business development centers help
with the collection and the dissemination of cybersecurity
information?
Mr. ARNOLD. Well, let's talk about first the collection
thereof. When events happen, some of them have grave economic
impact. Some of them maybe do not have horrible economic
impact, but they have some technical issues and indicators that
all need to get reported. And so the SBDC has kind of become a
triaging place so the small business can say, hey, I have had
this kind of attack. Who do I need to report this to? And they
can give a list of the agencies that are best suited to gather
that data.
And then likewise, on the back side of disseminating the
information back out, as Ms. Sage has pointed out a couple of
different times, each small business is very unique in its
needs and there are a lot of different programs out there and
there is a need for that diversity, but we also need to have a
phonebook, if you will, a directory of, okay, well, these are
the information programs that are out there. These are the
educational pieces that are out there, and the SBDCs could
connect the small businesses to those.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you. And anybody who wants to answer this
question.
Based on your experience as a small business working with
other small businesses, why is it that most small firms do not
understand the full scope of their risk to cyber threats? And
do you believe we need more outreach, more education? Anybody
can respond to that. I would appreciate it.
Mr. REED. So having been a founder of a couple of small
businesses, what makes you motivated to build a small business
is to solve a problem, whether it is to sell food on the street
corner or to build the next great social media application.
Your focus is on delivering a product and solving a problem as
you see it. And that is what burns inside of you. That is what
takes the risk. That is what gets you to borrow money from your
mom's house to put it out there. And so the problem starts with
if cybersecurity is not something that you are in the business
of, and it is not the problem you are trying to solve, you are
pouring every amount of your heart and soul into solving that
specific problem.
So I think that what we have to do is early on the
education effort has to be if you want to see your dream
realized, then you need to make sure that you are taking care
of business at the very beginning before you see your dream
dashed because you lost that information. So I think it is
about structuring the question that you asked. And I think it
is a vital question. And you need to turn it back on that small
business and ask them, I am here to help you get your dream,
but what are you doing to make sure it can live for the long
term, not just for the short?
Ms. ADAMS. Okay. Does anybody want to respond quickly to
that?
Mr. ARNOLD. I would like to add, too, that small
businesses, well, will frame cybersecurity as an IT program. It
needs to be reframed as a business problem, one that the
business owners have to address, and I think that is critical.
Ms. ADAMS. Ms. Sage?
Ms. SAGE. I just want to say amen.
Ms. ADAMS. Okay.
Ms. SAGE. I also think that to the points that have been
made earlier, if cybersecurity is not going to help us
ultimately accomplish our business goal, it will go the way of
every other issue or concern that small businesses have to deal
with, which is we do not deal with them until we have to. So to
the extent that we can help, as you rightly pointed out,
educate business owners, and to Mr. Arnold's point, that this
is not just a technology problem, educate business owners that
it is the same like if you do not have an EIN number for doing
business, you cannot do business. It does not matter what kind
of service you want to provide. There are certain things you
just have to have in place. And I think if we can get our small
business community to understand that this is one of those
kinds of things, I think we will be in a much better place.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you very much. I am out of time.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady's time
is expired.
We want to thank the panel here for your very insightful
information that you have given us here today. I think you have
answered the questions very well and cybersecurity is clearly
one of the principal, one of the greatest issues a lot of small
businesses face today. They know it is important, but they are
not quite sure exactly what to do about it. And this Committee
wants to work to help them to the extent that we can. So thank
you for helping us to help them. We appreciate it greatly.
I would ask unanimous consent that all members have 5
legislative days to submit statements and supporting materials
for the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
And if there is no further business to come before the
Committee, we are adjourned. Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 12:08, p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Fragmentation

The most fundamental problem in accessing this data right
now is fragmentation. The DHS, FBI, NIST, and the NSA, are just
a few of the agencies collecting cyber incident and
intelligence information. Each has multiple repositories and
programs. Some are well advertised, while some are part of
workgroups and not widely available. Others are hidden by
classification. Simply having a list of all the data sharing
initiatives available would help tremendously.

Such a list might start with the various information
Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISAC's) and Information Sharing
and Analysis Organization Standards Organizations (ISAO's), and
expand to include to programs like DHS's Automated Indicator
Sharing (AIS) program. The inventory would include what
information sources they consume, how they make the data
available, and the membership criteria for each. The
intermediate organizations like ISAC's and ISAO's are, in many
cases, doing a great job of making otherwise inaccessible data
available to small businesses \2\.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See Appendix: How the IT-ISAC makes AIS affordable

Small businesses are extremely resourceful. Having quality
incident reporting and cyber intelligence flowing to the small
business community lets us build solutions for ourselves.\3\
Our biggest challenge, in that regard, is collecting and
aggregating data from a wide array of sources. In truth, even
the largest multi-national companies cannot collect data on the
breadth and scale that US government agencies can provide.
Access to quality data for companies of all sizes helps level
the playing field between large and small businesses and will
spur economic development alongside novel solutions.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See Appendix: Email Interview: Douglas M. DePeppe--Cyber
Resilience Institute
\4\ See Appendix: Economic Trends And How Shared Information Helps

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Overuse of Classification

Another problem with sharing information is the overuse of
classification. There are a myriad of rules governing the
declassification of information, but declaring valuable
information a secret is almost effortless. It takes no more
than two words, uttered in a grave tone, to play keep away with
vital information. ``That's classified.'' And just like that,
our cyber equivalents of neighborhood crime statistics and sex
offender registries are taken away in the name of national
security. While secrets have their place, we have a right to
know what is going on around us, and every data point that gets
classified degrades our ability to make good decisions \4\,
\5\.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See Appendix: How Classification Impacted the Wannacry Outbreak
and Response

The other problem with classifying information is that it
creates another digital divide between the have's and the have
not's. Small companies are generally much better at raw
innovation. When we cannot get access to the raw material for
building novel solutions, our security posture will not improve
and we lose economic opportunities to create jobs around our
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
innovations.

As you contemplate the role of classification, please keep
this in mind: When this country was founded, we were colonists
living under the boot of a government that exerted control by
keeping secrets and forcing access to information it deemed
might be incriminating. Our adversaries would like nothing more
than to goad our government into keeping secrets, then unleash
those secrets to draw the ire of the citizens and undermine
trust. Remaining transparent is the only solution that works in
the long run. It is better that we let our enemies know we see
them coming and face them head on, then to have us bickering
with one another while they steal all our trade secrets \5\.

Pressure to Keep Up Poses Major New Threat

There is a more pressing issue to which I need to draw your
attention. It is a byproduct of two distinct disadvantages that
small businesses face:

1. As big companies armor up, attackers turn to less
protected small businesses.

2. Small businesses cannot afford to compete with big
companies for the cybersecurity talent and solutions
they need to protect themselves.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ The federal government is also snapping up scarce talent. For
example, students can receive scholarships worth up to $60,000 for NSA
accredited degree programs, but then they are obligated to work for the
government. Small businesses cannot compete with that kind of
recruitment.

These are circular issues with one begetting the other. In
their wake, the demand for affordable solutions will rise
dramatically, creating yet another threat. Small businesses
desperate to meet the cybersecurity demands of larger clients,
government regulations, insurance carriers, and lending
institutions are going to become victims once again.
Adversaries will use this opportunity to sell cheap software
and services that are subsidized by selling data and secrets
out the back door and give them a toehold in the supply chain
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
of larger organizations.

The driver here is that cybersecurity is also economic
warfare and a geopolitical game of chess that knows no borders.
These higher-level battles manifest as foreign and domestic
espionage, extortion, and economic disruption. They encompass
aspects of both organized crime and the Cold War. A central
issue that impacts small businesses is the ability to vet
vendors who may have ties to either the criminal underground or
nation-state adversaries.

Deputizing Small Business Cyber Solution Providers

I believe we can get ahead of this problem with your help.
Fixing the problem with American-made products and services
will not only protect the sector, but also stimulate job growth
and economic development. I suggest that the SBDC's work with
local, state, and federal law enforcement to certify local
vendors as All-American solution providers, then connect those
vendors with other SBDC's within their state and across the
nation.

Participants would be bound to:

defend small businesses under a Hippocratic-like
oath,

affirm allegiance to US interests,

produce software/services domestically (no
offshoring data or talent), and

report cyber intelligence using uniform methods.

Participants would be subject to steep legal penalties for
using offshore solutions, perhaps submitting to spot-check
investigations to ensure compliance. However, so long as they
rely on American solutions, they (and perhaps their clients)
would be protected by good-Samaritan laws much like our first
responders. These deputized small businesses would also form a
sort of national guard embedded directly in our business
communities.

Improving the Collection and Dissemination of Information

In addition to tapping our SBDCs, I believe the government
has two resources that can help with collection and
dissemination of cybersecurity information. Our Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS) is very good at aggregating, summarizing, and
making data available in easy to digest forms. Meanwhile, the
IRS is one agency to which every small business owner is happy
to report losses.

Obviously there is potential for abuse in reporting losses
that did not occur. To offset this, any loss report would
trigger (or could trigger in the case of a lottery system) an
investigation by law enforcement to validate claims. The
investigation would allow for the gathering of valuable
incident details and cyber intelligence information.

The DHS was established to bring together intelligence and
data from multiple agencies. Therefore it makes sense to have
data bubble up to them for aggregation and, when absolutely
necessary, apply judicious and time-limited classification.
Gathering points for information would include the IRS, as
mentioned above, but also local/state/federal law enforcement,
with SBDC advisors connecting small businesses to them as
appropriate. In fact, it may be best to classify all data
initially at the gathering points and charge the DHS with
declassifying everything, except that which is truly vital to
national security or conflicts with privacy. Dong so alleviates
the SBDC advisors, law enforcement, and any deputize4d
businesses from making such decisions.

While DHS has the ability to aggregate and (de)classify
data, the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) has the talent,
infrastructure, and existing relationships to repackage and
deliver it back to the community. Undoubtedly some will insist
the data need not be made public. But security by obscurity
only builds false hopes.\7\ In fact, I would argue that the
value added from the statistical expertise to correctly
interpret raw data would far outweigh the idea of keeping
poorly interpreted data secure.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ See Appendix: How Classification Impacted the Wannacry Outbreak
and Response

An example of poorly interpreted data is the oft-quoted
statistic that sixty percent of small businesses fail within
six months of a cyber attack. It is so tantalizing, that even
we used it at Threat Sketch early on in our marketing
materials. However, we later learned this to be unverified
information and have distanced ourselves from it because our
clients trust us to deliver accurate data.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ https://www.bankinfosecurity.com/blogs/60-hacked-small-
businesses-fail-how-reliable-that-stat-p-2464

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
SBDC Advisor Training

Small businesses need local solutions that can tap into a
national network of trusted solution providers. The SBDCs have
proven effective in helping small businesses navigate a myraid
of state, federal, and local resources, and with training. I
believe they can rise to this challenge as well.

With regard to training, the NSA has been busy establishing
a network of colleges and universities that are Centers of
Academic Excellence (CAE) in Cybersecurity. And NIST, through
its National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE), is
helping standardize the language in our industry, which is much
needed. I believe that the NSA-CAE community colleges and
universities are well positioned to cross-train and up-train
existing SBDC advisors on the business aspects of
cybersecurity. Advisors need not become technical experts, but
rather learn the standardized language developed by NICE and
delivered through NSA-CAEs. Doing so will let them help small
businesses locate and connect with appropriate resources.
Appendix

How the IT-ISAC makes AIS affordable

The DHS has an information sharing program called Automated
Indicator Sharing (AIS) that gathers and distributes cyber
intelligence using STIX and TAXII protocols. When I first
encountered this program through Threat Sketch, the only
commercially supported software systems had six-figure price
tags. Although free, open-source versions exist, they require
constant patching and maintenance as well as a secure facility
to house them. These hidden implementation costs put ``free''
information well out of the price range of small businesses.

We were referred by AIS to the IT-ISAC, which already has
infrastructure in place to receive AIS information via STIX/
TAXII and was able to fractionalize the cost among its paid
members. The IT-ISAC has since played a vital role in both
supplying data and allowing us to share our own knowledge back
to the community.

Email Interview: Douglas M. DePeppe - Cyber Resilience
Institute

Cyber Market Development Project, as well as Sports-
ISAO Project Office. Our nonprofit, Cyber Resilience
Institute, is the NIPP Challenge awardee (and our
project will transition to commercial use under `c-
Market' branding and naming). Our model has a CTI and
Information Sharing core, based in a community and
adopting a PPP sharing and capacity building model.

That as a quick background, we enter communities
through students and a workforce program: c-Watch. And,
what we're promoting is the linking together of a
network of cyber hunters and analysts--that is,
graduates of the workforce program--into the Cyber
Threat Intelligence Research Network. What CTIRN
represents is a national capability of students--a bit
like a CyberCorps or a cyber-ROTC equivalent--engaged
in populating a commercial Order of Battle (i.e.,
adversary profiling), that would be available for the
private sector and all levels of government, and
without incurring IC classification constraints.

How Classification Impacted the Wannacry Outbreak and
Response

I participated in the national response to the Wannacry
outbreak lead by the National Cybersecurity and Communications
Integration Center (NCICC; pronounced ``N-KICK''). During one
of the daily NCICC calls, a large company claimed to have
something they wanted to share, but did not want to make it
public. A DHS representative came on the line and declared the
briefing TLP-Yellow from that point forward. He then invited
all companies on the line to share what they knew and there was
nothing but awkward silence. Even under a veil of secrecy, the
big company was unwilling to share what they knew. I wonder to
this day what it was and if it could have saved even one
victim.

And let us not forget that the reason the Wannacry outbreak
was able to travel so quickly. It did so by leveraging an
exploit discovered by the NSA and kept secret until exposed in
a WikiLeaks data dump. I understand why the flaw was kept
secret, but that decision was not without consequences. The
entire attack may never had occurred had the flaw been
disclosed to the private sector when it was first discovered.
Not only did that decision lay the groundwork for the
ransomware attack, but it created a rift between the government
and the private sector. I know of at least one large-scale flaw
that was not reported to the government for the reason that
cybersecurity researchers have lost faith in our government. It
will take a long time and many taxpayer dollars to recover from
the tarnished image that results from keeping secrets.

Economic Trends And How Shared Information Helps

To describe how shared cyber incident and intelligence
information helps small businesses, I need to provide context.
At a company level, cybersecurity is a business problem of risk
management. At a national level, cybersecurity is economic
warfare. At a global scale it is a geopolitical game of chess
that ignores physical borders.

At the business level, three trends drive cyber risk in
small businesses. They are:

1. An increase in incentives for hackers to make
money by exploiting stolen data.

2. A dramatic rise in the liability that comes with
handling sensitive data.

3. The use of automation to attack small businesses
on an industrial scale.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Arnold, Rob (2017). Cybersecurity: A Business Solution. ISBN
978-0692944158.

Let's use a familiar example to illustrate how these three
forces have changed the risk landscape. Consider an employee's
W-2 form. Ten years ago it was hardly worth the paper it was
printed on because there was no mass market for selling
personal information. Today, each W-2 is worth $20 or more on
underground, black markets. The incentive has gone from nearly
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
zero to $20 dollars per victim.

While the hacker gets $20 for each W-2, the liability to
the employer and the employee is substantially higher. In the
extreme, lawsuits and drained bank accounts can cost the
business and the employee hundreds of thousands of dollars. And
more subtle losses come in the form of lost morale and the
hassle of dealing with damaged credit, which add to the losses.

While there is an incentive to steal W-2s en masse from
large companies, the big companies are becoming harder to
attack. As a result, hackers are using automation to go after
unprotected, unprepared small businesses by the thousands. Due
to the volume of attacks, they only need to compromise a small
fraction of them to make a profit. It is a nefarious business
model that works.

In the context of trend number one, sharing cyber
intelligence about black markets and espionage warns small
businesses about emerging incentives for stealing data. To
address the second trend, which is victim liability, incident
reporting is used to understand trends in the risk landscape
and to determine how different attacks relate to losses.
Finally, combatting automated attacks means using both types of
data to detect large scale operations and respond quickly to
undermine the nefarious business model.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD OF

THOMAS GANN, CHIEF PUBLIC POLICY OFFICER, MCAFEE, LLC.

BEFORE THE U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON SMALL
BUSINESS

ON ``FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AND SMALL BUSINESSES: PROMOTING GREATER
INFORMATION

SHARING FOR STRONGER CYBERSECURITY''

November 15, 2017, 11:00 AM / RAYBURN HOUSE OFFICE BUILDING
ROOM 2360

Good morning, Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez,
and distinguished members of the committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today, I am Tom Gann, Chief Public
Policy Officer for McAfee, LLC. I have over 20 years of
experience in the IT industry, having run government relations
and public sector alliances functions for Digimarc, Siebel
Systems and Sun Microsystems. During the last decade, I have
focused on cybersecurity and identity management issues. I hold
degrees in business and political science from the London
Business School and Stanford University.

I am pleased to address the committee on this important
matter. My testimony will address the cybersecurity challenges
small businesses face, why sharing technical information is
particularly difficult for small businesses, the types of
information sharing that could be most useful to them, and
general recommendations that can enhance the cybersecurity
capabilities of small businesses.

MCAFEE'S COMMITMENT TO CYBERSECURITY

McAfee is one of the world's leading independent
cybersecurity companies. Inspired by the power of working
together, McAfee creates business and consumer solutions that
make the world a safer place. By building solutions that work
with other industry products, McAfee helps businesses
orchestrate cyber environments that are truly integrated, where
protection, detection and correction of threats happen
simultaneously and collaboratively. By protecting consumers
across all their devices, we secure their digital lifestyle at
home and while on the go. By working with other security
players, we are leading the effort to unite against state-
sponsored actors, cybercriminals, hacktivists and other
disruptors for the benefit of all. McAfee is focused on
accelerating ubiquitous protection against security risks for
people, businesses and governments worldwide.

Before beginning my comments, I want to express how
extremely pleased McAfee is in seeing the focus on improving
the cyber threat landscape for small businesses. Through the
past several years, a great deal of time and effort has been
focused on larger organizations with resources to invest, but
attention on risks to small business--the backbone of our
nation's economy--is long overdue. For too long, small
businesses have been a target of malicious actors with little
or no way to protect themselves due to education and resource
constraints. Thank you for investigating ways to better protect
this vital segment of our digital economy.

CYBERSECURITY RISKS FACED BY SMALL BUSINESS

There's no doubt that small businesses face many of the
same cybersecurity risks as large ones. Some cyber-attack
methods, such as ransomware and those that begin with spear-
phishing, are particularly well-suited to small businesses, who
might be an easy target because of their lack of cybersecurity
resources. Small businesses store personal information,
implement operational requirements and own valuable
intellectual property just as large enterprises do, so they too
need strong cybersecurity protections. In fact, more than 50
percent of cyber-attacks are launched on firms having fewer
than 50 employees, according to cyber expert Steve Morgan. A
2016 report from Keeper and the Ponemon Institute found that
only 14 percent of small and medium-sized businesses say they
have the ability to effectively mitigate risks and
vulnerabilities. Further, 50 percent say they had been breached
in the past 12 months. This is not at all surprising, given
that many small businesses might not even have IT staff, let
alone cybersecurity staff.

Not addressing these risks have real consequences for the
businesses themselves, larger businesses and local economies.
For example, an August 2017 analysis by Tech Republic found
that a single cybersecurity attack could cost a small business
$256,000. And we've seen at least one instance of a small
business breach affecting a larger one in the Target hack.

An October study by the Better Business Bureau, The State
of Small Business Cybersecurity in North America, found that
half of small businesses could remain profitable for only one
month if they lost essential data. Further, while small
businesses may be adopting solutions like antivirus software,
one of the most cost-effective tools, employee education, is
used by fewer than half the companies surveyed. The report also
found that while awareness of cybersecurity risk among small
business owners is growing, they are not at all certain what to
do about it.

According to an August 2017 survey from BizBuySell, the
Internet's largest business-for-sale marketplace, 90 percent of
small businesses believe it's at least important to protect
themselves from a cyber-attack. Yet moving from cyber
protection being important to it being essential, practical and
affordable is a big step. Investing in more than just very
basic cybersecurity tools requires time, money and other
resources--like an IT staff--that small businesses often don't
have. We have to acknowledge the fact that for most small
businesses, cybersecurity is an expense they don't want to
incur when they're trying to simply make payroll and remain
profitable.

``Profitability is the ultimate test of risk,'' one of the
Better Business Bureau report's authors said, adding that small
business owners have to do a cost-benefit analysis of
cybersecurity.'' It doesn't do any good for a small business to
adopt a $10,000 solution if the potential risk reduction is
worth $5,000,'' he added.

THE INFORMATION SHARING CHALLENGE FOR SMALL BUSINESS

So, what's the solution? Should small businesses
participate in the Department of Homeland Security's (DHS)
cyber threat information sharing program mandated by the
Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act (CISA)? This is a
question worth exploring. In talking with our customers, it is
clear that many small businesses are unaware of CISA, often
don't understand how the law can help them, and are confused by
the many information sharing initiatives out there.

However, I also believe we should consider how information
sharing efforts, such as those mandated by CISA, can directly
benefit small businesses.

The DHS initiative known as Automated Indicator Sharing
(AIS) is open to small businesses, but few have the resources
or an educated IT staff to make direct use of or benefit from
it. The kind of information shared via AIS is comprised of
indicators of compromise (IOCs). While the overall program has
been a strong step in the right direction, it still provides
far too little real value. IOCs are just the breadcrumbs that
network security staff look for to uncover clues as to what may
be occurring inside their organizations. Typical IOCs include
registry keys, MD5 hashes of potential malware, IP addresses,
virus signatures, unusual DNS requests, and URLs. While these
can be useful, they are not enough to provide the defensive
information needed to protect an organization.

The information shared must be both useful and actionable
to the receiving parties and, in the case of AIS, it also must
be automated. As many small businesses outsource functions like
their point of sale systems, or even their entire IT needs,
they may not have access to the information contained there,
let alone be able to ensure it is useful and actionable. Even
if they had their own IT support infrastructure, small
businesses would have to acquire and set up systems and
software to collect, share and use the information. The reality
is any information sharing capabilities require time, money and
resources that many small businesses just do not have.

Additionally, it should be understood that we are not
sharing information just for sharing's sake. There needs to be
a valuable purpose for the sharing if a business is going to
spend the money needed to set it up and maintain it going
forward as a core business practice. If the information being
shared is not useful, actionable and automated, then the entity
sharing it doesn't bring much value to the table--nor would the
small business get value from it. Today, the type of simple
information via IOCs exchanged by AIS is hard for small
businesses to get value out of.

A DIFFERENT KIND OF INFORMATION SHARING

This doesn't mean that small businesses don't need or can't
benefit from cyber threat intelligence; they certainly can. But
perhaps we should focus our discussion more on sharing a
different kind of information--information that is more
informative and educational right away.

The Better Business Bureau study found that when asked to
judge 10 statements on cybersecurity as either true or false,
the average score was below 60 percent, meaning that there are
still opportunities to better educate small businesses and
dispel some myths. And regarding what to do first in a data
breach, only about 20 percent of respondents answered
correctly. Granted, the laws vary from state to state and can
be complicated, but this just points out the need for more
education on the benefits of having a plan before a breach
occurs.

Education and awareness efforts are essential. The Federal
Trade Commission (FTC) just last month launched a new site for
Protecting Small Business that offers advice on cybersecurity
basics, protecting personal information and what to do in the
event of a data breach. Likewise, the Small Business
Administration (SBA) also provides resources on its website. We
need even more initiatives like these that make it as easy as
possible for small businesses to learn more about how to
protect themselves.

The federal government can also help raise awareness among
vendors and solutions providers of the role small businesses
play in protecting the nation's critical infrastructure. Many
important government contractors are small businesses and, as
we learned in the retail attacks of 2014, small businesses are
attractive attack conduits for breaching larger business or
government targets rich in high-value data or other assets.

DEDICATED INFORMATION SHARING ORGANIZATION FOR SMALL
BUSINESS

The federal government should also help develop and fund
the standup of a non-profit Information Sharing and Analysis
Organization (ISAO) focused on U.S. small businesses. Small
businesses do not have the resources to address the problem of
gathering and analyzing cyber threat intelligence on an ongoing
basis, but a highly targeted ISAO with initial support from the
federal government could help. A small business-focused ISAO
could use the economies of scale to be able to supply
appropriate information to those business that lack the
resources but still need current cyber threat intelligence.
Such an ISAO could provide education services to its members as
a part of their services, such as basic cyber hygiene and more
advanced topics like incorporating the NIST Cybersecurity
Framework into their security program. Cyber education is
critical to the success of small business being able to
understand the problems in order to begin addressing them.

The ISAO could provide its members with best practices,
lessons learned, templates and processes for addressing
incidents, the ability to get help understanding the problems
and act as a hub in case a breach occurs. In the event of an
incident, small businesses need to know where to go and what to
do. The ISAO could also act as the first point of contact in
determining whether or not to reach out to law enforcement and
to assist the business in addressing the incident. This would
also allow the ISAO to communicate the situation to its other
members so that they too could be informed.

An information sharing organization such as this would be
also able to spread costs among its members. We encourage the
government to consider providing the initial startup funding
for a national small business ISAO.

ADDITIONAL RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PROTECTING SMALL BUSINESS

Move to the Cloud

Advances in technology can also serve to protect
technology. For example, outsourcing infrastructure to a cloud
provider is becoming more common. This practice could have real
advantages for a small business, as the cloud provider would be
responsible for security. Both infrastructure as a service and
security as a service warrant attention from small business, as
both can be economical ways to provide efficiencies and
security without the business owner having to think about it.
The growth of cloud applications has made these ``as-a-
service'' technologies real possibilities. Leveraging them
could enable a small business to focus on becoming a medium-
sized business, for example, rather than having to be an IT and
security expert.

At the same time, cloud providers have the opportunity to
gain the insight from the threats they see on the endpoints of
their small business customers, benefiting from the ever-
growing network effects of more and more threat data, which in
turn can enhance their ability to improve their customers'
security. Cloud providers should also be able to leverage their
economies of scale to share threat information with their
partners in the private and public sectors.

While the move to the cloud has real benefits, small
business owners cannot contract out all of their cybersecurity
obligations, particularly in the area of strong blocking and
tackling--making sure that passwords are updated on a regular
basis and backing up information on a regular basis.

Improve DHS's Automated Indicator Sharing (AIS) Program

While the AIS program is still in the startup phase and
needs to broaden the type of information it receives and
shares, we should not give up on its potential. Policymakers
need to enable the administration to move beyond simple
indicators supplied via AIS and provides a means to enrich the
effectiveness of shared information. The administration should
increase its efforts with the private sector to further evolve
the way cyber threat information is represented, enriched and
distributed in a timely fashion. Dong so will help create a
high-functioning ecosystem of information sharing that will
help all organizations, both large and small, to compete with
global networks of sophisticated hackers.

Encourage Cyber Insurance for Small Businesses

Small businesses would also benefit from cyber insurance,
which is specifically designed to protect an organization from
risk. This is still a small but growing part of the insurance
market. It deserves more attention, as does the idea of having
the government act as a reinsurer for the cybersecurity
insurance market during its early stages. Alternatively, the
government could establish a program similar to the National
Flood Insurance Program to help support the private market in
the event of catastrophic, widespread attacks.

Invest in Fighting Cyber Crime

The government should also devote additional resources to
fighting cybercrime. Too often, it is small businesses in
sectors like health care and finance that are being hacked by
cyber criminals. These criminals are perfecting the art of
ransomeware, and small businesses are all too often being
forced to pay to protect their data. Law enforcement at all
levels--federal, state and local--need to have the resources to
identify and take down hackers who have been terrorizing the
small business community.

CONCLUSION

It's important to recognize that technical information
sharing is only one piece of the puzzle. Small businesses need,
first of all, to get the basics of cybersecurity right.
Information sharing efforts designed to educate and raise
awareness are more important--at least at this point--than
those intended to share automated, actionable indicators of
threats. Small businesses can benefit greatly from moving their
infrastructure and security to the cloud and the economies of
scale of ISAOs dedicated to their unique requirements. Cyber
insurance also holds promise, as does doubling down on
investments to fight cybercrime. We also need to support
efforts to boost the effectiveness of the Automated Indicator
Sharing program to ensure that everyone wins over time.

Thank you for giving McAfee the opportunity to testify on
this important topic. I'm be happy to answer any questions.
