- PROTECTING SMALL BUSINESSES FROM CYBER ATTACKS: THE CYBERSECURITY INSURANCE OPTION

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PROTECTING SMALL BUSINESSES FROM CYBER ATTACKS: THE CYBERSECURITY
INSURANCE
OPTION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

JULY 26, 2017

__________

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 115-032
Available via the GPO Website: www.govinfo.gov
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
ROD BLUM, Iowa
JAMES COMER, Kentucky
JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, Puerto Rico
DON BACON, Nebraska
BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
ROGER MARSHALL, Kansas
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
DWIGHT EVANS, Pennsylvania
STEPHANIE MURPHY, Florida
AL LAWSON, JR., Florida
YVETTE CLARK, New York
JUDY CHU, California
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
VACANT

Kevin Fitzpatrick, Majority Staff Director
Jan Oliver, Majority Deputy Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Adam Minehardt, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Steve Chabot................................................     1
Hon. Nydia Velazquez.............................................     2

WITNESSES

Mr. Robert Luft, President, SureFire Innovations, Cincinnati,
Ohio, testifying on behalf of the National Small Business
Association....................................................     5
Ms. Erica Davis, Senior Vice President, Head of Specialty
Products Errors & Omissions, Zurich Insurance, North America,
Washington, DC, testifying on behalf of the American Insurance
Association....................................................     6
Mr. Eric Cernak, Vice President, Cyber Risk Practice Leader,
Munich Re U.S., Hartford, CT, testifying on behalf of the
Reinsurance Association America (RAA)..........................     8
Mr. Daimon Geopfert, National Leader and Principal, Security and
Privacy Consulting, Risk Advisory Services, Southfield, MI.....     9

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Mr. Robert Luft, President, SureFire Innovations, Cincinnati,
Ohio, testifying on behalf of the National Small Business
Association................................................    27
Ms. Erica Davis, Senior Vice President, Head of Specialty
Products Errors & Omissions, Zurich Insurance, North
America, Washington, DC, testifying on behalf of the
American Insurance Association.............................    36
Mr. Eric Cernak, Vice President, Cyber Risk Practice Leader,
Munich Re U.S., Hartford, CT, testifying on behalf of the
Reinsurance Association America (RAA)......................    40
Mr. Daimon Geopfert, National Leader and Principal, Security
and Privacy Consulting, Risk Advisory Services, Southfield,
MI.........................................................    48
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
AIA Statement (American Insurance Asociation)................    62
Willis Towers Watson Statement...............................    65

PROTECTING SMALL BUSINESSES FROM CYBER ATTACKS: THE CYBERSECURITY
INSURANCE OPTION

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 26, 2017

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 11:00 a.m., in Room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Steve Chabot
[chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chabot, Luetkemeyer, Brat,
Radewagen, Kelly, Blum, Bacon, Fitzpatrick, Marshall, Norman,
Velazquez, Evans, Murphy, Lawson, Clarke, Chu, Espaillat, and
Schneider.
Chairman CHABOT. The Committee will come to order.
Good morning. We appreciate everybody being here.
Cybersecurity has been one of this Committee's top
priorities. We have held numerous hearings and worked on
meaningful legislation to ensure small businesses have every
possible resource to protect themselves against a cyber attack.
Weeks ago, I, along with my friend from across the aisle,
Representative Dwight Evans of Pennsylvania, introduced
legislation to ensure that America's Small Business Development
Centers have the best possible cybersecurity training so that
they can better assist small businesses with their cyber
strategies.
Unfortunately, we have also heard too many firsthand
accounts from small business owners who have been victims of
cyber attacks. One case in particular that stands out is the
story of a small business owner who testified before this
Committee last year. He owned an indoor go-karting facility in
Maine, and had a number of employees and families that depended
on him. He told the Committee that he was struck by a phishing
scam. He logged onto his bank account and to his utter
disbelief his balance was zero. And that happened on a payday
no less, so all his employees were at risk of not being paid
that day, so he was really panic stricken. Fortunately, he
caught it just in the nick of time and was able to stop the
funds from being transferred, but that is usually,
unfortunately, not the case.
Cybersecurity experts have told this Committee about the
growing number of cyber threats facing America's 28 million
small businesses. In 2016 alone, the Justice Department
recorded nearly 300,000 cybersecurity complaints. This number
increases every year. Sixty percent of small businesses that
fall victim to a cyber attack close up shop within 6 months,
and the estimated average cost of a cyber attack on a small
business is over $30,000. And that may not be a huge amount to
a large corporate entity in the United States, but to a mom-
and-pop small business person, $30,000, that can mean why 60
percent of small businesses go out of business within 6 months
of being hit by a cyber attack.
In our Committee's efforts to spotlight these serious and
growing threats, it has become clear that we need to think
outside the box as we work to thwart cyber attacks. Small
businesses must also be diligent as they manage their IT
systems and educate their staffs about the importance of
cybersecurity. They should also be creative as they consider
different ways to spread risk and manage their cyber
strategies.
One increasingly feasible solution is cybersecurity
insurance. Many larger corporations are already exploring this
approach to dealing with cyber attacks. It is likely that small
businesses will follow.
Of course, the widespread adoption of cybersecurity
insurance policies is not without its challenges, both for
small businesses and for the insurance providers. Small
businesses must determine what policies and coverage options
make sense for them and also implement basic cybersecurity best
practices. Furthermore, the cybersecurity insurance marketplace
is remarkably new and many of the providers still lack the
historical data to offer appropriate plans to consumers which
drives up the cost to policyholders. Yet, as they look to
improve their models and cyber risk scenarios, cybersecurity
insurance will become more viable and more accessible.
Today, we will hear from a panel of witnesses that all have
some level of experience with cybersecurity insurance and can
offer an in-depth perspective on both the benefits of
cybersecurity insurance and the challenges that still lie
ahead. I look forward to hearing our witnesses' views on how
small businesses can more effectively manage their cyber risk
and possibly with the help of cybersecurity insurance.
And I would now like to yield to the Ranking Member, Ms.
Velazquez, for her opening statement.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The internet has undoubtedly transformed the way small
business operates. E-commerce empowers America's 28 million
small businesses, giving them a unique opportunity to sell
their products not only across the country, but around the
world. Unfortunately, for small business owners, when it comes
to the health of their businesses, cyber hygiene often falls to
the back burner. The lack of preventive measures can result in
hacks and other cyber incidents that have major and costly
implications for small business and their ability to operate.
The topic of this hearing is particularly timely. If Russia
was able to use cyber attacks to penetrate our democratic
institutions, by comparison a small business seems an easy
target. The fact of the matter is there will continue to be
cyber threats from those who seek to damage our national
security, our economic security, and our political system. And
there will continue to be criminals who seek to profit by
stealing sensitive data held by the government or the private
sector. Cyber criminals have realized small entities are more
exposed than larger businesses that have dedicated, in-house IT
personnel overseeing their systems and networks.
In 2016 alone, more than 1.1 billion identities were
stolen. This is worrisome, perhaps lethal, for companies that
have a reputation of safeguarding their customers' information
and need to maintain their credibility. Small businesses that
lose customer information when their security is breached
suffer significant costs financially and in the loss of
customer trust. And once businesses get compromised, fully
recovering from a cyber attack is extremely difficult.
On average, small businesses that get hacked make the
discovery more than 200 days after the attack has occurred. For
the federal government, cybersecurity should be a priority, but
the private sector must also stand up to the challenge and
complement existing federal resources.
Given the financial consequences that a cyber attack may
have on small businesses, there is a new industry of insurance
providers focused on providing policies to protect them; yet,
there are a number of factors making this an expensive
undertaking. A lack of adequate data underscores the complex
nature of creating cyber liability policies for small firms.
Also, the type of business that risk management procedures and
the continually evolving threats make it difficult for the
insurers and the small businesses.
Today's hearing will help us look at this noble idea and
learn what role Congress plays in streamlining such an
important insurance product. I look forward to hearing the
challenges small businesses face in selecting a cybersecurity
insurance policy and the hurdles insurers must overcome to
offer valuable and comprehensive cybersecurity insurance
solutions. It is clear from recent events that these issues are
not diminishing. If anything, they are growing more important.
Cybersecurity concerns from Russia's attack on our political
intuitions to criminal enterprises preying on small businesses
merit our attention more than ever before.
I would like to thank you all for being here this morning
and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields
back.
And if Committee members have opening statements, I would
ask that they be submitted for the record.
And I would now like to explain our timing rules and lights
here. It is pretty simple. We operate under the 5 minute rule.
There is a lighting system to assist you there. The green light
will be on for 4 minutes. The yellow light will come on and let
you know you have got a minute to wrap up, and then the red
light will come on and you are supposed to stop. Most people
do. But we will give you a little leeway. But if you could stay
within those parameters, we would appreciate it very much.
And I would now like to introduce our distinguished panel.
Our first witness is Robert Luft, the Owner and President of
SureFire Innovations, a service-disabled, veteran-owned small
business and minority business enterprise located in my home
district of Cincinnati, Ohio. And Mr. Luft and I actually
talked about this a long time ago and he brought this to my
attention. And I think that actually was how this hearing came
into being here, so do not screw it up because you are the one
who did it.
SureFire Innovations specializes in providing network
infrastructure services to companies all across the country.
Prior to starting his company, Mr. Luft served our country for
16 years in the Army as a combat engineer. He is testifying on
behalf of the National Small Business Association. We thank him
for his service to our country and we also welcome him here
today.
I would now like to yield to the Ranking Member to
introduce our next witness, who I believe is a constituent and
whose first name is Erica, which happens to be our daughter's
name. You even spell it the same way. So, and I yield.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is my pleasure to introduce Ms. Erica Davis, senior vice
president and head of Specialty Products Errors and Omissions
at Zurich. She is also a constituent from my district in
Brooklyn, so I am very proud.
Prior to joining Zurich in 2009, she was a senior
underwriting officer for technology insurance specialty at the
Chubb Group of Insurance Companies. Ms. Davis holds a bachelor
of arts degree from the University of Arizona. Welcome.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. And our third witness will be
Mr. Eric Cernak, Vice President and Cyber Risk Practice Leader
at Munich Re in Hartford, Connecticut. In his role, Mr. Cernak
provides leadership in all cyber efforts overseas, Munich Re's
property and casualty operations, and develops strategies to
help the company compete in the cyber marketplace. He is
testifying today on behalf of the Reinsurance Association of
America, RAA, and the Property Casualty Insurers Association of
America, PCI. We thank you for testifying here this morning.
I would now like to once again yield to the Ranking Member
for introduction of our fourth witness.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is my pleasure to introduce Mr. Daimon Geopfert,
national leader and principal of security and privacy
consulting at Risk Advisory Services. He has over 20 years of
experience in a wide array of positions, including time in the
U.S. Air Force. Mr. Geopfert has served as the manager and lead
technician for security assessments performed on some of the
largest corporations and government entities in the world. He
holds a bachelor's degree from the United States Air Force
Academy and a master's degree in computer science from the
University of Michigan. Welcome. Thank you for being here.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. And we also thank you for your
service, Mr. Geopfert.
And Mr. Luft, you are welcome here and recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENTS OF ROBERT LUFT, PRESIDENT, SUREFIRE INNOVATIONS;
ERICA DAVIS, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, HEAD OF SPECIALTY PRODUCTS
ERRORS & OMISSIONS, ZURICH INSURANCE, NORTH AMERICA; ERIC
CERNAK, VICE PRESIDENT, CYBER RISK PRACTICE LEADER, MUNICH RE
U.S.; DAIMON GEOPFERT, NATIONAL LEADER AND PRINCIPAL, SECURITY
AND PRIVACY CONSULTING, RISK ADVISORY SERVICES

STATEMENT OF ROBERT LUFT

Mr. LUFT. Good morning. Thank you, Chairman Chabot, Ranking
Member Velazquez.
Chairman CHABOT. You need to turn the mic on there.
Mr. LUFT. I apologize.
Chairman CHABOT. Yeah. You have got to turn it on.
Mr. LUFT. Good morning. Thank you, Chairman Chabot, Ranking
Member Velazquez, and members of the House Small Business
Committee, for inviting me to testify today on the current
state of cybersecurity for small companies and how cyber
insurance can help small businesses transfer risk.
My name is Robert Luft, and I am the owner of SureFire
Innovations located in Cincinnati, Ohio. I am pleased to be
here representing the National Small Business Association where
I currently serve on the Leadership Council and the Technology
Council.
SureFire Innovations is a certified service-disabled,
veteran-owned small business and minority business enterprise,
specializing in network infrastructure, design installation of
hardwire, wireless, security and smart city networks.
After my military service in the Army, where I had the
honor to serve on multiple combat deployments to Iraq during my
16-year career, I decided that entrepreneurship was my path,
and hence, the founding of SureFire Innovations.
Cybercrime is growing rapidly with annual cost to the
global economy estimated to reach over $2 trillion by 2019.
Organizations of all sizes are at risk for cyber attacks.
Small business represents more than 97 percent of business
in the U.S. Alarmingly, in 2015, 43 percent of all attacks were
directed at small business. Despite the growing awareness of
cyber-related crimes, 77 percent of small business owners
believe their company is not at risk for cyber attacks.
The risk of being a target for cybercrime is high. Forty-
two percent of small businesses surveyed by the National Small
Business Association reported being a victim of a cyber attack,
with the average cost being $32,000 when business banking
accounts were hacked, and $7,000 on average for small business
overall.
So what can we do as small businesses to address this
issue? We can start with what I learned in the Army. Keep it
simple. By utilizing the SBA's top 10 cybersecurity tips, this
would provide a framework for all small businesses, even those
who are not technologically savvy and currently have zero
protections in place; simple measures, like installing
antivirus software, the use of complex passwords, and backing
up information.
Since total elimination of threats is impossible,
protecting against them should be a top management priority.
Unfortunately, many small businesses do not place cyber threat
as a top priority. This is evident by the fact that 60 percent
of small companies go out of business within 6 months after a
cyber attack. Small business need not only think of ways to
mitigate cyber attacks, but also how to transfer that risk away
from their company.
This can be accomplished with the cyber liability insurance
policy, which provides coverage in the event of a cyber attack.
A typical cyber liability policy will include the following
coverages: theft and fraud, forensic investigation, network
business interruption, extortion, and data loss.
What led to my purchase of a cyber liability policy is a
subcontractor was performing services on one of my projects,
suffered a bank account breach that resulted in the loss of
$15,000. This was a catastrophic event. Those funds were
required for payroll and put enormous strain on its employees.
This event made me realize that our company was just as
vulnerable, and despite having a cybersecurity plan, we did not
have a cyber liability insurance policy. So in the event we
were breached, we would not have any financial protections
available.
Unfortunately, we were not the exception, as 75 percent of
small businesses do not have cyber liability coverage in place.
Most small businesses do not have the appetite to purchase
another insurance policy. My annual premium is $3,200. The
level of security this provides my company does not completely
remove all of my concerns, but it affords me the knowledge that
if we were hacked, protective steps had been taken to address
any potential damages to the company and my employees.
There are enormous amounts of resources available to help
educate small businesses on cybersecurity and the potential
ramifications of not having the appropriate plan and policies
in place. The issue is awareness. The more we can help inform
small businesses on how to mitigate and transfer these risks,
the greater the positive impact small business will have on our
economy.
Thank you for the opportunity to address this very pressing
issue.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Ms. Davis, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ERICA DAVIS

Ms. DAVIS. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Velazquez, and
members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to
speak with you today about the private sector's role in
providing risk management solutions to protect businesses from
cyber risk.
My name is Erica Davis and I lead a team of market-facing
underwriters at Zurich North America, one of the five providers
currently leading the North American cybersecurity insurance
marketplace.
Zurich has invested in identifying risks and delivering
solutions for our customers. Zurich is a member of the American
Insurance Association, the leading property-casualty insurance
trade organization representing approximately 325 major
insurers. I appreciate AIA's focus on cybersecurity.
The cyber landscape continues to evolve, making companies
increasingly vulnerable to the potential harm of a security or
privacy event.
While awareness of the threats is growing across all sizes
of organizations, businesses are still struggling how to
understand cyber risk. That is, the full scope of their
exposures and how best to protect themselves. They must
determine whether they should retain the residual risk or
transfer it through the purchase of a cyber insurance product.
Our approach to cybersecurity includes understanding
attitudes to cyber risk, providing tailored coverage to meet
our customers' needs, and working with businesses to adopt a
mindset of resilience rather than just protection.
Last fall, Zurich and Advisen released a survey of risk
managers and other risk professionals. It found that 87 percent
of respondents believe a technology interruption would have a
moderate to significant impact on their organization. As with
any line of insurance, risk culture is critical to underwriting
cyber insurance. Businesses must build a culture of resilience
and operational awareness at all levels, rather than simply
viewing cyber risk as a technology issue.
Insurance is just one piece of the cyber risk management
puzzle, but the role of insurance is increasing as customers
seek risk insights and feedback from their insurance advisors.
It has really become more of a partnership with businesses now
focusing on not just what happens post-event and a loss being
paid. They value having qualified, vetted resources available
to them, especially in their moment of crisis. And they are
focusing more on risk-mitigation tools their insurance
providers can provide to them.
The business community's interconnectivity and reliance on
technology has increased and that creates additional points of
entry and new threat vectors. The cyber insurance and exposure
has broadened to include potential property damage for
something like critical infrastructure, supply chain ripple
effects, bodily injury from autonomous vehicles, or
cyberespionage. And the issue is only becoming more
complicated.
In an effort to continuously help customers and protect
themselves from risk, Zurich began participating as a key
industry consult in a public-private partnership by the
University of Maryland and the National Institute of Standards
and Technology. We are proud to be part of this initiative.
Zurich is also collaborating with Deloitte to help improve
a business' cyber resilience. Policyholders can complement
Zurich's cyber insurance solution with risk management services
through Deloitte to understand their level of cyber exposure
and resilience.
Underwriting of the cyber product is evolving, as are the
risks. The insurance community is continuously working to
understand the full scope of the exposures and what the
controls may need to be. Each business needs to be underwritten
differently, and as insurers, we must continue to refine our
own understanding of those exposures. Finding solutions to the
most complicated of cyber risks will require collaboration
between the insurance industry, governments, academia, and
other think tanks to establish standards, encourage
information-sharing, build resilience, and create adequate
global governance.
As the market evolves, Zurich is committed to staying at
the forefront of the cybersecurity issue, and we will continue
to develop additional insurance solutions going forward.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I look
forward to answering your questions.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Cernak, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ERIC CERNAK

Mr. CERNAK. Good morning. I am Eric Cernak, vice president,
U.S. cyber and privacy risk practice leader at Munich Re U.S.,
testifying on behalf of the Reinsurance Association of America
and the Property Casualty Insurers Association of America.
Munich Re and HSB provide cyber and privacy-related
insurance and reinsurance protection for small and large
businesses in the United States and throughout the world. HSB
Group has an A++ and Best Financial Strength rating. We were
one of the first companies to provide reinsurance for cyber
risk to small businesses. In addition to reinsurance, we
underwrite cyber risk, develop products, and work with small
businesses to help mitigate cyber-related exposures.
Today's hearing is an important discussion to highlight the
success of the private sector in developing cyber insurance. It
will help raise awareness among the small business community
about the importance of purchasing cyber insurance as a
preventative risk management tool and critical safety net
should a cyber event occur.
A 2017 Risk Management Solutions report concluded that the
number of large magnitude data exfiltration events has grown
substantially, and companies are increasingly investing in
their own cybersecurity systems. However, a June report by
broker Aon estimated that only 19 percent of small businesses
in the United States had purchased cyber insurance compared to
around 75 percent of certain large companies globally. More
insurers have offered cyber insurance over time, from less than
a dozen in the early 2000s to more than 70 in 2016. As we see
more high-profile cyber events, small businesses are
increasingly aware of their exposure. This has prompted the
insurance industry to add cyber endorsements to existing small
business insurance policies.
A significant part of the value proposition of these cyber
insurance policies is loss prevention services. Participants in
a 2016 Hartford Steam Boiler survey listed vulnerability
assessments, next-generation firewalls, IT security audits, and
intrusion detection as the most helpful loss prevention
services. Participants also listed reasons that they did not
purchase cyber insurance: they did not need it, cost of
coverage, and an application process that is too complicated
and confusing. These results suggest that education is key to
increasing the take-up rate of cyber insurance by small
companies.
The public and private sectors have a role to play in
increasing the cyber insurance take-up rate, helping businesses
overcome the ``it will not happen to me'' mentality,
constructively addressing cyber vulnerabilities, and preparing
for the aftermath of a cyber event. Cyberattacks may not be a
matter of if, but when. It is essential for businesses, which
are increasingly interconnected, to be prepared, protected, and
resilient. Insurance can help with all three.
The insurance marketplace needs to continue to refine the
process in coverage to reduce complexity associated with the
purchasing of cyber insurance. For example, common coverage
form terminology could help applicants better understand what
different policies cover.
Insurers are also grappling with four factors in offering
cyber insurance. As both the chairman and ranking member have
stated, there is no significant historical loss data. Second,
the cause of loss is generated by an active adversary that
changes with new technology. Third, insurers are grappling with
the evolving patchwork of State, Federal, international cyber-
related requirements. And fourth, cyber is not bound by
geography and poses potential aggregation risk for insurers.
As these factors evolve, Munich Re and HSB are continuously
talking to our small business customers to better understand
their needs. We are also monitoring the technological,
regulatory, and society trends that could pose cyber risks.
So what can Congress do to improve cyber protections for
small businesses? We specifically encourage Congress and the
administration to coordinate cybersecurity policy among Federal
agencies and designate lead agencies to coordinate discussions
where appropriate. It is critical that this coordination
include State insurance regulators and that we all work
together to avoid a conflicting patchwork of State, Federal,
and international standards. Munich Re and HSB Group stand
ready to work with you to protect small businesses from
cybersecurity threats. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Geopfert, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAIMON GEOPFERT

Mr. GEOPFERT. Thank you, Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member
Velazquez, and members of the Committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to discuss the cybersecurity challenges that have
become a constant material threat within the small business
community.
My name is Daimon Geopfert, and during my career I have
performed hundreds of security assessments and cyber breach
intrusion investigations within small businesses. I was asked
to speak today regarding how legislation, such as H.R. 3170,
and private sector solutions, such as cyber insurance products,
can help organizations manage their cyber risk.
In a study performed last year, RSM performed extensive
data mining within a set of cyber insurance claims and found
that 50 percent of the reported attacks were against
organizations with $50 million in revenue or less. Attacks
against small businesses are not an anomaly; they are the norm.
This is the key demographic that is being targeted by hackers.
What is needed is a venue through which small businesses
can find simple, direct guidance on how to protect their
environments and mitigate risk, and that also provides access
to resources with the necessary expertise to chaperone them
through the implementation of that guidance.
The current legislation addresses part of this requirement
by essentially creating cyber mentors within the Small Business
Development Centers. These personnel could quickly become the
frontline advisors that are so desperately needed to guide
small businesses through the deployment of technical security
solutions and administrative risk management techniques, such
as acquiring cyber insurance.
While this is a critical first step, the SBDCs hold the
promise of a myriad of benefits that could be made available in
the future. Again, to make material progress on this issue, we
need to move to clear, concise, pragmatic solutions. While it
might seem like an abnormal suggestion, what is needed is to
emulate our peers within the hacking community. The underground
markets excel and become exceedingly efficient at turning large
masses of unskilled, technically challenged individuals into
groups of, while not elite, at least effective cyber attackers.
We lack that equivalent process on the defensive side in which
we can rapidly take a large number of small businesses and have
them become at least efficient and effective at basic
cybersecurity.
While it sounds relatively simple, reference environments,
as they are known, are not common in the small business
community, which often leads to organizations cobbling together
their security architecture and governance based on their
individual interpretations of best practice.
Similar to the methods of our adversaries, small and middle
markets need a dedicated hub where they can find simple,
realistic guidance on how to deploy security solutions that are
complete and effective at a basic level. This would then need
to be paired with programs dedicated to delivering to security
training directly to the IT and management members of those
small businesses as most of these organizations simply cannot
acquire the necessary security talent on the open market.
The SBDCs could play a critical role in the process of
working with government entities, private sector consultants,
and vendors to create standardized models and security
training. It should be mentioned that an additional benefit of
deploying such common models is that it would then allow the
SBDCs to address the need for actionable cyber threat
intelligence that could be easily consumed and put to use by
small businesses. If common reference environments are made
available to small businesses, many of these entities would be
highly interested in deploying these frameworks if they knew
they can consume and utilize threat intelligence in a plug-and-
play manner. It should be noted that this support was included
in the prior H.R. 5064 legislation that passed this Committee
last year, but then later expired in the Senate.
At this point, the foundations would be laid for a base-
level accreditation program for small businesses in which they
can demonstrate that they have achieved basic cyber controls
and processes. The SBDCs would be a natural fit to oversee this
program and could then coordinate between newly accredited
small businesses and insurance carriers to facilitate the
acquisition of cyber insurance. These suggestions create a
process that naturally flow from a set of standardized security
templates, through the training and the deployment of those
templates, through the accreditation that the controls were
deployed properly, through the coordination with the cyber
insurance market to offset the residual risk. This process in
its entirety represents the most requested types of support by
small business executives encapsulated in a clear, concise, and
pragmatic approach. It would materially improve the current
security status of approximately 50 percent of the U.S.
economy.
The final point I would suggest would be to use the SBDCs
as a coordination point between small businesses and a
designated, responsive law enforcement entity. Currently, when
a small business is compromised, they can contact their local
police departments, which are often willing to help, but
technically unable to do so, or they can contact the FBI or
Secret Service that are technically able to help, but typically
do not have the bandwidth to do so.
This situation has created a mindset within the small
business community that when it comes to cyber matters, they
have essentially been abandoned to the Wild West where the rule
of law does not apply. Legislation that addresses the points I
have described above would greatly improve the security and
longevity of the U.S. small and middle market businesses.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my statement, and I look
forward to further questions.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. And I will yield
myself 5 minutes.
Mr. Luft, I will go to you first. Could you tell us what
process you went through in determining what cyber insurance
coverage you ultimately ended up with? And are there any
recommendations that you would make to other small businesses
who might be considering, first of all, whether or not they
should get insurance coverage? And then secondly, you know, who
they should get it from? I am not saying what company, but just
kind of the process.
Mr. LUFT. Well, it was my first assumption that cyber
insurance should just be as simple as any type of insurance, so
I reached out to my existing insurance provider. What I quickly
found out is that is not the case. He was not familiar with a
lot of policies. So once I saw some hesitancy on his end, I
sought some additional resources and found an agent that was
exclusive to cyber insurance. That would be my first suggestion
to any small business.
And one of the first things that a company needs to look
for when they are looking at that, there are some standard
coverages in there: the extortion coverage, data loss. So the
company could assume that those things are going to be included
in a policy.
But one thing that they need to ask for is retroactivity.
When you first initially buy that policy, it is going to become
effective that inception date, but anything that may have
happened previously, it would behoove that small business to
ask for maybe a year of retroactivity, just in case there is
something lurking there in their network, to ensure that they
are safe.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Ms. Davis, let me go to you next. You mentioned in your
testimony that not all causes of loss are covered by a
particular insurance policy. Could you provide the Committee
with an example of what would be an uninsured loss and how
small businesses can protect themselves from that type of
liability?
Ms. DAVIS. Sure. So the exposures that arise from cyber
threat continues to evolve and there are certain elements of
loss that at this point are not transferable to an insurance
policy. There is work being done by the insurance community to
try and develop insurance solutions for some of those losses,
but my advice to small businesses really echoes some of the
comments that we have heard already, and that is just providing
additional education to those businesses, so things like this
hearing today really bring awareness to the topic. But where
assistance is needed is helping them connect the dots.
I think small businesses today have an understanding of
what the exposures are and what risks they may bring to the
business, but they are struggling with the ``how.'' What sort
of action items they can implement to make their operation more
resilient and secure. So it really does come down to businesses
understanding the risk and protecting themselves from it, which
is really done through risk mapping. Smaller businesses need to
understand what downtime could mean to their organization.
Also, the sensitive data that they are holding, what sort
of costs they may incur if that data is compromised, and I
think that qualitative aspect is an area and it is an
opportunity where the insurance community can assist with some
of that process.
The other point that I will mention is just in terms of
connecting the dots and bringing action items to them, it is
about understanding if employee training is only being offered
by roughly 80 percent of organizations now, that does not
translate to the fact that we have seen a growing number of
threats really come out of exploitation of that human element,
of that big vulnerability. And 50 percent of respondents to
that Advisen Zurich survey noted that humans or their employees
unintentionally infecting their network was a top concern. So
just helping bring together those pieces.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. I have got less than a minute
to go and I have got two witnesses. I am going to throw this
question up and it is kind of maybe an impossible question, so
if either one of you want to answer this. If a business has X-
amount of insurance where they are covering fire and a whole
range of things and now they have got to consider cybersecurity
insurance, and let us say they are going to go with the
insurance company they have now, how much more typically could
they expect to pay for this that they are not paying without it
right now? Percentage-wise, are we talking an additional 10
percent, 25 percent? And I know that is a tough question. It
would depend on how big the company is. What would your
estimate be if you have one?
Mr. CERNAK. That is an excellent question, and as you point
out, it is going to depend on the class of business that they
are in, the amount of data that they have, what coverages they
are actually looking for. And there are two approaches to cyber
insurance in the marketplace today. One is a standalone policy,
which is probably going to cost you thousands of dollars.
Chairman CHABOT. Yeah. I would guess that would be probably
more. So let us say you went with the company that you have now
and they did have the expertise, unlike what Mr. Luft had said
he experienced, I mean, ballpark, what range are we probably
talking about? Either one of you want to venture this?
Mr. GEOPFERT. Again, that is hard to formulate because
every one of the organizations, when we work with them--and I
am not on the insurance side; I am on the breach investigation
side, so I see the flip side of it--every one of the
organizations, the question is going to come down to what does
your network look like? How much data do you have? How does the
data pass through? Do you pass through credit card payments to
a third party? Depending on how they answer that, you can have
two organizations that are the same size in the same industry
that have put together their networks differently. They are
going to pay vastly different amounts for insurance.
Chairman CHABOT. I told you it was an impossible question.
Do either one of the first two witnesses want to take a
quick stab at it, ballpark?
Ms. DAVIS. So there are a number of factors that contribute
to that. So coverages, but also limits and retention. So it
really depends on what an organization's risk tolerance is.
Somebody may say to themselves, ``I feel as though I can retain
this risk. I am not at high risk of this sort of event
occurring,'' and they may be purchasing a $1 million limit with
a $250,000 retention purely to satisfy a contractual
requirement; somebody else may opt for hundreds of billions in
coverage. So those are some of the influencers.
Chairman CHABOT. Mr. Luft, you are from Cincinnati. I
expect you to give me an answer.
Mr. LUFT. So, Chairman, I can talk specifically about what
is happening with my company. And so for my liability policy,
covering our installation, for a million-dollar policy that is
about $4,000. When I bought that standalone cyber insurance
policy, that was $3,200, so roughly about 80 percent.
Chairman CHABOT. Good. Thank you very much. I appreciate
it.
My time is expired. I apologize for going a little bit
over.
The Ranking Member is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Mr. Cernak, I believe that you stated that it is not if
small businesses are at risk, the question is when is it going
to happen. So we need to operate under the assumption that
aggressors are already inside our networks. With that said,
what alternatives do small businesses have once they become
aware an aggressor already has access to that information and
technology?
Mr. CERNAK. Sure. Yeah, once you have identified that
someone may be within your four walls, I think it is incumbent
and imperative that you get somebody, like my colleague here to
the right, that could come in and identify exactly what is
wrong. And not to stop at the first answer. We have seen
instances where ransomware is extremely popular now. A lot of
businesses are being impacted by ransomware, and it is a very
visible attack. But what the criminals are doing on the other
side of that is they are loading additional software in the
back end so that once you rectify the very visible issue, and
you may think your problem is solved and go back to managing
your business, there is this other software that is going to
start exfiltrating data down the road. So you really need to
get a professional in to do a thorough analysis and your
insurance company can help you identify those people.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Mr. Geopfert?
Mr. GEOPFERT. The part I am going to hit is this actually
delineates quite a difference between the small business market
and even the mid-market in that both of those groups are going
to struggle preventing the breach. It is very difficult in
today's day and age with the types of exploits and malware to
keep them out. The more complex the organization, quite often
they will notice that they are breached earlier. And even if
the attacker did get in, quite often they have stood up
security monitoring of the tools that can let us retrace the
steps of the attacker so we can reconstruct what did the
attacker do in the environment, how long were they there, what
did they take, what did they touch?
In the small markets, quite often they are not even that
mature. The attackers can get in. By the time the organization
finds out that an attacker is in, when we show up there is no
evidence or the small business has already destroyed the
evidence in their initial response. They have overwritten it.
And so when we are talking about the damages for small
businesses, a big part of their problem is they always have to
assume the worst-case scenario. Because they either did not
have the evidence or they destroyed it, we have to assume the
attacker essentially reached everything and legal precedence
says they have to do mass notification, whereas in the larger
environments it might be the same attacker who did the same
thing, we can constrain. We can put bounds around what the
breach actually was. So it inordinately impacts the smaller
environments simply because they are less able to reconstruct
what the issue was even if they could not stop the attack.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Ms. Davis, cyber insurance is in its infancy as an
insurance product. How has it evolved since its inception to
meet the demands of small firms and the needs of neutralizing
relentless cyber attackers?
Ms. DAVIS. So the roots of the product were really in the
technology, you know. And as some of the first-party costs to
an organization, the immediate costs after a breach began to
evolve with notification standards and credit monitoring, et
cetera, the policy was built out to include those first-party
coverages. And what we are finding now is that financial
institutions, healthcare organizations, those early adopters in
heavily regulated segments are really more driven towards that
personal information and healthcare information.
Next, we have a three-tail organization, and what we are
finding now is that the coverages have evolved to really
address the interdependencies that we are seeing across the
supply chain. And so business interruption, loss of income,
extra expense that an organization would have to pay in the
event of downtime is becoming a key driver in the coverage
discussion.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. And can you explain how the process to
create policies is complicated by various state and federal
laws and a disjointed federal cybersecurity effort?
Ms. DAVIS. Sure. So we talked about some of the first steps
when an organization realizes that they have been compromised,
and certainly, forensics is a big piece of that to understand
what went wrong and why and how many, you know, the extent of
the information that was compromised. I would argue that very
early on in that process there also needs to be legal
representation, attorney breach coaches who are helping to
prioritize those notifications and needs to individuals who
were impacted. And the challenges that creates is really each
and every State, at this point an attorney general is handling
those topics differently. What is considered legal compliance
and what timeframe individuals need to be notified? How they
need to be notified, does it have to be through USPS? Is email
sufficient? And so the costs, the legal costs for small
businesses really add up in that process, and so
standardization of those requirements would help bring down the
costs associated with it.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentlelady's time is
expired.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you.
The gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Luetkemeyer, who is the
Vice Chairman of this Committee, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is a subject
that we are talking about today that 10 years ago it would not
even be on our radar, and yet today, here we are. And so it is
kind of scary from the standpoint of what are we going to be
talking about 10 years from now that is not on our radar today?
And so that is how fast our society and evolution of all these
things is happening. That is just an aside.
Mr. Cernak, you represent a reinsurance company, and we are
talking about cyber today and your company provides cyber
insurance. Why are you a reinsurance company that reinsures
insurance companies here today talking about cyber?
Mr. CERNAK. Thank you for the question. And it is a great
question.
I think the role that reinsurers play in this realm is to
help make more coverage available to the end consumers, the
small businesses, by enabling other property and casualty
insurance companies to put products out in the marketplace, and
not only provide those carriers with the capacity, but also the
technical knowledge to provide a sustainable product that they
can feel comfortable bringing to their insured customers. And
so beyond the dollars that a reinsurer can provide to these P&C
carriers, it is also the claims expertise, the service provider
networks, the forms development, and the rate development. You
need all of those things to create a compelling product, and by
doing that we help other carriers introduce products in the
marketplace, thus helping the end insureds.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Very good.
Evaluating the risk here is really difficult, and I know
Mr. Luft made a comment in his opening statement that 43
percent of the attacks are on small businesses. My staff has
got a number here of businesses under $300 million in value, 50
percent of cyber attacks are on those businesses. This tells me
we have got a very vulnerable group of folks here that probably
do not have the expertise to deal with it. And so how do we
protect them? So that is where insurance comes in.
So I guess my concern is not necessarily, I know we have
talked a little about the business interruption, basically
coverages that you guys are involved in, but to me the biggest
risk for a small business is the liability exposure. And
liability exposure is such that if I am in the lending business
and I am lending to a small business and I see that they are
very highly leveraged and I see that they deal with lots of
personal information, to me there is an exposure there that
could really harm that credit. Therefore, that whole line of
credit is in danger. Therefore, it is going to hurt me as a
financial institution.
And I can see that at some point the regulators are going
to get involved in this and start asking and requiring for
cyber insurance for certain lines of business that deal with
more information.
So if Mr. Cernak or Ms. Davis would like to take this, it
looks to me like small businesses are the low-hanging fruit for
the bad guys to go after and I think in some cases, I was
talking to some folks a while ago, that it can even be the back
door to bigger business, which means you have an even bigger
liability risk. So would you like to talk about that just for a
second, how you want to approach that particular part of the
coverage?
Mr. CERNAK. Sure. And I think you are right on with that
assessment that we are starting to see small businesses be that
back door into the larger businesses, and we are starting to
see the larger businesses require contractually that these
smaller businesses carry some level of cyber insurance. The
struggle there is oftentimes they may or may not have an
arbitrary dollar amount in terms of the limit they want
carried, and they also do a fairly poor job of identifying the
exact coverages they want those folks to carry.
Your comment relative to the lending industry in
particular, I don't think I have seen that as of yet, but I
think it is a valid concern.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Go ahead, Ms. Davis. Would you like to
comment?
Ms. DAVIS. I totally agree. And thank you for the question.
Absolutely, we are seeing that back-channeling take place where
it does feel as though the larger organizations are locked and
loaded when it comes to their information security measures,
but that supply chain that we reference has become a huge
vulnerability, especially in the manufacturing space and when
we think through items like corporate confidential information.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. I think Mr. Luft made a comment a while
ago with regards to a question I think one of our other folks
made. And the comment was made with regards to covering things
that may have happened prior to the coverage being effective.
And so my question is, does your policies, are there policies
out there that will take care of things that you put in place
that were not accurate or that exposed you not only before, but
what happens if you put something in place, you let the policy
drop or go to a different carrier, do you have tail coverage or
something as well with this? Can you kind of explain the before
and after coverages here if there is such a thing?
Ms. DAVIS. Yeah. So it is an important development in the
cyber insurance space, the idea of prior acts. And the reason
why it came about is because of the statistic that
Congresswoman Velazquez noted of 200 days potentially where a
perpetrator has been in the network and we found the nature of
the threats has changed as attackers used to enter a network,
grab as much information as they can, and then get out, and now
they tend to lurk and try to stay under the radar, grabbing
small bits of information at a time. So that coverage is
available in the marketplace, and typically, we do find that
affordable coverage to that effect is available as customers
change carriers as needed.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentlelady from New York, Ms. Clarke, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Ms. CLARKE. I thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank our
ranking member. I want to also thank our witnesses for your
expert testimony today. This is very important information. I
think the average small business is really at a disadvantage in
this day and age, not really conscious of the intrusion of
those who would want to either extort them or use them as a
tool for penetrating even larger enterprises. So I want to
thank you once again for your insights.
Ms. Davis, I did want to find out from you how does your
company tailor insurance policies? Is it for each client? Is
there a ``one size fits all'' package? Can you give us some
insights into that?
Ms. DAVIS. Sure. So it is helpful to understand the
underwriting process when answering this question, so let me
start with that. Organizations would typically complete one to
two underwriting applications and those are submitted to
various carriers by an insurance broker. It was noted earlier
to really partner with a broker who has expertise in this space
since it is such an evolving area. And those applications have
questions on them. Some are reflective or inclusive of controls
kind of noted through the NIST framework; others are outside of
that. So there would be various applications and levels of
information that are provided at the time of the application
process.
But what the customers request, what an insured requests is
really driven again by more of their risk tolerance, why they
are purchasing the policy. Are they looking at it as more of a
contractual requirement? Or are they looking for a more robust,
cutting-edge solution? So, and a lot of that will influence the
price as well.
Ms. CLARKE. So it is more of a tailored process based on
the questionnaires that the individuals fill out?
Ms. DAVIS. That is correct.
Ms. CLARKE. And how widespread would you say this sort of
practice within insurance, how widespread has that become to
your knowledge?
Ms. DAVIS. The tailoring of solutions?
Ms. CLARKE. No, I am sorry. This sort of insurance practice
for small business getting cybersecurity insurance?
Ms. DAVIS. So just so I understand, you are asking how
widespread is it that the small businesses----
Ms. CLARKE. Within the industry of insurance, your company
is one that has been identified. Have other insurers begun
moving into this space?
Ms. DAVIS. Yes, absolutely. There is a growing recognition
that small businesses are looking and actively seeking to raise
their risk awareness, and insurance is one piece of that
puzzle. It should not be the entire solution, but we are seeing
increases in small- to medium-sized organizations actively
seeking out insurance policies for cyber.
Ms. CLARKE. Yeah, because sort of most brick-and-mortar
type of businesses have insurance, right?
Ms. DAVIS. Right.
Ms. CLARKE. Theft insurance, what have you. But not many of
those types of mom-and-pop establishments, which are very
prevalent in Brooklyn, New York, where we are from----
Ms. DAVIS. Yes.
Ms. CLARKE.--would be looking to essentially look at their
sort of connectivity and determining how they would add that to
a current policy.
Ms. DAVIS. And I think that is a great point and it really
gets at the way that the product has evolved from just a couple
of years ago, where it was really focused on more privacy
exposed organizations, and now we are at that new cusp of
buyers and coverages that are more driven towards that business
interruption, that network interruption, and the downtime and
financial impact that it could mean to those mom-and-pop
organizations.
Ms. CLARKE. Wonderful. Thank you.
Mr. Luft, in your testimony, you point out that small
businesses often do not perceive themselves as being targets
for cyber attacks. What can we do to educate the general public
on the risks of not being protected? And what can we do to
ensure that they have a place to go after a cyber attack takes
place? As it stands now, where do they go?
Mr. LUFT. Well, I would say the first step is the small
business needs to understand that there is extreme risk out
there and they need to look no further than to television.
There are plenty reports about what is happening to major
corporations, to small businesses on a daily basis. So my first
suggestion is that small businesses need to take that
initiative.
From an education standpoint from this body, I do know from
the Federal resources, from the SBA, especially within
Cincinnati, they do a tremendous job of having events informing
small businesses about cybersecurity and actions they need to
take place. So I would think more what needs to happen is the
initiative from the small businesses to take action.
Ms. CLARKE. And probably partnering with some Chambers of
Commerce?
Mr. LUFT. Absolutely. Yes.
Ms. CLARKE. And things of that nature?
Thank you very much again for your testimony here today.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady's time
is expired.
And the gentlelady from American Samoa, Mrs. Radewagen, who
is the Chairman of the Subcommittee on Health and Technology is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. RADEWAGEN. Talofa. Good morning. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and Ranking Member, for holding this critical hearing.
Thank you all for appearing today.
Ms. Davis, my first question is for you. You mentioned that
businesses with personal health and personal financial
information consider data security as more of an issue. Are
there any industries that you believe are prone to cyber
attacks, but currently do not see cybersecurity as a pressing
issue?
Ms. DAVIS. I would say the one class of business where we
are definitely seeing an increase in awareness is in the
manufacturing space. And again, that gets back to more of the
corporate confidential information, the supply chain, and what
interruption, network interruption could mean to those
organizations. Manufacturers, historically, had felt like the
product did not necessarily speak to their coverage needs, to
their exposures, and we are definitely seeing that maturity
start to change in their thought process.
Mrs. RADEWAGEN. Thank you.
My second question is actually for all of you. What do you
think are the biggest risks for cybersecurity insurance
providers that do not exist in other insurance markets? Mr.
Luft?
Mr. LUFT. Your question was specific to the cyber insurance
companies?
Mrs. RADEWAGEN. Insurance providers. Yes.
Mr. LUFT. In speaking about the small businesses, the
reason why they need to think about that as the statistic has
been mentioned several times today, that after a cyber attack,
60 percent of small businesses are out of business within 6
months. I think that is the greatest call for action from a
small business perspective.
Mrs. RADEWAGEN. Ms. Davis?
Ms. DAVIS. I think one of the biggest challenges to
insurers right now is really not having a solid sense of what
their aggregation concerns may be. When we think through
property as an example, you are able to model, right, what your
windstorm-exposed areas are. When it comes to cyber, there are
all of these hidden or sort of silent interdependencies that
you may not be able to track or to model in the underwriting
process. So that is definitely a concern for us.
I would also say the intersection of the various lines of
business is unique to the cyberspace. We are talking today
about kind of the standalone cyber policies, but what we are
finding is that as the threats evolve, some of these coverages
are creeping into different policy lines, and so making sure
that we have a way of identifying those gaps and redundancies
to make sure we are providing good, holistic, meaningful
solutions to our customers.
And lastly, I would just say that this is a product still
in its infancy and so we are learning together across the
industry to make sure that we provide more consistent
underwriting processes, more consistency in our application
process, and in the language and vernacular that is being used.
And I think all those things are hurdles for us at this time.
Mrs. RADEWAGEN. Mr. Cernak?
Mr. CERNAK. Thank you for the question.
I see two major challenges right now, in addition to the
ones that Ms. Davis pointed out. First is the patchwork of
regulations that we are faced with in terms of trying to
address and create products. We have to not only worry about
the State, but the Federal, and now international regulations
and security standards. So that is one item.
The other, as Congressman Luetkemeyer mentioned in his
remarks, is the smartphone is turning 10 years old this year,
right? Never have we tried to insure an exposure that is
evolving this quickly. It is moving with the speed of
technology, and that in and of itself poses challenges.
Mrs. RADEWAGEN. Thank you.
Mr. Geopfert?
Mr. GEOPFERT. I will speak as the neutral third party in
the room. Quite often when things go bad, what we see working
as responders with the insurers and the small businesses, it is
more of a syntax issue. There is no common language to talk
about security and risk within these organizations. So what we
see is the insurance companies reaching out to the small
businesses trying to put together their policies and packages
and understand the risk of the organization they are going to
insure. And the small business, not being malicious, they
simply do not understand security.
When they are filling out the package and trying to
communicate how much data do they have? How do they control it,
their business partners, their systems? They do not know how to
fill out the packages and applications in the right way. So
quite often the insurance companies will pick up that policy
and not really understand what is underneath the hood until
there is a breach, until we come in on the technical side and
start touching the environment. Quite often, the insurance
companies really do not understand how bad bad can get.
And so until we can get to the point where there is sort of
a standardized language where the insurance companies know how
to rate the risk of a small organization and the small
organization knows how to rate themselves, there simply could
be missed expectations on both sides.
Mrs. RADEWAGEN. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. Thank you very much.
The gentlelady's time is expired.
The gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Evans, who is the
Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Tax, and
Capital Access, is recognized. And I would like to thank him
for his leadership on this issue and introducing legislation to
ensure that the SBDCs accredit the people that will help to
train small business folk to better protect themselves against
cyber attacks. So we appreciate his leadership on this. And he
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you and
the ranking member's leadership collectively on the fact that
this is really a bipartisan approach and we have all got to
work together.
So what I want to piggyback a little bit and expand a
little deeper on what Ms. Davis said and the term that she
used, ``risk mapping.'' And used that term, and kind of if you
have a crystal ball, if you say ``risk mapping,'' what
particular industries, much more subject to the risk aspect in
terms of where we are today? You said risk mapping. Give me a
sense on categories of small businesses.
Ms. DAVIS. So when I speak through risk mapping, I am
thinking through, you know, it varies by industry, but it is
also about identifying what is at risk from a pure data network
security view, but also the broader implications that that may
have on your organization. So the lost revenue or the downtime,
it could mean the reputational risk. It could mean bodily
injury or property damage, and bringing together a multi-
stakeholder approach when evaluating cyber risk so that you are
thinking of it as an organization, as an enterprise level.
And in terms of the cyber or the IT risk mapping component
of that, it could mean from a retail organization how many
records you are holding. How long are you retaining them? For
what reason are you retaining them? So that you are always
keeping a proper calibration between your data risk and your
data value.
Mr. EVANS. Okay. I am starting my business. I mean, where
would you go to kind of get that little sense of the mapping
and understanding? To your knowledge, does anybody keep track
of what takes place in terms of the community? Because
listening, you just said the smartphone is 10 years old. Is
there anywhere you can go to get a little sense of that?
Ms. DAVIS. So there are businesses that you can turn to to
help you do that, but I would say the very first step is doing
it internally. And again, engaging your stakeholders within an
organization to make sure that you have got either a risk
manager or somebody who is acting in a risk manager role. You
know, talking with HR or if you have somebody handling the IT
business in-house. But really just beginning to have that
dialogue internally so that you can start to gain and act on
the information that you learn through something like an
incident response plan to help you engage and limit your
damages if and when an event does occur.
Mr. EVANS. To the rest of the panel, hearing what Ms. Davis
said, we just had this discussion about risk mapping. And as
you look at it, what would you say in your particular case to
your clients, understanding the aspect of risk mapping?
Mr. GEOPFERT. The first point I am going to make is this
is, again, dealing with small businesses. If you tried to
explain this concept to them, to your point, they do not know
where to start.
Mr. EVANS. Right.
Mr. GEOPFERT. This would be a perfect role for the Small
Business Development Centers.
Mr. EVANS. Right.
Mr. GEOPFERT. Because they touch so many different
entities, in a lot of cases they become the de facto knowledge-
sharing centers. And in a lot of cases, they would be able to
start you on that process and lay that out.
The other point that I want to make out, when we deal with
risk mapping, in a lot of cases that operates off the mindset
that, like what you see in the news, that there are hacking
crews that are out targeting your specific organization and
going after you. A lot of small businesses, when they are
trying to consider their risk, they do not feel that they are
at risk because we are too small, we are too new. No one is
shooting at us. It misses the point that the vast majority of
breaches are not targeted and you cannot plan for that risk. If
you are plugged into the internet, there is sort of the
background radiation of the internet that is constantly
grinding through looking for anybody that happens to be
vulnerable and it might happen to be you.
And so a lot of organizations, when we first sit down to do
risk mapping with them, they are shocked with that realization
that they are not targeted; they simply were a target of
opportunity on the network. And so I think the Small Business
Development Centers would be great at communicating that
message of in your specific industry, this is what a risk map
would look like. But do not forget there is a permanent
residual risk that you simply cannot excuse yourself because
you are too small or you are not in that industry.
Mr. CERNAK. I think there is also an opportunity for
insurance agents and brokers to begin that process as well.
Because as they are sitting down discussing with their clients
what their exposures are, they can start to ask the leading
questions, if you will, as to what data do they have, where is
it stored, and how do you use it, a lot of the points that Ms.
Davis suggested. So I think insurance agents and brokers need
to raise their level of education to help the clients.
Mr. EVANS. I yield back the balance of my time. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman's time is
expired.
The gentleman from Iowa, Mr. Blum, who is the Chairman of
the Subcommittee on Agriculture, Energy, and Trade, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. BLUM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the
panelists for being here today to talk about a very important
issue to small businesses.
I am and was a small business person, and a few years back
my high-tech company was compromised via a cyber attack. I was
absolutely shocked at how untrained law enforcement was on how
to handle this situation because we lost value. We lost value.
Two questions concerning that for the entire panel: A, has
that changed? Is law enforcement, in general, across the
country better trained now to handle the theft of a company's
information via cyber attack?
And B, what can Congress do or what can government do,
assuming we are not where law enforcement needs to be? What can
we do to--any ideas or suggestions on how we can change that?
Mr. LUFT. To your first question, I hope. And the second
question, as far as what Congress can do, whatever can be done
to help inform small businesses about the number of threats
that are there and helping small businesses understand what
steps they can do to protect themselves is the greatest thing
that could be done right now.
Mr. CERNAK. Again, I think, you know, the patchwork of
regulations also can hinder a little bit of that because there
is this attitude of, you know, well, who is ultimately
responsible for that portion of the law enforcement if you have
got different regulatory bodies that are involved in cyber
events? So I think, again, streamlining that may help as well.
Mr. BLUM. In your opinion, is law enforcement better
trained than they were 5 or 10 years ago on cyber attacks? And
how to prosecute and how to find out what the value is of what
was taken, et cetera, et cetera?
Mr. CERNAK. Yeah. No, and that is an excellent question.
Unfortunately, my focus is more on helping the small businesses
recover relative to the issue and that is where my expertise
stops.
Mr. GEOPFERT. Sir, it pains me to say, as I am a former
special agent, so that is where I came from, are they better
than they were 5 or 10 years ago? Yes. Has it materially
improved the situation? No.
Per my comments earlier, in a lot of cases, what happens
with a small business especially is they do not register on the
Richter scale enough to draw the attention of the law
enforcement entities that could actually do something to
resolve the situation. And so the FBI and Secret Service have a
lot of very skilled people that do exceptional work, but there
is only so much availability, so much bandwidth. And they are
naturally going to gravitate to the larger events. And so while
they would be interested to hear of the issues within the small
businesses, the idea that they are going to send an agent down
to start working on those cases is just not reasonable.
And so what you are left with is local law enforcement, who
usually are very excited to help, but they technically cannot
do anything. They are very effective, and they have put a lot
of people through training where if you have internal theft, if
you have an employee that is committing fraud or something,
they can assist with those types of issues, but at the end of
the day, the goal of law enforcement typically is to affect an
arrest against somebody. And with the vast majority of the
attackers overseas, it is quite often hard to get them
interested. And what they seem to miss is they do play a key
role in this.
Take a typical small business that might not have great
security monitoring themselves, so they do not produce the
evidence internally for us to reconstruct what the events were.
But let us say we can see an offending IP address that touched
them where the attacker came from on the last hub. That IP
address is in somewhere else, another business, another citizen
of the U.S. We cannot go acquire that system. But if I worked
with a law enforcement entity, I could very rapidly get some
type of search authority. They can go acquire that system. We
might be able to recover the evidence we need to see how bad
the event was off of that system. And when we try to do that
now, quite often that is weeks or months to go through that
process. By that time, all the evidence we could have used to
limit the damage is gone.
And so there is a role, but because they normally are not
going to end up in arrest, it is hard to get them engaged.
Mr. BLUM. Thank you very much.
Last question, assuming the value of the compromised data
is covered by insurance, how do you quantify? How do you put a
number on compromised data? How does that work? That has got to
be, I mean, that has got to be a tough thing. Give me some
insight into that, please.
Ms. DAVIS. So it is a tough thing. In talking about the
patchwork of laws, it largely depends when you talk about how
those records are compromised, you know, where they were
compromised, the extent of them, the number of people who are
going to require notification. There is a general sentiment
that there is desensitization happening across the population,
so fewer and fewer people are taking carriers up on offers for
things like credit monitoring. It depends largely on the
forensics, how long they were in your network, how much
information was compromised, and really driving up those
forensics costs; any fines and penalties that could be
resulting from that and if there were data restoration costs
involved. So the sums, they range wildly.
To get to your earlier question, I just want to point out
that they say the prosecution rate for these kind of nefarious
actors only ranges around 10 percent, and so that means that
criminals who were sort of lurking in the dark web are
currently coming out because there is no reason to be in the
dark and that means they are talking to each other. And so the
sophistication and nature of the attacks really continues to
increase.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. BLUM. I yield back the time I do not have, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
The gentleman from Florida, Mr. Lawson, who is the Ranking
Member of the Subcommittee on Health and Technology, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. LAWSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome to the
Committee.
Ms. Davis, as you are well aware, many small businesses may
be unaware of the lack of capital to purchase cyber insurance.
What can small business organizations, SBAs, as well as local
entities, do to better educate the small businesses about the
risk of cyber attacks and the importance of purchasing cyber
insurance?
And I say that because I was in small business and I have
been trying to wind some things down. And a young person came
in. I heard Mr. Cernak talk about the birthday of this here is
10 years old and I had a typewriter in the office, an IBM
Selectric typewriter. And one of the young persons said, what
is that? You know, and I said this is one of IBM's best. They
said, they still make those?
So my question is, I just wanted to say that because when
you talked about the birth of this, what can we do to educate
small businesses about it?
Ms. DAVIS. So I think when it comes to small businesses,
you know, we really have to think through the culture of an
organization. When it comes to controls, the expectations
across industry class are really going to vary wildly, so you
cannot say this one control will make you a better risk. There
is no silver bullet answer, but it is about building a culture
of resilience. It is about understanding what your risks may
be. It is about ongoing employee training. And these are items
that do not have a significant price tag associated with them.
That is just an ongoing effort to make sure that you are
bringing the right people into the conversation and that you
have that multi-stakeholder incident response plan in place if
and when an event occurs. Because what we do find is
organizations who are lacking that sort of preparation are the
ones who have a longer amount of downtime, more financial
impact to their organizations because they were not prepared.
I would say from an insurance perspective, do keep in mind
that although the costs will vary based on some of the
subjectivities we have talked about, you know, they cannot
afford to be out of business for a prolonged period of time.
And so when you think of the safety net that an insurance
policy can bring to the equation, it will likely be a fairly
small financial cost compared to that longer hardship if the
downtime is significant.
Mr. LAWSON. Okay. And I have read the staff report on cyber
insurance can be customized to the specific needs of the
company. Mr. Cernak, what are some of the more innovative ways
that you see cyber insurance can be crafted to the specific
needs of small businesses?
Mr. CERNAK. One of the trends we have seen lately is
tailoring it to small businesses by making it even more
comprehensive. So a lot of the policies that may be out there
currently offer higher limits, but you have to choose which
exact coverages you feel you need as a small business owner.
And the concern is maybe I select the wrong coverages for what
I need.
So we are seeing a trend of packaging multiple coverages
under a common limit, making it a very streamlined approach so
that they do not have to answer 12 pages of underwriting
questions where you are going to get the wrong information, not
by any malicious intent, but simply by the fact that they do
not understand the application. Perhaps provide cyber insurance
as an endorsement to a policy they might already be buying. So
perhaps they are already buying a business owner policy that is
providing them with property and liability insurance. Can we
add on a very nice and tidy package of cyber coverages as an
endorsement to that?
Mr. LAWSON. And a real quick question, anyone can answer.
Will small businesses in the small business be able to do group
coverages, hopefully, to stabilize their premiums?
Mr. CERNAK. So along the lines of almost a captive or some
sort of that, there has been, I know, some conversations around
that idea. It is a little bit of a challenging idea because as
we stated earlier, you know, cyber does provide some level of
aggregation exposure. And so by doing a group approach, you may
be doubling down on that aggregation exposure as well. But
there may be some cost savings, especially as these policies
tend to bring services into play. Those services may be had at
a more competitive price.
Mr. LAWSON. Okay. My time has expired, but I hope you all
remember the IBM Selectric typewriter.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields
back.
And we want to very much thank the panel here for helping
the Committee to better understand an issue that more and more
small businesses all across the country are facing, and that is
the cyber risk that is out there, the attacks that they could
be facing. We are committed as a Committee to doing everything
we can to assist the small business community to better protect
themselves, whether it is best practices, whether it is
potentially cybersecurity insurance, and you all have assisted
us in doing that, so we thank you very much for that.
I would ask unanimous consent that members have 5
legislative days to submit statements and supporting materials
for the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
And if there is no business to come before the Committee,
we are adjourned. Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 12:22 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Testimony of Erica Davis

Senior Vice President and Head of Specialty Products Errors and
Omissions

Zurich North America

before the

House Committee on Small Business

``Protecting Small Businesses from Cyber Attacks: the
Cybersecurity Insurance Option''

July 26, 2017

Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez, and Members of
the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to speak with you
today about the important issue of cybersecurity and the role
of the private sector in providing risk management solutions to
businesses to protect against cyber risk.

As a leader of a team of market-facing underwriters at
Zurich North America, I work with brokers and customers on the
placement of cyber insurance. While there is increased
awareness of the threats across all sizes of organizations,
businesses are still struggling to understand cyber risk: the
full scope of their exposures and how best to protect
themselves and their customers.

Zurich

Zurich is a leading multi-line insurance group with more
than 140 years' experience serving businesses worldwide. Zurich
employs approximately 54,000 people and serves customers in
more than 210 countries and territories.

Zurich entered the United States in 1912, and for more than
100 years has served businesses of all sizes in America,
including Fortune 500 companies, small and medium size
businesses, as well as farmers and ranchers. We are proud to
help them manage risk and give them the confidence to
contribute to the U.S. economy. Zurich's North American
headquarters is in Schaumburg, Illinois, and supports the jobs
of over 9,000 employees across the United States. We are proud
to have a market and employment presence in each of your
states. We are also pleased to offer risk management solutions
to customers in Puerto Rico and will explore the marketplace of
American Samoa.

As one of the five insurance providers currently leading
the North American cybersecurity insurance market, Zurich is
invested in identifying risks and delivering solutions for its
customers. Zurich is committed to staying at the forefront of
the cybersecurity issues, as both the likelihood of a security
breach and costs continue to escalate.

Zurich's Approach to Cyber Risk

Understanding Attitudes to Cyber Risk. As the cyber threat
landscape continues to evolve, companies across all industries
find themselves increasingly vulnerable to potential harm from
a security or privacy event.

Most loss dollars arise from first-party privacy breach
costs, such as forensics, breach coaches, consumer notification
and credit monitoring. We are also seeing:

Business interruption loss

Liability lawsuits

Regulatory fines

Reputational damage

Shareholder suits

Businesses today face difficult decisions about
cybersecurity and how best to manage their risks: deciding
whether they should retain the residual risk or transfer it
through the purchase of a cyber insurance product.

The role of insurance is continuously increasing as
customers are now seeking industry feedback and risk insights.
It has become more of a partnership, with businesses focusing
on not just what happens post-breach and a loss being paid.
They value having a stable of pre-vetted vendors available to
them if they are impacted by a data or security event. They are
also focusing more on pre-breach services to guide them through
risk mitigation tools like technology assessments.

In October 2016, Zurich and Advisen (a leading provider of
data, media and technology solutions for the commercial
property and casualty insurance market) released a sixth annual
survey of risk managers, insurance buyers, and other risk
professionals on the current state of trends in information
security and cyber risk management. Key findings included:

Eight-seven percent of respondents believe a
technology interruption would have a moderate-to-
significant impact on their business.

Over the last six years, the proportion of
companies buying security and privacy cyber insurance
has increased by 85%, from 35% in 2011 to 65% in 2016.

For the firsts time in the six years of this
study, general counsel has surpassed information
technology as the department most frequently
responsible for assuring compliance with all applicable
federal, state, or local privacy laws, including state
breach notification laws.

Most companies surveyed (97 percent) clearly
recognize the importance of collaboration between their
risk management and information technology departments
on issues related to cyber security.

Industries with substantial personally
identifiable information, personal health information
and/or personal financial information, in general,
consider data security and privacy to be a more
significant risk. As a result, they also are more
likely to purchase security and privacy insurance and
engage in risk management activities.

Costs related to a breach of customer/
personal information are the leading reason for
purchasing cyber insurance.

Coverage. Zurich provides coverage for cyber risk to
businesses of all sizes, and cyber coverage is tailored based
on customer need. While the historical reason for purchasing
cyber insurance is liability concerns and costs related to
breach of customer or personal information, coverages recently
have focused on business interruption and supply chain downtime
as the result of a cyber event.

Risk culture is also critical to underwriting any line of
business. Cyber insurance is no exception. It is critical for
businesses to build a culture of awareness at all levels.
Events in recent years have raised awareness of cyber risk
across all industry segments. Businesses must adopt a mindset
of resilience rather than just protection.

More businesses are beginning to view information security
as an organizational challenge rather than just a technology
issue. The business community's interconnectivity and reliance
on technology has increased, which creates more points of entry
and new threat vectors. The exposure has broadened to include
potential property damage for something like critical
infrastructure, bodily injury caused by autonomous vehicles or
cyber espionage.

Therefore, the underwriting of the cyber product is
evolving as the risks are morphing. The insurance community is
continuously working to understand the full scope of the
exposures and what the controls might need to be. Each business
needs to be underwritten differently.

Resilience. Organizations of all sizes now realize they are
at risk of a security or privacy event. Finding solutions to
the most complicated of cyber risks will require collaboration
between the insurance industry, governments, academia and other
think tanks to establish standards, encourage information
sharing, build resilience and create adequate global
governance.

In an effort to continuously help customers understand and
protect themselves from risk, Zurich began participating as a
key industry consultant in a ``first of its kind'' public-
private partnership by the University of Maryland and the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). The
partnership embarked on a research project to assist companies
ascertain the effectiveness of their information security and
cyber supply chain best practices, with an end goal of helping
organizations increase their cyber risk assessment and
management capability. The project built on an existing Cyber
Risk Portal, which collects data by allowing participating
businesses to anonymously upload information to compare their
cybersecurity capabilities to the existing NIST Framework, as
well as to their peers and competitors.

To further assist businesses with their security and
privacy risk management, Zurich is also collaborating with
Deloitte to help improve a company's cyber resilience.
Policyholders can complement Zurich's cyber coverage with pre-
breach cyber risk assessment and management services through
Deloitte to understand their level of cyber exposure and
resilience. These services include standards-based risk
assessment of an organization's threat detection and incident
response capabilities, as well as risk mitigation
recommendations. This is just one area where Zurich is focusing
on cyber risk mitigation rather than solely risk transfer.

Insurance Issues

Data Breach Uniformity. Because there is a myriad of state
laws governing data breach, we are interested in a national,
uniform standard on data security and breach notification.
While this is not directly in the jurisdiction of this
committee, it is certainly relevant for you as Small Business
Committee Members to recognize the complexity of cybersecurity
governance from a business perspective. We appreciate the
efforts of Congressman Luetkemeyer in this regard.

Cyber Accumulation. A challenging issue for all insurers is
cyber accumulation. Given the cyber interconnectedness of
potential data loss, business functions, and supply chains, the
ability to quantify exposures, accurately price risks, and
manage accumulations and capital requirements will remain a
difficult issue for the insurance community for the foreseeable
future.

Cyber as a Peril. Zurich is contributing to the public
dialogue around interconnectivity and the full range of
exposures from cyber as a peril. The extent of exposures
presented by a cybersecurity event is beyond the current scope
of coverage. For example, physical damage is rarely offered on
a cyber insurance policy, but can result from a cyber attack.
The full range of the exposure is too broad to be covered by
the private sector; not all causes of loss can be transferred
to an insurance policy. Cybersecurity breaches can cause losses
including property damage, bodily injury and reputation risk,
and we are investigating the best way to consider these
impacts.

Conclusion

Zurich continues to refine its understanding of cyber
exposures so we can help our customers understand the risk,
make thoughtful decisions on our current product, and develop
additional insurance solutions going forward.

With data breach, ransomware and other attacks on small
businesses occurring daily, we appreciate your focus on risk
management solutions provided by the private sector.

Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today. I
look forward to answering your questions.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6297.010

Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez, and members of
the Committee, thank you for inviting me to testify. My name is
Eric Cernak, and I am Vice President U.S. Cyber and Privacy
Risk Practice Leader at Munich Re, US. Munich Re provides a
range of reinsurance and insurance solutions through various
companies that are part of the Group. In the U.S., Munich Re
provides cyber- and privacy-related insurance for small
businesses through Hartford Steam Boiler Group (HSB)
headquartered in Hartford Connecticut. HSB has an A++
(Superior) financial strength rating from A.M. Best Company and
has underwritten cyber reinsurance and insurance for over 12
years. Small business cyber insurance clients are served by
over 1,500 HSB employees in our Hartford office and regional
offices throughout the U.S.

I am testifying today on behalf of the Reinsurance
Association of America (RAA) and the Property Casualty Insurers
Association of America (PCI).

The RAA is the leading trade association of property and
casualty reinsurers doing business in the United States. RAA
membership is diverse, including reinsurance underwriters and
intermediaries licensed in the U.S. and those that conduct
business on a cross border basis. The RAA represents its
members before state, federal and international bodies.

PCI is composed of nearly 1,000 member companies,
representing the broadest cross section of insurers of any
national trade association. PCI members write $202 billion in
annual premium, 35 percent of the nation's property casualty
insurance. Member companies write 42 percent of the U.S.
automobile insurance market, 27 percent of the homeowners'
market, 33 percent of the commercial property and liability
market and 34 percent of the private workers' compensation
market.

Today's hearing is an important discussion to highlight the
success of the private sector in developing cyber insurance and
to help raise awareness among the small business community
about the option of securing cyber insurance, which can offer
both preventative, risk-management tools and act as a critical
safety net should a cyber event occur. My perspective today is
from that of a reinsurer and insurer. Munich Re's Hartford
Steam Boiler Group, as a reinsurer (insurance for insurers) for
primary insurers, provides reinsurance to share in the risk of
loss, helps primary insurers underwrite cyber risk and develop
products, and provides other services to primary insurers that
are writing, for example, cyber insurance specifically for
small businesses. HSB, as a primary insurer, also offers cyber
insurance and services directly to customers (via brokers and
agents).

ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF CYBER INSURANCE

Cyber is a rapidly evolving risk and reinsurers and
insurers continue to develop products to meet the increasing
demand and needs of the insureds, including small businesses.
The magnitude of known attacks, development of new technologies
and security measures to protect against such attacks are
growing dynamically. As reported by Risk Management Solutions
in its 2017 Cyber Risk Landscape Report, the number of large
magnitude data exfiltration events has grown substantially in
the years prior to 2016 (with 2016 showing some recent
flattening of incident rates). To protect against these
threats, companies are increasingly investing in their own
cybersecurity systems. And, per the RMS report, global
expenditure on cybersecurity is estimated to have grown 14
percent year-on-year, from $75B in 2015 to $86B in 2016.

According to a report published last month by Aon titled,
``Global Cyber Market Overview, Uncovering the Hidden
Opportunities,'' the global stand-alone cyber insurance market
in 2016 was around $2.3 billion in premium, up from $1.7 in
2015, and the U.S. accounted for 90% of the 2015 market. The
report noted that ``the market is still believed to be in its
infancy and penetration levels are still relatively low.'' It
estimated that globally ``over 75%'' of certain large
businesses but ``less than 5%'' of small and medium-sized
businesses secured some cyber insurance. In the U.S., around
19% of small businesses secured some cyber insurance. Aon's
report projected that the U.S. stand-alone cyber insurance
market gross written premium will continue to grow at 30% per
year and could more than triple from 2015 to 2020, from $1.5
billion to $5.6 billion.

More insurers have become interested in offering cyber
insurance over time. Less than a dozen insurers offered some
cyber insurance in the early 2000s compared to more than 70 in
2016. Reinsurance risk transfer options for insurers with
regard to cyber may also become increasingly available. Aon's
report mentioned another study by Aon Benfield that ``estimates
the 2015 global reinsurance market to be worth c. $525m in
annual premium.'' Further, ``more than 15 reinsurers actively
write standalone cyber treaties and the number is increasing.''

Most cyber insurance policies have their roots in liability
coverage. Initially, these policies were considered ``stand-
alone,'' meaning the business needed to purchase the coverage
separately from any other insurance, such as general liability,
they might be purchasing, as these policies did not provide
explicit coverage for cyber-related losses. The first cyber
policies were often expensive, difficult to obtain, and
required a relatively cumbersome and confusing application
process. For these reasons, the initial success related to
cyber policies came from the larger end of the market--Fortune
1000 companies--and provided limits generally ranging from $10M
to $25M+.

Early on, many insurers required the applicant to submit to
an external data system penetration test. The results of the
test were then submitted as part of the insurance application.
As cyber insurance became more prevalent, most insurers dropped
the penetration test requirement and focused on the
application. As the market has evolved, it is now possible for
an insured to obtain up to $5M in coverage by answering as few
as 4-20 questions.

As more attacks on larger businesses occurred and media
coverage increased, smaller business began to take notice of
the exposure. The insurance market responded by creating cyber
insurance endorsements, which is simply an insurance product
that is added to policies the small businesses were already
purchasing, such as their business owners' policy or commercial
property policy. Business owners' policies typically cover
small business property and liability exposures in one simple
insurance package, and commercial property policies typically
cover the property exposures of larger businesses. A cyber
insurance endorsement can cover various exposures not addressed
by Businessowners' or Commercial Property policies by providing
coverage for costs resulting from a breach of personal
information, cyber extortion, transmission of a virus to
another entity, breaching another entity's propriety
information, etc. These endorsements afforded the insured a
streamlined product and application process (generally an
application is not needed for base limits), and lower premium
for a commensurate limit (e.g. $100,000). Often these cyber
endorsements could be automatically quoted without the insured
ever completing an application--greatly simplifying the
process.

With either the stand-alone cyber insurance policy or the
endorsement approach, a significant part of the value
proposition is the value-added loss prevention services that
can be ``bundled'' into the policy to reduce the insureds'
exposure. For example, a cyber insurance policy could include
risk-management services such as vulnerability assessments,
next generation firewalls, IT security audits, and intrusion
detection/penetration testing. These were ranked as a the top
five most helpful services related to cyber insurance in a 2016
survey of small businesses conducted by Hartford Steam Boiler.

In that same survey, 36% of participants gave three reasons
why they did not purchase cyber insurance. The number one
reason given was that they claimed they did not need it. The
second was the expense of coverage, and the third was that the
process was too complicated and confusing. These results
suggest that education is key to increasing the take-up rate of
cyber insurance by small businesses, particularly given that
86% of the respondents stated that they store Personally
Identifying or Personal Health Information.

HOW TO INCREASE THE TAKE-UP RATE OF CYBER INSURANCE BY
SMALL BUSINESS

The small business objections to cyber insurance noted
above, two of the three speak to the misunderstanding of the
value proposition of cyber insurance relative to the exposure.
Small businesses would benefit greatly from better
understanding the risks presented to their operations by cyber-
related exposures and the cyber insurance option to address
those risks. Almost every business now relies upon at least one
computer to conduct business, whether it is for accepting
payments, designing parts, or servicing customers. It is
important for small businesses to better understand their
reliance upon technology and the impact to their operations
should it not perform as expected due to a cyber event.

The public and private sectors have a role to play in
helping businesses, small and large alike, to overcome the ``it
won't happen to me'' mentality and constructively address cyber
vulnerabilities while preparing for the aftermath of a cyber
event. Cyber attacks may not be a matter of ``if'' but
``when.'' It is essential for businesses, which are
increasingly interconnected, to be prepared, protected, and
resilient, and insurance can help with all three. Businesses
are no longer being attacked solely for the data they have but
increasingly for the access to larger businesses with which
they conduct business. This exposure is now being recognized by
larger companies as they frequently require smaller business
partners to carry cyber insurance as part of their contractual
relationship.

In addition to education efforts, the insurance marketplace
needs to continue to refine the process and coverage to reduce
the complexity associated with purchasing cyber insurance. One
significant challenge is that the terminology in a coverage
form can vary greatly from insurer to insurer, thus making it
harder for an applicant to understand what is covered in
different policies. Last year, Munich Re's Hartford Steam
Boiler Group participated in a Treasury-led project to develop
a glossary of cyber insurance terms to help simplify and
standardize cyber insurance terminology.

LIABILITY THAT MAY STILL BE PRESENT EVEN IF AN INSURED
PURCHASES CYBER COVERAGE

As previously discussed, the terminology used in coverage
forms can vary greatly from insurer to insurer, which makes
understanding coverage difficult when a business is evaluating
its needs.

Typical cyber-related coverages can include:

Data Breach Response

Data Breach Liability

Computer attack

Network Security Liability

Media Liability

Cyber Extortion

Misdirected Payment Fraud (e.g. Business Email
Compromise)

Fines and penalties (may not be insurable in all
jurisdictions)

Some cyber policies also are beginning to examine and/or
address the exposure related to:

Property and bodily injury resulting from a cyber
event

Failure of the Internet and the potential impact
to business operations

However, the insured may still need to examine other
policies for potential coverage for cyber-related exposures.
These other policies may include:

Crime

Directors & Officers (which covers legal actions
against top company executives)

Contractual Liability (which protects a
policyholder from liabilities assumed under a contract)

Technology Errors & Omissions for exposures
resulting from IT products the insured creates

MINIMUM SECURITY EXPECTATIONS FOR OBTAINING COVERAGE

Where an application is required for a cyber product,
insurers may want to understand if the applicant complies with
various security requirements (when applicable for the industry
in question) such as the Payment Card Industry Data Security
Standard (PCI-DSS), Health Information Technology for Economic
and Clinical Health Act (HITECH), Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act
(GLBA), Red Flag Rule, and Sarbanes-Oxley.

Additionally, from a technical perspective, many
applications will inquire about encryption being deployed,
systems patching cadence, back-up procedures, password
management, firewalls installed, anti-malware software,
intrusion detection/protection devices deployed, etc.

However, there is growing recognition that strengthening
companies' security culture, embodied by various policies
(privacy/security and document retention/destruction), criminal
and credit checks conducted on employees, and robust training
programs, deserves strong consideration as part of the
underwriting process. This also is supported by the above-
referenced Hartford Steam Boiler survey finding that nearly
half (47%) of all data breaches were attributed to a vendor/
contractor, followed by employee negligence or malfeasance
(21%), and lost or stolen mobile device (20%). Hacking or other
cyber-attack only represented 11% of data breaches.

By contrast, when no application is needed for an
endorsement-based cyber product, often the form may contain
language stating that the insured needs to comply with
reasonable and industry-accepted protocols. These protocols may
include:

Providing and maintaining appropriate physical
premises, computer, and Internet security

Maintaining and updating at appropriate intervals
backups of computer data

Protecting transactions, such as processing credit
card, debit card and check payments

Appropriate disposal/destruction of files
containing sensitive personal or corporate information/data

HOW INSURERS DETERMINE COVERAGE AND PRICE

Cyber insurance is unlike most other insurance coverages in
four fundamental areas. Insurers are grappling with the
following factors in offering cyber coverage and at what
premium/limit.

There is no significant historical loss data.

The exposure is relatively nascent as the Internet has only
been commercially viable since the late 1990's. Further, the
loss data generated even 10 years ago does not fully represent
the exposure today. For example, virtual currencies and
smartphones did not exist 10 years ago.

Due to the lack of loss data, insurers have adapted
pricing, terms, and conditions from other lines of business,
such as technology errors and omissions, crime, media
liability, etc. Some insurers also have looked to conduct
primary research and have interviewed experts in various
fields, including IT forensics, attorneys, breach response
service providers, public relation firms, and others. Through
this process insurers can better understand the frequency of
events, how long events may take to address, and the associated
costs for the various services. These figures are then
converted into insurance premiums. As experience develops,
these initial figures can be blended with the actual insurance
claims results to refine the premiums being charged.

Another tool insurers have deployed to improve cyber
insurance products and pricing is the survey of potential
customers (e.g., business owners) to understand specific kinds
of concerns, the frequency of issues they face, and the costs
to address them. This helps insurers prioritize which coverages
to develop and include in a cyber insurance product and
determine associated terms and pricing.

The cause of loss is generated by an active adversary,
which is capable of changing tactics and targets to suit their
needs based on advances of technology.

As new technologies are introduced, exposures that
previously did not exist become commonplace. For example, cyber
extortion was typically limited in scope to targeted attacks
where the attacker threatened to release data that had been
stolen or to continue with a Denial of Service attack unless a
ransom was paid. These attacks took significant time to conduct
and often posed a significant risk to the perpetrator as they
needed to interact with the company to receive payment. With
the advent of virtual currency, ransomware exploded and is now
a leading cause of loss.

Legislative and regulatory requirements continuously
evolve.

Insurance companies need to monitor the evolving state,
federal, and international privacy and data protection laws.
While these laws are designed to protect consumers, they may
create an exposure to small business owners. For example, there
are 48 different state breach notification/data protection laws
with which a small (or large) business must comply. Many of the
first cyber insurance policies focused solely on liability
exposures of third parties (as opposed to those faced by the
entity purchasing the coverage) and only provided a small
sublimit (the maximum amount for which the insurance policy
would pay for in the event of this type of loss, which is less
than the overall limit of the policy) for costs the insured
might incur complying with various breach notification laws. As
more states followed California in the mid-200's with their own
breach notification laws, insurers responded by expanding their
breach response coverages.

Cyber poses potential aggregation or accumulation risk for
insurers.

Cyber risk is not bound by geography, which greatly
increases the aggregation risk from an insurer's perspective.

Many insurers will identify potential causes of aggregation
(e.g. particular industry, service providers, failure of the
Internet, etc.) and either decide to exclude that cause of
aggregation or to monitor the amount of insurance being
provided very closely. For example, an insurer may monitor the
number of insureds using a particular cloud service provider.

CONCLUSION

As the private cyber insurance market continues to rapidly
expand, reinsurers and insurers will continue to monitor and
analyze cyber risks, survey and work to better understand the
needs of existing and potential customers, develop insurance
products and services accordingly, and help insureds following
a cyber event. It is equally, if not more important, to U.S.
businesses for federal and state governments' lawmakers,
regulators, and other entities focusing on cybersecurity and
evaluating potential regulatory changes, to develop clear,
consistent requirements and to avoid a patchwork of different
requirements and standards. Such a patchwork would impede
companies' ability to effectively implement cyber security
protocols and respond quickly and appropriately to a cyber
security event. Although the nature of reinsurance means that
reinsurers do not directly interact with consumers, and
therefore reinsurers' obligations in the event of cyber
security events differs somewhat from the primary insurance
industry, the entire insurance and reinsurance industry (as
well as consumers) benefit from uniform, consistent standards
that are both proportional and flexible enough to work in an
ever-changing cyber environment.

We also encourage the Administration to coordinate
cybersecurity policy among federal agencies and designate lead
agencies to coordinate discussions where appropriate. This
should include discussions with state insurance regulators to
encourage healthy cyber standards while eliminating conflicts
and duplicative regulation.

Thank you for your time and your interest in this very
important issues.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

House Small Business Committee

``Protecting Small Businesses from Cyber Attacks: the
Cybersecurity Insurance Option''

AIA STATEMENT

July 26, 2017

In today's increasingly interconnected world Cybersecurity
is a risk that no business is immune from regardless of
industry or size. We appreciate the House Small Business
Committee (Committee) holding the hearing. ``Protecting Small
Business from Cyber Attacks: the Cybersecurity Insurance
Option.'' The comments below are intended to provide a brief
overview of cybersecurity insurance and some potential
challenges for this market.

As with many other emerging and complex risks, insurance
is, first and foremost, a useful targeted risk transfer
mechanism. A cyber event can be costly for any business,
including small and medium businesses, so minimizing that
financial impact through cyber insurance is beneficial. And,
just as cyber risks continue to evolve and develop, so has the
cyber insurance market. Therefore, a key point is that the
insurance market is developing responsibly to meet changing
client demands and offering produts tailored to meet small,
medium and large business needs.

Approximately 15 years ago, ``cyber insurance'' originated
as a technology errors and omissions product that provided
coverage for negligent acts, errors, and omissions in the
deliverance of technology products and services. Today, stand-
alone ``cyber insurance'' products may include coverage for
forensic activities, legal fees associsated with determining
how best to comply with each state or territory's notification
rules, notification and credit monitoring costs, business
interruption, and damages and expenses incurred in connection
with claims brought against a third party, such as costs
associated with responding to or defending against regulatory
inquires, payment of fines, and lawsuit liability. More
recently, some insurers may also offer dedicated cyber coverage
for bodily injury or property damage.

Importantly, cyber risk should be considered a peril.
Coverage for the cyber peril can be addressed, in whole or
part, in a dedicated, stand-alone product or embedded in a
multi-risk policy that might include cyber as one of the many
causes of loss, for instance a commercial property policy or a
directors and officer's policy.

Moreover, cyber insurance can serve as a valuable tool in
crafting a risk management program. Hence, communication is an
important aspect of the cyber insurance purchasing process. The
process typically begins with a conversation with the insurance
carrier and with the advice of an insurance agent and broker
whose expertise guides the insured in evaluating its coverage
needs and existing insurance products to determine whether
insurance gaps exist and how best to address those gaps.

Additionally, cyber insurers continually innovate and offer
add-on products and access to strategic partnerships that small
business may find invaluable. For instance, many insurers have
partnerships with computer forensic firms, public relation
coaches, and expert legal counsel. Timing is critical in the
event of a breach, therefore, having a list of identified
resources could be crucial. As well as post-event resources,
pre-event resources may also be important to a small business.
For example, risk assessments, employee training, and table-top
exercises are useful tools that an insurer may offer.

It is important to note that there are clear business
benefits to cyber insurance, as identified above, but cyber
insurance should not be seen as a driver of behavior, guarantor
of cyber security, or a standard-setting vehicle. Regardless of
a business's size, cybersecurity requires an ever-evolving
adaptable approach that is incorporated into an entity's
overall risk culture and each individual company is uniquely
and best able to assess its own risk and global approach to
managing cyber exposures and deciding what role insurance will
play.

We recognize that small and medium businesses have limited
resources and the decision to purchase cyber insurance is one
that should remain within the businesses sole discretion. As
such, our industry is committed to responsibly meeting market
demand and offering innovative solutions that best suit our
client's needs.

Therefore, the cyber insurance market should be allowed to
grow organically without undue pressure that could stifle
innovation and market growth. Rather, through public-private
partnerships we should explore solutions for addressing the
challenge that confront market growth. Some of these challenges
include the following:

Education - Businesses are not always
convinced that they are at risk of a cyber-event. Size
and industry may be factors that convince an entity
they are not at risk, but unfortunately, today's
connected society and supply chain interdependencies
makes everyone a target for unscrupulous actors.

Data and Risk Modeling - The risks presented
by the cyber age are new and more rapidly evolving
compared to more traditional risks that insures have
been underwriting for hundreds of years. Thus,
sufficient loss data and risk modeling capabilities,
which are critical to responsible underwriting, will
need time to develop. Moreover, the risk is continually
evolving as bad actors look for new ways to expropriate
information and process it for their own purposes.

Aggregation and Accumulation - As indicated
above, coverage for cyber events may be embedded in a
number of insurance policy types. Further, cyber is
also a global challenge, sometimes without geographic
borders or predictable locational centers, thereby
increasing the geographic risks broadly. The
increasingly interconnected business environment and
the ubiquitous presence of cyber in our commercial
world also serves to increase the aggregation and
accumulation risks insurers must manage.

Forensic Review - A lack of actuarial data
is not the only data gap that insurers may face. Often
times insureds may avoid sharing data such as forensic
reports with their insurer in an effort to avoid an
assertion that they have waived the attorney client or
work product privilege. Though these concerns are
understandable, failing to provide forensic information
hurts insurance carriers and their clients in two ways:
(i) it makes it more difficult to evaluate claims
triggered by a cyber-event given that critical
information is withheld from the carrier; and (ii)
there will be less information available to insurance
carriers to aid in risk management and risk transfer
solutions for the client and more broadly for the
benefit of the cyber insurance market.

Insurers are committed to meeting the challenges of market
growth so that they can continue to evolve their product
offerings in order to provide risk transfer solut8ions that
benefit businesses of all sizes. Thank you for your interest in
this subject matter. Our membership is an active participant in
the cyber insurance market and we would be happy to discuss
this issue and answer any questions that you may have.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT ON BEHALF OF WILLIS TOWERS WATSON

BEFORE THE

UNITED STATES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

HEARING ENTITLED, ``PROTECTING SMALL BUSINESSES FROM CYBER ATTACKS: THE
CYBERSECURITY INSURANCE OPTION''

JULY 26, 2017

On behalf of Willis Towers Watson, we submit the following
statement in response to the above-referenced hearing.

Small businesses (SBs) tend to be less concerned about
their technology/cyber risks than their publicly traded
counterparts. This view may be due primarily to a limited
understanding of the scope of risks these organizations face.
According to the Verizon Data Brach Repot, approximately 61% of
data breach victims are businesses with less than 1,000
employees. With this in mind, here are some of the common
misconceptions we found among SBs:

a. We're not a target for attackers because we don't
have valuable data: Any business that processes data
and is connected to the internet has cyber risk. While
SBs often do not have large `troves' of data, they
still have data. Attackers view access to SB networks
as a `path of least resistance.' Compared to large
publicly traded companies, SBs may not have significant
resources invested and dedicated to protecting their
critical assets. As such, it is easier for a hacker to
infiltrate a high volume of SBs than one large
organizations with stronger controls.

b. We outsource the storage/processing of data: Most
SBs think outsourcing data storage and processing will
completely transfer their risk and potential liability
to the outsource provider. However, the organization
that owns the data ultimately has reasonability for it.
While there may be some shared liability with outsource
providers, most have limit of liability provisions in
their contracts. Further, determining liability is a
lengthy process and something an organization will be
challenged to devote time to while responding to a
breach.

c. We have adequate technology security controls:
While technology controls are important and part of the
solution, cyber risk at its core is a people risk.
Willis Towers Watson claims data reveals that 69% of
cyber breaches can be attributed to an organization's
employees and can stem from a lost laptop, a
disgruntled employee, inadequate cyber awareness
training or hiring of non-qualified employees.
Therefore, to address these vulnerabilities, it is
important organizations to also devote attention and
resources to people solutions, such as employee
engagement, awareness and hiring the appropriate IT
talent.

Both Business to Business (B2B) and Business to Consumer
(B2C) organizations should understand their cyber risk and
consider cyber insurance as a method of risk transfer. For B2B
organizations, it's easier to understand why cyber insurance is
important. When dealing with other businesses, there may be
contractual requirements that require organizations to carry
cyber insurance or technology professional services coverage.

If an organization is providing technology professional
services, it is important for them to put together technology
professional services coverage with cyber liability insurance,
as there is an overlap in coverage. Even if an organization is
not providing a technology professional service, cyber
insurance should be considered as it can provide balance sheet
protection for both first-party coverage (out of pocket
expenses - i.e., business interruption, data restoration, and
cyber extortion) and third-party liabilities (lawsuits alleging
financial harm as a result of an organization's errors or
omissions).

For B2C organizations, historical buyers of cyber insurance
were industries that held a lot of records (i.e., retail,
healthcare and education); however, the more recent cyber
claims have affected other industries such as manufacturing,
nonprofits and critical infrastructure.

One of the best practices for SBs seeking to understand
their cyber exposures is to review cyber claims and losses
scenarios, such as the following:

Retail

An online retailer noticed unusual activity on its server,
which prompted an investigation. They discovered that hackers
had stolen an employee's credentials and used them to access
the names, billing addresses and credit card numbers of
approximately 50,000 customers during checkout.

Outcome: The insurer retained the appropriate vendors and
notified the necessary individuals and agencies. The retailer
incurred approximately $1M in first-party costs.

Healthcare

A hospital office employee stole medical profiles,
histories and detailed personal information on approximately
125,000 patients.

Outcome: The insurer provided the client hospital with
crisis support team, made up of outside vendors, to help
resolve the breach and reimbursed the hospital approximately
$800,000 for the crisis team's expenses.

Manufacturing

A consumer products company underwent a software system
upgrade performed by a vendor. The system upgrade failed, which
caused all of the manufacturer's systems to malfunction on the
same day. This caused an unintentional and unplanned outage,
which resulted in the suspension of the manufacturer's
operations.

Outcome: $2M was paid by the insurer for extra expenses
associated with the business interruption, including expenses
to continue normal business operations.

Technology Professional Services

A technology services provider of software applications,
implementation services and support contracted with a social
welfare organization to consolidate and update its legacy IT
systems. The social welfare organization filed suit against
insured, claiming it failed to meet contractual deadlines,
delivered a poorly performing system and failed to properly
staff the project.

Outcome: The social welfare organization sought damages in
excess of $15M.

Cyber Extortion

A client's computer server was maliciously attacked by a
virus that encrypted their data and demanded a $5,000 ransom to
unencrypt. The insured reported the matter to the FBI and local
authorities, and refused to pay the ransom.

Outcome: The insurer engaged ex expert to perform a
forensic analysis of the client's system. The expert found the
impacted server didn't contain any confidential information.
They removed the virus and strengthened the client's data
security protections. The insurer reimbursed the insured
$45,000 for forensic costs incurred.

Handling cyber breaches can be complex and expensive, and
costs can easily amount to thousands of dollars or millions if
an organization is not proactive. SBs need to take advantage of
cyber insurance, as it provides a risk transfer, as well as a
partnership with the various experts (such as forensics,
attorneys and public relations) that need to be involved in the
event of a breach. Most cyber insurers offer their
policyholders a choice of breach response services, typically
from a list of pre-approved vendors. Many allow the
policyholders' own choice of vendor. Most insurers also grant
policyholders access to a complimentary cyber risk management
portal that includes the most updated information on emerging
cyber threats and the latest reports on risk mitigation
measures and practices. Moreover, premiums and other terms and
conditions are extremely competitive as market conditions are
relatively soft with slight rate decreases. This is likely due
to additional capacity in the market and underwriters being
able to better quantify exposure.

In sum, SBs need to be as proactive as their larger
counterparts by: (1) conducting proper risk assessment and
quantification; (2) investing in a cyber-savvy culture; (3)
insuring cyber threats they can't mitigate and; (4) allocating
enough capital to technological cyber defenses.

Willis Towers Watson (NASDAQ: WLTW) is a leading global
advisory, broking and solutions company that helps clients
around the world turn risk into a path for growth. With roots
dating to 1828, Willis Towers Watson has 39,000 employees in
more than 120 countries. We design and deliver solutions that
manage risk, optimize benefits, cultivate talent, and expand
the power of capital to protect and strengthen institutions and
individuals. Our unique perspective allows us to see the
critical intersections between talent, assets and ideas - the
dynamic formula that drives business performance. Together, we
unlock potential. Learn more at willistowerswatson.com.

[all]
