- REVERSING ENTREPRENEURSHIP DECLINE

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REVERSING THE ENTREPRENEURSHIP DECLINE

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
JULY 19, 2017

__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 115-030
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

26-250                         WASHINGTON : 2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
ROD BLUM, Iowa
JAMES COMER, Kentucky
JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, Puerto Rico
DON BACON, Nebraska
BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
ROGER MARSHALL, Kansas
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
DWIGHT EVANS, Pennsylvania
STEPHANIE MURPHY, Florida
AL LAWSON, JR., Florida
YVETTE CLARK, New York
JUDY CHU, California
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
VACANT

Kevin Fitzpatrick, Majority Staff Director
Jan Oliver, Majority Deputy Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Adam Minehardt, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Steve Chabot................................................     1
Hon. Nydia Velazquez.............................................     2

WITNESSES

Gregory Crawford, Ph.D., President, Miami University, Oxford,
Ohio...........................................................     4
Ms. Karen Kerrigan, President & CEO, Small Business &
Entrepreneurship Council, Vienna, VA...........................     6
Mr. Joe Schocken, CEO, Broadmark Capital, Seattle, WA............     8

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Gregory Crawford, Ph.D., President, Miami University, Oxford,
Ohio.......................................................    29
Ms. Karen Kerrigan, President & CEO, Small Business &
Entrepreneurship Council, Vienna, VA.......................    33
Mr. Joe Schocken, CEO, Broadmark Capital, Seattle, WA........    42
Questions and Responses for the Record:
Questions from Hon. Aumua Amata Coleman Radewagen to Ms.
Karen Kerrigan.............................................    49
Additional Material for the Record:
None.

REVERSING ENTREPRENEURSHIP DECLINE

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 19, 2017

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 11:00 a.m., in Room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Steve Chabot
[chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chabot, Luetkemeyer, Radewagen,
Knight, Kelly, Blum, Bacon, Fitzpatrick, Marshall, Norman,
Velazquez, Murphy, Lawson, Clarke, Adams, Espaillat, and
Schneider.
Chairman CHABOT. Good morning. The Committee will come to
order.
We appreciate the panel being here, and I will be brief in
my opening remarks so we can get the testimony.
Last month, the national unemployment rate was down to 4.4
percent, and the stock market continues to rise, setting new
highs almost daily. But amid these encouraging statistics, the
American economy continues to grow at only half its historic
average. A slower economy means lower growth and wages for
American workers, a higher national debt, and makes it harder
for Americans to achieve the American dream.
Just last week, the administration acknowledged the need
for faster economic growth through their MAGAnomics plan, a
term I am told was coined by our former colleague and new OMB
director, Mick Mulvaney. I look forward to continue working
with the administration on their priorities of regulation and
tax reform to grow the economy.
One group that should benefit from these reforms are new
and small businesses, as they are the main engines of economic
growth. They create the majority of our nation's jobs and spur
innovation. However, since the great recession, there has been
a significant decline in entrepreneurship, which may in part
explain the slow economic growth experienced in American today.
With last week marking Major League Baseball's All-Star
Game, the Committee has put together its own group of small
business and entrepreneurship all-stars to testify this
morning. By listening to solutions that can be made by the
federal government, universities, and the private sector, we
can all work together to ensure America remains the most
innovative and entrepreneurial country in the world.
We appreciate the testimony of the witnesses today. As some
members may be aware, originally, I had Larry Kudlow also on
the panel, and unfortunately, he informed us yesterday he was
unable to make it today. So he will not be here. But we have
three great witnesses we will turn to shortly.
And I would now like to yield to the Ranking Member for an
opening statement.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
holding this timely hearing.
In this Committee, we often say that small businesses are
the backbone of the economy, and that is absolutely true.
However, when we think about job creation, something I know all
of our constituents want us to focus on, it is not just small
firms, but specifically, new firms, that lead the way. Fledging
companies that scale up rapidly need to add employees to their
payrolls and that translates into new jobs. This type of
entrepreneurship has long been a cornerstone of our economy,
and it is necessary for the United States to see continued
economic prosperity.
While the last 2 years have seen a slight uptick in
business formation, unfortunately, entrepreneurship and
business creation has seen a decades-long decline since the
1970s. In 2014, our nation created slightly over 450,000 new
firms. That represented the lowest number of firms created in
any year in more than 4 decades. This troubling trend stems
from a confluence of factors. Lack of capital remains an
ongoing problem for all entrepreneurs. However, the problem is
particularly pronounced for traditionally disadvantaged
demographics, like women and minorities. In fact, the Kauffman
Foundation found that over 70 percent of Asian, Hispanic, and
Black entrepreneurs, relied on personal and family savings as
their main source of startup capital. And women typically
launch their ventures with 25 percent less capital than their
male counterparts.
These disparities come with significant cost to our
economy. According to one analysis, if minorities started
businesses at the same rate as non-minorities, the U.S. will
have more than 1 million additional employer businesses, and as
much as an extra 9.5 million jobs.
We must also look at ways to foster entrepreneurship among
younger people. With over $1 trillion in national student loan
debt and an average of $37,000 for recent graduates, too many
young people are foregoing the opportunity to create a new
business. I have authored legislation that will provide student
loan relief to recent graduates who launch startups and to
their employees. I would be interested in hearing the panel's
view on that idea today.
Finally, we must ensure that our nation remains the land of
opportunity for foreign-born entrepreneurs. Immigration and
entrepreneurship have long been drivers of our economic
success. For generations, America has been the place to take a
chance, build a business, and ultimately, strengthen our
economy and communities. In my city, New York, nearly half the
small businesses are owned by immigrants. Nationally, more than
half of startups valued at $1 billion or more, were founded by
immigrants.
To reverse declines in entrepreneurship, we must build on
this asset. I am concerned that the current administration
policies and anti-immigrant rhetoric, could severely stifle
this important source of talent. We should be advancing
strategy that draws on immigrants' innovation, hard work, and
entrepreneurial spirit, not creating additional barriers.
During today's hearing, we will hear a wide array of ideas
to foster entrepreneurship. This is an important topic that
directly affects the livelihood of all our constituents,
whether you are from Brooklyn, New York, Silicon Valley,
Cincinnati, Ohio, or Lincolnshire, Illinois, I hope today's
discussion provides a range of new ideas that members of the
committee can coalesce around.
In that regard, I want to thank all the witnesses for their
participation and insight.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields
back.
And if Committee members have an opening statement
prepared, we would ask that they be submitted for the record.
I would like now to take just a moment to explain our
timing rules here. It is pretty simple. You get 5 minutes to
testify and we get 5 minutes. I know some of you have been
through the drill before many times. And there is a lighting
system to assist you. The green light will be on for 4 minutes.
The yellow light will come on and let you know that you have
got about a minute to wrap up and then the red light will come
on and we ask you to stay within that timeframe if at all
possible.
I would now like to introduce our distinguished panel here
this morning. Our first witness is Dr. Gregory Crawford, the
current president of Miami University, the real one in Oxford,
Ohio, not that one down in Florida. And I might note that our
staff director, Kevin Fitzpatrick, is a graduate of Miami
University, and my son, Randy, and my brother, Dave. And Dave
is a Miami merger because his wife Ellen also went there. They
have four kids and live in Florida. But in any event, we
welcome you here, Dr. Crawford. Under your leadership, the
Entrepreneurship Program at Miami University Farmer School of
Business is ranked sixth among public institutions and first in
social entrepreneurship. He is also an entrepreneur himself,
co-founding Myomics, a drug discovery company and Corum
Medical, which produces non-invasive optical devices. And we
thank you for being here.
Our second witness is Ms. Karen Kerrigan, President and CEO
of the Small Business and Entrepreneurship Council. Not a
stranger, of course, to this Committee. Ms. Kerrigan has
testified before numerous House and Senate Committees, and we
welcome her back. She is an advocate for protecting small
businesses and promoting entrepreneurship here in Washington,
D.C.--not just here in D.C. but all over the country. She has
served on numerous federal advisory boards, including the
National Women's Business Council, and the U.S. Treasury
Taxpayer Advisory Panel. And we again welcome you here.
I would now like to yield to the Ranking Member to
introduce our third witness.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is my pleasure to introduce Mr. Joe Schocken, the
president and founder of Broadmark Capital, headquartered in
Seattle, Washington. He currently serves on the United States
Commerce Department's National Advisory Committee on Innovation
and Entrepreneurship. He holds a degree from the University of
Washington and an MBA from Harvard University. Welcome. Thank
you for being here today.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Dr. Crawford, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF GREGORY CRAWFORD, PRESIDENT, MIAMI UNIVERSITY;
KAREN KERRIGAN, PRESIDENT AND CEO, SMALL BUSINESS AND
ENTREPRENEURSHIP COUNCIL; JOE SCHOCKEN, CEO, BROADMARK CAPITAL

STATEMENT OF GREGORY CRAWFORD

Mr. CRAWFORD. Thank you. Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member
Velazquez, and Committee members, I am just thrilled to be here
today to talk about entrepreneurship. So thank you so much for
the invitation.
I would like to answer three questions today: How do
universities cultivate entrepreneurial leaders? The second
question, how does Miami University promote the entrepreneurial
spirit? And thirdly, kind of the new metric we are looking at
is not just if our students get jobs, but how many jobs they
actually create.
So a little bit about my biases and my background. I am a
physicist and inventory, so a little bit geeky, I bet. Co-
founder of two tech startup companies, industrial experience
out in Silicon Valley and Xerox Park Economic Development in
Indiana, and then leadership at three top universities. And so
over my time in my career have sort of come to the definition
of entrepreneurship as seeking potential, seizing opportunity,
and synthesizing solutions for societal impact.
And many folks think that at a university, that
entrepreneurship is fully embedded in the business school, and
we have one of the best business schools in the country, the
Farmer School, but nevertheless, entrepreneurship is all
throughout our campus, and more than half of our students are
actually outside the business school in all different majors,
across all the different colleges and so forth.
One example is the company OROS, which just was featured in
the Forbes Magazine article, Why Ohio is the Best State in
America to Launch Startups, that were two science students at
Miami who actually leveraged the NASA technology, Aerogel with
low thermal connectivity, and made great new coats and apparel
for that. So we are very excited about that.
Entrepreneurship education and how do we do it? We kind of
think of it in three steps. Number one, we think of the T-
shaped individual, and that is the person that has both depth,
so there are good computer scientists, for example, but then we
have this wonderful liberal arts core where they can study
philosophy and ethics and anthropology and so forth. And then
surrounded by that we look at entrepreneurship as a co-major,
so they back that on. But what we bring to the table for our
students is really to get them involved with entrepreneurship,
exercises, experiences, and so forth, and those experiences.
And so we look at it that way. We have a top-ranked institute
for entrepreneurship, as you mentioned, Mr. Chairman, and also,
we have a wonderful entrepreneurial faculty and students in our
Armstrong Institute for Interactive Media Studies.
Our ecosystem, a student can go along all different paths
in the university. They can be involved with entrepreneurial
clubs. They can live in a dorm that is a LLC, a living,
learning community, where they are all entrepreneurial-minded.
They can go and start a social entrepreneurship company through
a net impact club. We do all kinds of great things on events
and they can be part of a venture competition. We have a
startup weekend where they just involve starting a company over
a 3-day period. And we have internships all around the world,
around the country. We think that Oxford, Ohio, is fantastic,
but we need to get in the heart of some of these
entrepreneurial environments.
And so I would love to talk to you about a few of the
examples there. Number one, we just think there is no
replacement for students getting involved with an
entrepreneurial company. They are real projects, real states,
real consequences. It is messy, complex, and risky, and we want
to get them involved with that. And one of our affiliations is
Cintrifuse in Cincinnati, and it is just a wonderful place,
which is a catalyst for high-tech startups and small startups
and so forth. And so our students are engaged with companies
such as Roadtrippers or Frameri, 84.51 and the Brandery, and
they really get mixed up in those type of experiences.
The second one is putting our students in the heart of
Silicon Valley. And so we were one of the first external
satellite campuses out there in Silicon Valley in the San
Francisco area, and it is a study abroad experience in a sense
but in our country. And the students are embedded in startup
companies for 4 days of the week, and then on the fifth day
they get to meet with executives and thought-leaders in the
Silicon Valley area at places like Facebook, Apple, Instagram,
Google, and Twitter. So we are very excited about that program,
getting them deeply engaged in that.
The impact of our alums is pretty fantastic. We do a lot of
focus on our undergraduate education at Miami. That is what we
are known for. And if we look at LinkedIn, we have more than
1,500 Miami alums that categorize themselves as founders. Over
the last 5 years, since 2011, we have brought in more than $2
billion in venture capital money for affiliated high-growth
companies coming out of the university with our alums.
And thirdly, we had about 94 Miami companies exit high-
growth companies since 2011.
So the role of entrepreneurship, it really plays sort of a
big national role today and universities can add on the
research side, which I did not speak too much about but we love
to address. And they also can really train and provide
innovative curriculums for students to really engage in that
kind of enterprise.
The outcomes are great. Students can graduate and start
companies, which is fantastic, but they can also take those
entrepreneurial skills and go off and be great lawyers and work
in the medical enterprise and be congresswomen and senators and
so forth. And I do believe there is the intangibles that an
entrepreneurial kind of education offers that sometimes we do
not talk about. We often talk about the skillset, but it
creates an environment for them at a university where they can
embrace failure, and when they fail, they can embrace it with
kind of enthusiasm and optimism, knowing that it is just a step
to success.
Second of all, it gives you the courage to step out and do
something that nobody else has ever done in the world or nobody
else has ever succeeded at.
And third, it enables our students to think about an idea
and bring unity to a concept, and also bring unity to a team.
And so I am very happy to be here and report that we are
not just counting students who get jobs after graduation. More
than 95 percent of our kids have a job 6 months after
graduation. But my new metric is looking at impact on the
university and how it impacts society in our country. And so
how many jobs that our students create after graduation. Thank
you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Ms. Kerrigan, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KAREN KERRIGAN

Ms. KERRIGAN. Well, great. Thank you so much, Chairman
Chabot and Ranking Member Velazquez, Members of the Committee.
It is great to be here.
Chairman CHABOT. Could you pull the mic a little closer,
maybe?
Ms. KERRIGAN. No. Actually, I think--oh, this? The whole
box? Okay.
Chairman CHABOT. Yeah.
Ms. KERRIGAN. Okay. Got it. How are we doing?
Chairman CHABOT. Good.
Ms. KERRIGAN. Good.
Chairman CHABOT. Much better.
Ms. KERRIGAN. Okay. Thank you.
So my group, the Small Business and Entrepreneurship
Council, we are very grateful that the Committee has convened
this hearing on this very critical issue. Restoring healthier
levels of entrepreneurship and new business creation is vital
to our country's economic strength and to opportunity in
America. Thank you for the invitation to be here.
SBE Council, just real quickly, we are a nonprofit advocacy
research and education organization dedicated to protecting
small business, promoting entrepreneurship. For nearly 25
years, we have been working on policy initiatives and private
sector initiatives to strengthen the ecosystem for startups and
successful small business growth. Our members have testified
many times before this Committee, and they have seen that their
participation and your positive engagement has led to
successful policy outcomes in a number of areas--access to
capital, tax policy, regulatory relief, government procurement,
and more. So we appreciate your continuous work and your
ability to actually get things done. That is very much
appreciated by our members. Every hearing, every piece of
legislation and your advocacy is very important to building an
environment where people want to take risks and pursue the
dream of starting a business.
John Lettieri, the cofounder of the Economic Innovation
Group, he recently participated in our event we had on the
Hill, the Startup Policy Forum last month, and he made an
observation that I think is worth repeating here. He noted
that, indeed, there is a growing awareness about the trends in
entrepreneurship, but there is a lack of connectivity in the
policy debate regarding just how severe these trends are and
what their implications are for the broader economy. And we
think that really needs to change at every level of government
and within the business community itself because
entrepreneurship, as you know, is so critical to our country,
its dynamism, and strength.
In a series of gap analysis studies at my organization
conducted in the summer and fall of last year, our chief
economist, Ray Keating, looked at key gaps in the economy. We
looked at gaps in wage growth. We looked at the gaps in private
sector investment. We looked at the gap in jobs. And of course,
we looked at the gap in entrepreneurship.
Keating looked at three data points--the incorporated self-
employed, unincorporated self-employed, and employer firm data.
He looked at the pre-recession high--that is 2008--for each
measure as a share of the civilian, noninstitutional population
and compared those to where we are now according to the latest
data. His findings show that there is a gap of about 3.5
million businesses in America. That is businesses that simply
do not exist because people never started them.
An Economic Innovation Group study reinforces our findings,
but also finds that new business creation during the 2010-2014
recovery was highly concentrated. Their study notes that the
five metro areas of New York, Miami, Los Angeles, Houston, and
Dallas, produced as big of an increase in Businesses as the
rest of the Nation combined. And for comparison, the recovery
and expansion during the 1983-1987 period found much less
concentration, with new business creation in 25 metro areas
produced the same increase as the rest of the Nation.
So obviously, this has been happening over some time. We
know this recovery has been imbalanced. There are those left
behind, those who currently think they are still, or we are
still in a recession, and we know this difficult period has
left these scars on many. We believe it is showing up, for
example, in the big drop-off in entrepreneurship among younger
Americans, those ages 18 to 34. I cite several reports in my
written testimony, the Millennial Entrepreneur study from the
SBA Office of Advocacy, a Wall Street Journal report, the
latter of which finds that the share of younger people who own
private businesses has reached a 24-year low.
Now, there are some groups, and there is some positive
news. Some groups and sectors of the population that have
bucked this trend where entrepreneurship remains stronger is
growing. Entrepreneurs aged 55 to 64 made up for 25 percent of
all new entrepreneurs in 2016, and that is up from 14.8 percent
in 1996. Immigrant entrepreneurs continue to show strength as
they account for 30 percent of new entrepreneurs.
So, you know, there is obviously some bad news on the
entrepreneurship front, but I do think there is a lot to be
hopeful for in the future. At the state and local level there
is a tremendous amount of policy changes and initiatives that
are focused on lowering barriers and providing support to help
people start businesses. In terms of the states of the two
witnesses here, I mean, both of their states rank in the top 10
in terms of from a policy environment, but that took a lot of
hard work in terms of keeping taxes low, streamlining
regulations, engaging the business community and making those
places great places to start businesses. Business leaders and
successful entrepreneurs are stepping up and bringing their
capital, know-how, energy, and networks back into their
communities and cities to help rebuild and revitalize areas
that particularly need help. We heard a great success story
from Dan Gilbert, the founder and chairman of Quicken Loans at
our policy forum where he is really pumping billions of dollars
back into Detroit and making that a great place for people to
live, and obviously, for new entrepreneurs.
There is great news on the broadband front. A whole lot of
things that are going on. We just need more of this activity to
happen. And certainly, Congress has a role to play in terms of
tax, regulatory, and healthcare reform as well. So I look
forward to discussing these things with you and the Committee.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. We appreciate it.
Mr. Schocken, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOE SCHOCKEN

Mr. SCHOCKEN. Good morning, Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member
Velazquez, and members of the Committee. My name is Joe
Schocken, and as the president and founder of Broadmark
Capital, I spent my entire career on new company formation,
capitalization, and development.
I am very pleased this Committee is willing to tackle this
vitally important subject of reversing the entrepreneurial
design. At the same time, we also need to accelerate our
economic growth, create high wage jobs, build an economy that
offers opportunity for all, and can compete effectively in the
face of increasing globalization and automation.
The solution to these problems is to unleash the power of
our innovation economy. That is where all the new net jobs get
created, and the good news is that there are some pretty simple
answers. The answers come from the Jobs Act, which I had the
honor of working with members of Congress and the Obama
Administration to pass. I say pretty simple because that law
passed with broad bipartisan support, and it showed that some
minor policy tweaks will produce the capital that unleashes the
innovation economy and does it without creating problems. So
here are some immediate solutions that we should all be able to
agree on to remedy this decline.
First, fix general solicitation. Seventy billion dollars of
capital was raised in the first 27 months following the Jobs
Act, almost all of which went into additional capital, into
small companies and new projects spurring job growth, and that
was done under the severe regulatory burden of third-party
verification. Go back to the previous standard of self-
certification, which was never a problem, and the $70 billion
number will grow instantly and exponentially.
Next, fix equity crowdfunding. Crowdfunding is an important
and useful tool, especially for attracting capital to our
struggling inner cities and capital-starved regions. It has
failed because the SEC's unworkable regulations have limited
its potential.
Make it simpler and more attractive for small companies to
do IPOs. Costs and regulatory burdens continue to make the
traditional IPO path unattractive for small companies. The Jobs
Act took a small step to correct this and we need to do more.
Expand the pool of accredited investors by allowing people to
become accredited through educational and employment
qualifications. Finally, here is a novel idea; let early stage
companies raise additional capital by selling their net
operating losses. Let them leverage their hard-won capital in
many cases that will make a difference between success and
failure.
These are simple, short-term fixes that will have a major
and quick impact on reversing entrepreneurial decline and
create real growth in the American economy. But we also need to
address the bigger, harder, long-term systemic issues that
impede our innovation economy. For that, we should create a
commission on the innovation economy. Bring in the best and
brightest venture academic, legal, and experienced
entrepreneurs to advise the Congress, White House, and the
agencies. A bill to do this is being introduced in both houses
and we encourage its immediate adoption. This commission should
be tasked with addressing some of these difficult, long-term
systemic issues, such as bringing back the small regional IPOs.
We used to have small IPOs for the regional manufacturers and
retailers which would create regional jobs and spread economic
growth more equally across the country. Spread venture capital
more evenly across the country, and expand opportunities for
women and minorities. The regional gender and racial imbalance
is a real problem and contributes to the economic and political
stress in this country.
The number of venture firms in this country is down by 50
percent, starving the innovation economy of the $5 and $10
million A round financings designed to bring the experience and
management expertise of venture professionals to follow the
initial seed and angel financings. Our leaders are just
beginning to acknowledge the problems created by a 50 percent
decline in the number of public companies. Increasing the
number of public companies would boost jobs, enhance
transparency, lower the cost of capital, and make pricing more
efficient.
So there is a formula for reversing our entrepreneurial
decline. Move quickly to solve the easier, near-term issues and
create a commission of the best and brightest around the
innovation economy to solve the tougher long-term issues. The
American innovation economy has long been the envy of the
world. The countries that are envious now are investing deeply
to compete with us and we need to respond.
Thank you for taking the time to address this vital issue.
I look forward to working with you on solutions, and I am
pleased to answer any questions.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
And I will begin with myself and recognize myself for 5
minutes.
Dr. Crawford, I will start with you first. So just how
great is Miami University of Ohio?
Mr. CRAWFORD. Well, since you asked.
Chairman CHABOT. No, my real question. As an entrepreneur
yourself, what were some of the biggest lessons that you
learned as a co-founder of two startup companies?
Mr. CRAWFORD. Thank you for the question. I there were
several areas. I was a physicist, number one, and when I
started my first company I thought, you know, I can do quantum
mechanics, therefore, I can do accounting. And boy was I wrong.
And so I really learned how to actually pull together a team
and bring unity around something that is very transdisciplinary
and requires all types of expertise. And you just simply cannot
do it on your own.
The second area was just how much inertia is out there in
the marketplace, and you fight against change, and if it is
disruptive change, it is even more difficult to kind of move
the needle forward. But as one of my mentors put it, if there
is no inertia, you probably do not have a very good idea, which
was actually absolutely right.
And the third area I think, just on the personal side, as a
physicist, you can kind of over engineer everything, and so the
mentorship on really how to bring simplicity to your project, I
think, is very important. And so, but what I did learn overall,
when you look at entrepreneurship and you look at it from your
company's perspective or building it through the university is
just how important the partnerships are. If you do not have
that ecosystem, if you do not have the infrastructure in place
that you can go to the intellectual property attorney, the
corporate attorney, you can go to the venture capital or the
angel investment firm or your local state for seed funding, you
just cannot make it all work. So the most important I would say
learning is how to actually develop those partnerships and move
forward in a more strategic way with both your state and the
country.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Ms. Kerrigan, I will go to you next.
In your written testimony, you stated that risk aversion
after the financial crisis has become an issue preventing
Americans oftentimes from taking on risk and starting new
businesses. What solutions would you suggest to potential
entrepreneurs to ease their anxiety in starting a business? How
would you address that?
Ms. KERRIGAN. Well, I think it all starts with the economic
climate and, you know, bringing back sort of robust economic
growth in the country. I think once there is that traction and
there is sustainable growth, you are going to have more private
sector investment. You are going to have more job growth, more
quality job growth. I mean, things will just brighten up
overall. And so if you have that breakthrough, sort of that
light in the economy where there is sort of more competence and
more optimism, I think it will bring more people off the
sidelines and take those risks.
I talked about the Millennial generation, and particularly
I think in my written testimony, why this generation might be
so risk averse, but I was very heartened to see an American
Small Business Development Center survey that they just
released in May of 2017, that found that 50 percent of
millennials planned to open businesses in the next 3 years.
Wow, that would be terrific, you know, for our economy. So we
need to enable that. We need to encourage that. But the two
things, the two barriers that stood out at me are issues that
this Committee has dealt with, access to capital being a key
issue. And the other which was a surprise; they do not know
where to go to start a business.
So I think really building out the ecosystem. Making sure,
you know, the policy environment has to be right, access to
capital, access to markets, and then access to education and
information that people have that can successfully start and
scale their business.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Schocken, are there any particular regulations that you
would like to see revised or removed that would especially help
entrepreneurs or small businesses generally?
Mr. SCHOCKEN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I would go back to my
testimony. We suggested a series of minor regulatory changes
that would have a dramatic impact on the innovation economy.
They build on our learnings from the Jobs Act. I mean, take
general solicitations. Seventy billion dollars. You create a
general solicitation in the Jobs Act and $70 billion of capital
was directed into new companies and new projects across the
country. And that is with basically one-and-a-half hands tied
behind our back because of this third-party verification
requirement.
So Congress has accepted the notion of general
solicitation. The SEC wrote a set of regulations that
effectively fixed a problem that did not exist. There was no
third-party verification before required for these securities,
and you will not find anything in the literature that said it
was a problem. The problem got created, and even with that
major impediment to capital formation, $70 billion of new
capital. And lack of access to capital is one of the most
significant factors in impeding the innovation economy. So I
have given you an outline of a couple of easy things to fix and
also outlined some long-term issues that I think are terribly
important.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. My time is expired.
The Ranking Member is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Schocken, can we go back again to the concentration of
capital, access to capital, in terms of geographic areas? Not
only about debt financing but venture capital. How do you see
or what role can we play in addressing that issue? It is one
that constantly, you know, we bring up to the Small Business
Administration, even the VC program that we have at SBA, is
doing a poor job in reaching every corner of America,
particularly rural America and minority and women-owned
businesses.
Mr. SCHOCKEN. You could not be more correct. And let me
begin with a really startling statistic. Since the 2008
recession, 50 percent of new business formation in the United
States has come from .64 percent of the counties in the United
States. Fully 50 percent of new businesses came from 20 of
3,100 counties across the United States. That is a total
concentration of economic growth in just a very small set of
areas.
Let me give you one other statistic. Fifty percent of all
venture capital last year went to one state. So this problem is
a really serious problem. And as a business guy, it does not
come easily for me to suggest that there is a Federal role
here, but I am going to suggest that I think there is. We used
to have an SBIC program, where the SBIC sponsored venture
capital funds around the country. We in the industry viewed it
as a successful program. It was viewed as unsuccessful because
the bonds were not paid off by the investments that were made.
And my view is the study that proved that was a poorly done
study because, in fact, the debts were not paid back, but in
doing that calculation, nobody bothered to take into account
the taxes that had been generated by those companies and by
those employees. And so I think part of the answer to your
question is bring back that SBIC program.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you. Thank you.
Mr. Crawford, would you like to comment?
Mr. CRAWFORD. Thank you. Could you repeat the question,
please?
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Let us talk about the changing face of the
economy. More women are creating jobs and business formation
and minority businesses. How can we improve access to capital,
not only debt financing, but venture capital?
Mr. CRAWFORD. Sure.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. You see the role that $2 billion in VC did
to--the kind of impact that it had in your program.
Mr. CRAWFORD. It has, and I would say another thing. Coming
from my perspective at a university as well is that some of the
ideas that we have are very early on. They are very embryonic
in a sense, and so we have to kind of get them to the level
where you can even be in a series A kind of round. And so
personally, I have been the beneficiary, and I know many other
people who have on the SBIR programs and the STTR programs, so
that early kind of see nondilutive capital through grants I
think is a great way to take some of those early, those big
ideas that we have to get to the next stage and get to the
prototyping stage and how that would work out I think would be
great from that perspective.
And also, I do like your idea of just reimbursing students
for debt if they go into small business and so forth. That is
just a fantastic idea.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Mr. CRAWFORD. And I hope you move that forward.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Ms. Kerrigan, tax reform remain a high priority, but also
an elusive one, even in this Congress. So members on this
committee understand the importance of keeping the interests of
small firms and entrepreneurs in mind as we approach tax
discussion. How could simply updating thresholds and adjusting
them for inflation annually help create a better
entrepreneurial environment?
Ms. KERRIGAN. I think that is a great question. For
example, if you look at the--and I am talking about the tiniest
businesses here. They just start up and if you look at the
self-employment threshold, for example, where you start paying
self-employment tax at $400, that has not been updated since
the 1950s. And if that had kept pace with inflation, whatever
they do, that would be over $6,000 right now, and there is a
lot of complexity with that. It is a big turn off, particularly
for young entrepreneurs. I am talking about people that start
businesses that are 15, 16 years old. This is the Tax Code.
This is what I am going to have to deal with. So that is just
one idea I think of a threshold that the Congress can look at
and to update and to modernize.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentlelady's time is
expired.
The gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Luetkemeyer, who is the
Vice Chairman of this Committee, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. LEUTKEMEYER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank all of
you for being here today.
As the ranking member indicated, there are a number of
concerns that we have with regards to small businesses. We have
talked about taxes, regulations, broadband last week, and then
access to capital is what has been discussed with the two
previous questioners. And to me, this is a really key situation
because you may have a great idea, but until you can get the
money to put it in place to operate your business, you are
stuck.
And so it is interesting, Mr. Schocken, you mentioned that
50 percent of all venture capital went to one state last year.
Can you explain why? Have they just got all the brainpower
there to come up with all the ideas or is that where they have
all the money? Or they have both? Or how does this all work?
Mr. SCHOCKEN. Well, first of all, 50 percent went to one
state and just as consequential, there has been a 50 percent
decline in the number of venture firms in this country. There
has not been a decline in the amount of capital managed in the
industry. So the number of firms is down by 50 percent. What
that means is the firms are making fewer, larger, and later
stage investments, and those are concentrated in just a couple
of these markets. And that is one of the most important long-
term systemic issues that we should be addressing.
Mr. LEUTKEMEYER. One of the things that you also mentioned
in your testimony was with regards to regional IPOs. Can you
elaborate a little bit? That is kind of an interesting concept
to me. I would like to delve into that just a little bit. Can
you talk about it a little bit?
Mr. SCHOCKEN. When I grew up----
Mr. LEUTKEMEYER. That makes two of us.
Mr. SCHOCKEN. The way I grew up in this industry, we had
small regional IPOs. Today, every IPO, virtually IPO is $100
million or larger, and there are many small companies across
this country, small, regional manufacturers, craft brewers,
small manufacturing companies. The $25 million IPO has gone
away.
Mr. LEUTKEMEYER. And the reason for that is?
Mr. SCHOCKEN. Well, there are lots of reasons for it. My
suggestion is we create this commission to figure out what the
reasons are, but you lost the regional investment banking
firms. You used to have regional investment banking firms
across the country. Now you have got a couple of major national
banking firms. And so because of that concentration of capital
in larger firms, because of regulatory requirements, because of
costs, because of decimalization, there are a whole series of
reasons why the regional IPOs have gone away. And one of our
most important tasks should be to bring back those regional
IPOs. That is one of the ways to create jobs around the
country. I am not sure I have got the magic answer for that
one, but it is such an important issue. It should be one of the
major long-term systemic issues that we address.
Mr. LEUTKEMEYER. Well, I deal a lot with community banks
and banking folks in general with one of the other Committees I
serve on, and one of the things that we have seen is we really
have got kind of a two-tiered economy going right now where we
have the big banks and big companies doing well and you have
the small banks and small companies that are kind of
struggling. And a lot of it goes back to regulatory costs of
compliance that the small banks are having to deal with and
then they pass those costs on to their small lenders, to the
small borrowers, and it makes it more difficult, number one, to
afford the loan, and number two, the regulatory environment
makes it more difficult for the small banks that should give a
loan to small businesses as well. So it is kind of a one-two
punch there.
The problem is if we do not have a way to generate some
economic activity and some access to capital for entrepreneurs,
we are going to dry up as a country. We wonder why our
employment numbers are stagnating, and we had this discussion
this morning with some folk at the Fed. And it is pretty simple
to me. The small businesses are where the generation of jobs
are, and if you do not have small businesses, you do not
generate the jobs.
I know one of the other things I want to talk about, and
you had mentioned crowdfunding in your testimony. And also, I
know we had somebody I think testify in this Committee that
PayPal now has small business online lending. There are a lot
of other options out there. How viable are those options for
entrepreneurs?
Ms. KERRIGAN. I know Mr. Schocken said crowdfunding has
been a disaster, Title 3 crowdfunding, but there is a positive
story to tell here. There have been 400 offerings to date in
Title 3 crowdfunding, and that was sort of, you know, Title 3
was really meant to focus on these startups, on these smaller
businesses. And you do have some businesses that have been
successful at raising a million plus. There is also a diversity
of businesses that are raising money through crowdfunding. I
think food and beverage is the top category. You have
entertainment and media, transportation. So I think the early
signs are really good. And also, PricewaterhouseCoopers just
released a survey. They said women were better at crowdfunding.
So this is, I think, really very positive. It comes down to, I
think, some regulatory relief. The SEC and perhaps things that
Congress can do to make this right. You know, lift some of the
costs on those small businesses who want to use crowdfunding
through their CF filing and all the compliance they have to do
and make it more practical. And I think you can really build
from some of these successes that you see. And also work
against, or help in terms of this concentration, this density
of capital as well, using these platforms that businesses
everywhere can use.
Mr. LEUTKEMEYER. Thank you very much. My time is expired.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentleman's time
is expired.
The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Schneider, who is the
Ranking Member on the Subcommittee on Agriculture, Energy, and
Trade, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Thank you, Chairman. I want to thank
Chairman Chabot and the Ranking Member Velazquez for holding
this hearing, and thanks to you for all you do for joining us
today to share your thoughts.
We have talked a lot about the fact that entrepreneurship,
small business startup, new business startup numbers are down,
and dramatically down, and have been declining for a while, and
reversing this decline obviously is something very important to
grow our economy because as was noted, two-thirds of the jobs
in this country are created by these small businesses.
From the beginning, if these businesses are going to
succeed, they need to have the resources, the access to
capital, the access to talent, the skillset that will create
these well-paying jobs, to create more investments, to create
the virtual circle. Mr. Schocken, as you touched, we have moved
away from the regional development and we have this great
concentration in a few places. But I also think we need to
invest in education and schools. And Dr. Crawford, you talk
about in college, and I love the fact that we are permeating
the entrepreneurial spirit into every class but we need to get
that into high schools and middle schools, I think, and create
it earlier. Because if you think about what is an entrepreneur,
or the definition of an entrepreneur. There are many academic
definitions. For me, it is someone who has a vision, a dream,
and the will and passion to pursue that dream, to take that
risk, and there is an element of risk-taking. But
entrepreneurs, as is my experience from 20 years in the
business working with entrepreneurs has demonstrated, they also
have blind spots. And I do not mean that in a bad way. These
are people who do not see barriers, who do not see stop signs,
who are not willing to accept no from people who cannot say yes
and go out and try to do that. But that spirit seems to be
declining. My worry is we are seeing a diminishing of that can-
do attitude, belief in the American economy that defined the
20th century as the American century. If we are going to make
the 21st century an American century as well, among the many
other things we have to do, I believe it has to be driving this
entrepreneurial spirit across the entire country.
So I did not know the number about. Was it .064?
Mr. SCHOCKEN. .64.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. .64 percent of the counties. And you hear
this discussion of the struggling rural economy. Well, if we
can start up businesses in these rural economies, if we can
create, and I have had the privilege of introducing
legislation, promote the hubs and the ecosystems and create the
incubators that will help companies go from the idea to start
up, to step out, to success. And I did not mean to give a
speech but I am passionate about this.
Chairman CHABOT. It was a fine speech, by the way.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Thank you.
So Dr. Crawford, I will start with you, this idea of
installing the spirit. You are a physicist; I am an engineer.
That science helps, but you talked about the fact that you do
not know, did not know about accounting but you thought you
could do it. How do we help these people? And it is not just
young people, it is people of all ages, to get over the hump
that maybe I do not know how to do it but I know how to learn
and I know how to ask questions. How do we get that spirit
instilled?
Mr. CRAWFORD. Well, I think you are exactly right. I really
do believe that entrepreneurship is a mindset. It is sort of
how you tackle and solve problems. It is not necessarily a
discipline in and of itself. But one of the areas which I see,
both at the college level and as you mentioned, the high school
level, is that I do not think that we prepare students how to
fail and then how to kind of move forward with failure. So if
you want to be naive and move forward and break down walls and
bust it down rather than trying to go over, you really need to
try things and fail and then how to kind of repurpose yourself
and redirect and know it is a stepping stone and a way in which
you will pivot and go in a new direction. I think high school
is a good place for that. I think college is an exceptionally
great place for that because you are surrounded by mentorship
and you are surrounded by people that can help you sort of get
through the messiness of entrepreneurship.
So I am in complete agreement with you. But the one thing I
would say and it sounds kind of funny, but we really need to
teach our youth how to fail and how to move forward because
that is all about the entrepreneurial mindset. When you hear
successful entrepreneurs, they do not be successful on their
very first time. It is two, three, four times. And they talk
about that failure. How do we teach it and learn it? How do we
pool that creativity?
Mr. SCHNEIDER. It is the difference between failure and
defeat. John Wooden, the great basketball coach said, ``I never
lost a game. I just ran out of time.''
Mr. CRAWFORD. Exactly.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. And I think failure is that lesson.
Mr. Schocken, the last few moments I have, is the culture
of failure is unacceptable affecting the ability for small
firms, new businesses to raise capital, because the idea of we
have to succeed becomes such a paramount issue for them?
Mr. SCHOCKEN. The problem for the innovation economy is
access to capital and regulations. If we solve those problems,
we will get back to creating the kind of vibrant economy where
there is success and failure becomes less of a factor. We have
got to create the jobs.
The other reason we have to create these jobs is you are
all dealing with the onsets of globalization and automation and
you know what is coming down the road. That genie is out of the
bottle.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. I do not think we are at the onset; I think
we are in the midst of it and we need to beat it.
Mr. SCHOCKEN. We are, and it is only going to accelerate.
And therefore, unleashing the innovation economy to create the
jobs that are needed is absolutely essential. And as someone
who has worked in this industry my entire career, the answer is
around access to capital and some minor regulatory reform. That
is how you make this industry succeed and that is how you
address these economic disparity issues.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. I am out of time, and thank you for the
extension. I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Iowa, Mr. Blum, who is Chairman of the
Subcommittee on Agriculture, Energy, and Trade is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. BLUM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to our
panelists for being here today.
Mr. Schocken, I am very intrigued by your ideas of simpler
IPOs and other means of financing startups. My little software
company in Iowa that started as three people in a basement went
public in the mid-90s and we were one of those $30 million IPOs
you referred to. Piper Jaffray out of Minneapolis and William
Blair out of Chicago were our co-lead underwriters and I will
never forget the days of sitting in a high-rise in Chicago at
Sidley Austin, a law firm of 2,000 attorneys. Good firm. But at
$1,000 an hour per attorney, there were probably 10 of them in
the room. We were running up a bill of $10,000 an hour. And in
the process that it took to put together a prospectus and a red
herring and initially go public was fascinating but
overwhelming, I think, to most small entrepreneurs. Can you
give me some ideas? The regional IPO is an excellent idea. I
could not agree with you more. Do you have other ideas about
financing options? I know there is--well, I used to call them
vulture capitalists. I know there are venture capitalists out
there, which we managed to go public without using their
services, but other ideas you have? Because it intrigues me and
it is much needed. I could not agree with you more.
Mr. SCHOCKEN. Thank you. And congratulations on that
success.
Mr. BLUM. Thank you.
Mr. SCHOCKEN. That is a good story. I love to hear those
kind of stories.
You know, what happens when there is an economic event, the
laws tend to overreact, and it is the smaller companies that
get punished when that happens. And you will remember what
happened at the end of the 1990s when the tech bubble burst and
the reaction congressionally was Sarbanes-Oxley. And what
happened was they swept the small companies in under the bigger
companies in terms of regulatory requirements for doing IPOs.
And those have just become so costly and so burdensome. The
accounting requirements and the undertakings required, where
your small company would have been subject to the same kind of
accounting and legal standards as the Boeings and Exxons of the
world.
Mr. BLUM. That is crazy.
Mr. SCHOCKEN. Yes. And so we took a step towards resolving
that problem in the Jobs Act by creating a couple of minor
benefits for the smaller companies. Unfortunately, it has not
been as useful for bringing back the IPOs as we would have
hoped, and the reason for that is because of low interest
rates. Low interest rates have been drawing so much capital
into private equity that private equity has turned out to be a
very strong competitor to going public. But at the same time,
we have got to really answer this question--how do you bring
back the smaller IPOs? Because there are lots of great little
companies that, you know, for which a $25 million IPO means
another 200 or 400 employees. And it is one of the ways of
solving this problem of the regional concentration. And there
are answers to that. And that is why I designed, you know, in
my testimony, here are some easy, short-term fixes that we can
do, but then here are some longer term systemic issues that
really need attention. And to me you do those two things and
you will unleash this innovation economy. But you have got to
bring back those $25 million IPOs as one of the answers.
Mr. BLUM. We did this in Iowa, by the way, and I tried to
coin the phrase ``Silicorn Valley.'' I do not know if it stuck
or not, Mr. Chairman.
Question for Mr. Crawford. Are the young people, the
Millennials, young people in general, becoming risk averse?
Mr. CRAWFORD. It is a great question. I think it goes back
to some of the earlier comments that we had about failure and
if you are ready to really work in that kind of environment
where you may fail three or four times before you succeed. I am
not necessarily convinced that they are risk averse, but I must
say that there is one thing. When we trained these
entrepreneurial kids at the university level and, you know, we
would love for them to go out and start small businesses and so
forth, but what we do see is that the bigger companies, the
Fortune 500s and so forth, are not gobbling those kids up
because they really see those entrepreneurial skills as being
very viable to their larger organization in an entrepreneurial
way that they can walk and get through things. And so I think
it is hard to say whether it is risk averse or not because even
though they may not end up in a small company or a small
startup, they are able to go work in some of the bigger firms
these days which are becoming more entrepreneurial in and of
itself.
Mr. BLUM. I have 8 seconds left. We cannot do another
question. I yield my 5 seconds back. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman yields back. Thank you very
much.
The gentleman from New York, Mr. Espaillat is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. ESPAILLAT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Velazquez. In the 13th Congressional in New York, we are
working to increase access to necessary capital for all our
entrepreneurs. Just last week, the ranking member--thank you.
Is this better? Okay.
Yes. Just last week, Ranking Member Velazquez and I had a
Small Business Summit, which was focusing on connecting small
businesses owners with agencies both at the Federal, state, and
city level, to assist them in their role to starting and
growing a small business. And we noticed that a good number of
the folks that participated were young people with questions
regarding establishing and supporting their small businesses.
And no doubt, this has shown that there is a high interest
still in young entrepreneurs in succeeding. Yet, they are
failing, as you have mentioned, in accessing capital, finding a
pathway to the necessary capital that will make their business
successful and sustainable. And in a time where we work in the
technology and research fields, it this is quickly advancing.
Yet, IPOs are down. We need to be focusing on how to better
supply our entrepreneurs with the capital they need to succeed
and ultimately create jobs and grow our economy.
But you mentioned that some of the hurdles that some of
these small entrepreneurs are the overregulation often
overburden small businesses, and particularly startup
businesses, and the tax inequities that exist, they are saddled
with these tax inequities. They are unable to like get some
oxygen out of the tunnel and continue to move forward.
So as we move as a Congress in this session to consider,
potentially consider, hopefully, some tax reform legislation,
what real, precise recommendations do you have for tax reform
that will help small businesses? It will be a real travesty if
we engage in tax reform and only like the big corporations walk
out of here with their pockets full and small businesses,
again, continue to struggle with overregulation and tax
inequities. What real recommendations do you have for easing
the pain with regards to tax inequities and regulation itself?
Any one of you?
Ms. KERRIGAN. Sure. And thank you for pulling together that
summit with business owners or potential business owners and
entrepreneurs because, you know, as I mentioned in my
testimony, many of them do not know where to go. I know the SBA
administrator is out traveling the country and sort of
promoting the SBA as a resource and getting the word out about
that. But certainly, we have a long way to go in terms of
telling them where to turn.
I think on tax reform, look, I think from a small business
perspective is very simple. I mean, we do have to keep small
businesses at the center of tax reform, so we need to lower
individual rates along with corporates rates. We need to lower
taxes, definitely a more simplified system, and again,
updating, I think, some of these thresholds is going to matter
to small entrepreneurs. And complexity, I think, is really the
key thing that has to be addressed. So if you get rid of a lot
of the loopholes. For example, allow for full expensing. I
mean, again, it all boils down to simplicity and these lower
rates that again are going to make the system I think more
competitive. So simplify, lower rates. There are a lot of great
ideas out there. Updating, modernizing, and just certainty in
the Tax Code as well, not changing it all the time I think is
very, very important from a small business perspective.
Mr. SCHOCKEN. And if I could?
Mr. ESPAILLAT. Yes, go ahead. Yes, Mr. Schocken?
Mr. SCHOCKEN. So, first of all, I gave you a suggestion in
my testimony when I said allow these young companies to sell
their net operating losses. They have to work terribly hard to
raise capital. Those losses that sit on their balance sheet do
not do them any good. If they could sell that, that would be a
way of really leveraging the equity they have created. And I
know from my own experience in many cases that would make the
difference between success and failure. The first thing I would
say.
The second thing I would say for the kind of businesses
that you are talking about, equity crowdfunding is just
enormously important. If someone is going to start a business
and their friends and their cousins and the people in other
states that they know will want to own a portion of that
business. The ability to invest in that business, whether it is
a neighborhood bakery, a small manufacturing company, to raise
that money via equity across the country under equity
crowdfunding under a reasonable set of rules different than
what we have today would make an enormous difference.
And the third thing, you have got to somehow simplify the
regulations. People want to start their businesses. They want
to bake their breads. They want to deliver, they want to do
whatever they want to do, and they get just buried under the
city, the state, the county, and all the various regulatory
requirements. Make that simple for small businesses. You are
correct wanting to keep these benefits away from big
businesses. I agree with you, whether it is selling the net
operating losses or whether it is simplifying, you can do that
for the small businesses and it would make an enormous economic
difference in this country.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. ESPAILLAT. Thank you so much.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you.
The gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Norman, who used to
be the new guy on the Committee but now he has been around a
couple of weeks, so he is an old hand now, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. NORMAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank each one of you
for coming.
In our role in Congress, there is no shortage of the need
for public-private partnerships, but in many cases you see
where the public is the one that gets the short end of the
stick. What would you say that we could put in, safeguards that
we could put in, benchmarks to make sure that any dollar that
the taxpayer invests, there is a return on investment. And
failure is a great teacher. But from our role, what would you
say we do to make sure that there is a return on investment,
that it is a smart investment, and not dole out to either one
state or one group? This is for each one of you.
Mr. SCHOCKEN. Well, earlier I had said that one of the
ideas for dealing with driving capital into rural and other
counties across the country is to reestablish the small
business investment program at the SBA. So specifically to your
question, how do you avoid losses by the government, the answer
is to have each of those investments be partnered with private
venture capital or private equity firms where the government is
not making the win-lose decisions on each investment, but they
are doing it in partnership with private capital. And that
discipline would have an enormously positive impact on
government money being invested in the correct companies that
have a chance to succeed.
Ms. KERRIGAN. That sounds good to me.
Mr. NORMAN. As a follow-up, you know, typically the SBA,
they are the last to get paid. The repayment of equity comes
back from the private investors.
Mr. SCHOCKEN. No, no, the SBA gets paid back first.
Absolutely.
Mr. NORMAN. In every case?
Mr. SCHOCKEN. Well, under the original SBA program, the SBA
was the debt. The win that was there was for the private
investors but the government always got their money back first.
I was trying to address your question, how do you avoid the
government making the wrong decisions? And I think the way to
do that is through what you would call a public-private
partnership that each of these investments are only in
investments that are vetted by private capital, where they do
the due diligence. And let us say the government is 40 percent
of the investment and private capital is 60 percent of the
investment. The government gets its money back first. The
government is the lender in this situation. The upside, the
real potential is to the private capital but the government
gets its capital back first. That is exactly how you should
design a program like that.
Mr. NORMAN. I agree.
Ms. KERRIGAN. Generally, I will just say this, being that I
really am not an expert in public-private partnerships, but
going back to our gap analysis reports that I talked about, we
looked at private sector investment. And over the past decade
there has been a dearth of $1.5 trillion. We really have a
problem with private sector investment in this country. So the
more that we can encourage investment on the private side,
perhaps the less we need it on the public side. So I think
policies really need to get back to encouraging private sector
investment incentives, and that is going to happen through tax
reform. I think it is going to happen through regulatory relief
across the board, including in the financial services sector.
We just need more people investing more of their dollars. I
mean, letting go and investing not only in our startups and our
small businesses, but our economy, their own companies to
really get the economy going again.
Mr. CRAWFORD. I agree. I think the companion-type of grants
that they are talking about, how to bring the public and
private together, could also work at the research level as well
with some of the Federal Governments and their research
enterprises, to bring those early seed ideas out of the place
and having them, sort of the due diligence done by the private
side as well as the private side. And I think the big question
is also where are you going to put your dollars on the Federal
side? Where is the risk assessment going to be? Is it going to
be where the ideas are so early on and you are only going to
get one out of 10, or are you going to be down further on in
the series B and C rounds of venture capital where you are
going to have a much higher probability of success?
Mr. NORMAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield my time.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields
back.
The gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Murphy, who is the Ranking
Member of the Subcommittee on Contracting and Workforce is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. MURPHY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you all for
being here today. Fascinating testimony.
Mr. Crawford, I really enjoyed reading through your
testimony, as well as hearing you talk about Miami University
and all of the initiatives that you have launched to help build
the next generation of entrepreneurs and innovators. And my
colleagues on this Committee have heard me talk about similar
incubators and apprenticeship programs that have been launched
by universities and colleges in my district in Florida,
specifically at the University of Central Florida, Rollins
College, and Valencia College. So I completely agree with you
that universities play a vital role in the startup ecosystem.
And if that sounded like a shameless plug, it was.
My first question is for either Dr. Crawford or Ms.
Kerrigan.
You know, as we look at the future of work and think about
the startup ecosystem, the way that the workforce is engaging
with the workplace is changing, particularly in the startup
ecosystem. And even I think the dynamics and demographics of
the workforce is changing. So right now about a third of the
workforce is millennial. By 2020, I think about 50 percent of
the workforce will be millennials. And we are moving away from
sort of the idea of working for one large corporation for the
period of your entire life. When it comes to benefits and the
other sorts of programs that are normally provided through that
type of employment, what do you think we could do? What can
Congress do to adjust to these changes in what work will look
like, particularly as it relates to the startup ecosystem?
Ms. KERRIGAN. I mean, that is a great point because, I
mean, I think you are talking about the gig economy; right?
Ms. MURPHY. Yes.
Ms. KERRIGAN. And really, this desire to do your own thing.
I mean, there are some people that really like that arrangement
a lot, but they really do wish they would have the benefits
that go along with full-time work.
I think there is a lot that can be done, you know,
hopefully or potentially on the portability front. And I would
encourage the Congress to look at things a little more
innovatively as well. Say for example that you do have an
independent contractor who wants to be independent and wants to
stay independent and perhaps is working for a larger enterprise
or a larger business, is there any way that they can tap into
their benefits without losing that independent contractor
status? If both of them agree, he wants to be or she wants to
be independent but I value this person, so is that a
possibility, sort of looking at the independent contractor test
and making that a little bit more flexible? I mean, that is one
idea that I think of right now.
Mr. CRAWFORD. And I do think it is interesting. I mean, on
the front end, when you graduate college and you get out there
and benefits and so forth are not a big deal, we see the kids
that are going out to San Francisco and Silicon Valley and they
will spend every last penny of their disposable income on rent
and it does not matter to them, and we have seen the uptick in
the crowd of 55-plus and the entrepreneurship, so they are more
stable and they can actually get out there. And I think one of
the questions is when you graduate school, you go off and work
3 to 5 to 8 years, how do we get those folks back in after they
have worked at a big company and how to get them back in to the
startup economy? And I think that is when benefits play a big
role. If people have families and so forth, other
responsibilities, and so how you could kind of be innovative on
that front as a Congress in terms of pulling them back in or
how we call it in Cincinnati, the boomerang effect where we can
pull the 30-somethings back into the entrepreneurial economy.
Ms. KERRIGAN. And I think anyway, we can allow independent
contractors to either, you know, if they are joining some type
of business group or some type of association, or some type of
entity, you know, where they can pool, whether it is health
care, whether it is retirement benefits, or et cetera, I think
that would be a great solution as well. I know that would take
some regulatory changes at the Federal and probably state level
as well. But I think having those places where independent
contractors can go where they can, again, use sort of the
collective power of all of them to negotiate for better prices
for healthcare, et cetera, or to share their risks I think
would be ideal.
Ms. MURPHY. That is great. And just another sort of follow-
up question. There has been some talk about how the Millennials
do not really know where to go, the know-how for starting up a
business. I know we try to address it a bit in some of the
universities and school systems, but there are also SBA
entrepreneurial development programs, and this Committee has
done a lot to try to enhance those programs. How do you think
we can enhance the programs so that they are meeting the needs
of Millennials entrepreneurs and that they are more accessible
or readily available or they know more about them?
Ms. KERRIGAN. Well, yeah, I think, you know, in terms of a
lot of the programs at the SBA or educational programs that the
SBA provides, you know, both nationally and then within the
SBD, I think we really need to look at this and see the way
that Millennials and younger people are getting their
information is that is there that connectivity? And so I think
that is critical. How do we reach them? So I think all the
programs we need to look at to sort of go where these people
get their information. And using more social media, using sort
of the next thing that comes along. I know it continually
changes in terms of the platforms that they use, but I do think
that we need to get a little bit more innovative in terms of
how we reach, but also the programs. Are we staying relevant in
terms of what is happening in the marketplace and the training
that is actually provided?
Ms. MURPHY. Great. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentlelady's time is
expired.
The gentlelady from North Carolina, Ms. Adams, who is the
Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on Investigations,
Oversight, and Regulations is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ranking
Member Velazquez. And thank you all for your testimony and
being here today. I spent 40 years on a college campus, small
campus in Greensboro, North Carolina, Bennett College. So we
were always looking for new ways to do things. But I want to
thank you, Mr. Crawford, for serving in the capacity that you
do and what you do for students. And I wanted to ask you what
you would recommend to those colleges or universities with
smaller budgets, lower endowments to cultivate business leaders
and to promote entrepreneurship among the graduates.
Mr. CRAWFORD. Well, I think the entrepreneurship programs
in many ways, when you get faculty members that are
entrepreneurial, them and of themselves, and students that are
entrepreneurial, they will actually create the programs, just
like they were a true entrepreneur out in the marketplace. And
so in many cases, I think when you have that kind of
entrepreneurship on campus, you can kind of do things on a
shoestring and so forth. And so, I think the way that we have
done it at Miami and the way that my past experiences at other
fine institutions, has really been through the partnerships
that we created, both for the city and the state and the
Federal Government and so forth, because the resources go a lot
further. And universities, you should never underestimate that
you have what the marketplace wants and that is talent, talent,
talent. And so to use that talent as a way in which you can
offset or fund entrepreneurship programs through those
relationships with corporate and industry.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you. So your institution was successful in
developing your ecosystem. Did Miami have any contact with
Small Business Administration in setting up your programs?
Mr. CRAWFORD. Yeah, historically it has. Yes. And then
also, you know, we do work with our students, too, to get the
word out on the various programs for the SBA and so forth, and
the other programs that are available through the Federal
Government for those startup companies.
Ms. ADAMS. So did they offer their services or did you
partner with them? Did you see them out?
Mr. CRAWFORD. I think we sought them out on the front end,
and then of late we have been doing a lot more work also with
our local chambers and the ones in the state and how we
actually get the word out. And then working with the Minority
Accelerator Chamber also to women and minority-owned
businesses. And so we have been making the connections not just
at the Federal level but all throughout the state.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you.
Mr.--is it Schocken?
Mr. SCHOCKEN. Schocken.
Ms. ADAMS. Schocken. The difficulties that minority-owned
and women-owned businesses encounter trying to obtain capital
for their businesses is well documented. However, venture
capital seems to be particularly difficult to obtain. One
report suggests that women-owned businesses drew only 5 percent
of all U.S. venture capital. In your testimony, you outlined
recommendations to address the geographic concentration of
venture capital and the concentration of control of venture
capital, but do you have any recommendations to address venture
capital's lack of investment in minority and women-owned
businesses?
Mr. SCHOCKEN. Thank you. Great question. And I have two
answers to you. The first answer is cut the innovation economy
loose. Do the kind of access to capital proposals that we have
made because it will benefit everybody in that ecosystem. That
is the general answer.
The specific answer is that we have this tremendous
concentration of venture in this one state and this lack of
venture capital availability to minorities, to women, and
geographically around the country. In my view, that is a role
for the Federal Government, and in my view, you bring back the
SBIC program and you specifically target it to those states,
regions, women, and minorities that have had such difficulty
accessing capital. It is such an important issue, and clearly
the private marketplace is not able to answer it themselves. It
is, therefore, in my opinion, and I am a business guy, this
does not come naturally to me, it is a correct and proper role
for the Federal Government to step back in, and I think that is
the answer.
Ms. ADAMS. Great. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I am going to yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back.
And the chair would note that we have been joined by Chad
Pergram, who not only is a Capitol Hill correspondent for FOX
News, but more importantly, Dr. Crawford mentioned the
internship program, and Chad heads up the Inside Washington
program, which many Capitol Hill offices have taken advantage
of over the year, and the Small Business Committee actually has
an intern at this time, Nick Tracewell, who is also in the back
of the room here. So we are definitely benefitting from Miami's
program here and gave FOX News a plug, I guess. That was not
the intention. We wanted to recognize how it is working here on
Capitol Hill.
I apologize to Mr. Lawson. I am not taking up any of this
time, but I did want to get that in before he went on. So thank
you.
Our final questioner, I think, is the gentleman from
Florida, Mr. Lawson, who is the Ranking Member of the
Subcommittee on Health and Technology, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. LAWSON. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I would
like to welcome a Hurricane to a section of Florida, up in
Tallahassee. We always enjoy bringing the Hurricanes up and
sending them back where they belong in South Florida. And I see
a Florida State tie over there.
But my question centers around 36 years ago I was going
into small business and I was trying the only access. I think
it was $10,000 or $15,000 to go into--I was leaving coaching at
FSU and said I am going into small business. And so, as a
result, my question always centers around the access to capital
because--and I really did not understand at the time. The only
thing I had was an FHA loan for about $121,000 on a house, you
know, and that was blocking me from getting access to the
capital, even though the payment was only about $131 a month.
And so how can we work together? I mean, do they work together?
So 36 years later, I was still in the business until I got
hauled off to Congress. So my concern is that the way I have
this question here is how can communities, partners, including
local government, entities, and banks guarantee that those who
want to start small business have the resources to do so,
including the main question is access to capital? And that is
all I really needed. And they were asking me to get someone to
stand for the loan. And I did not really have the access that I
needed, but ever since then the main question has been how do
people like myself those years back have access to capital to
start a small business?
Mr. SCHOCKEN. Well, if your question is how do we guarantee
that access to capital, I do not think there is an answer.
Mr. LAWSON. Okay.
Mr. SCHOCKEN. But I would begin an answer by pointing to
equity crowdfunding. That is specifically what equity
crowdfunding was designed to do. For the smaller businesses,
whether they are neighborhood bakeries or small manufacturers,
that was the goal of equity crowdfunding, so that you could
bring together people who could then own a stake in that
business. That is an extremely important concept. You see the
success of Kickstarter and Indiegogo where they can finance
early-stage projects by providing t-shirts and merchandise. It
shows the hunger around the country to back early-stage ideas.
But until the Jobs Act passed and we legalized equity
crowdfunding, there was no way to provide ownership in these
new ideas to people who wanted to invest in those companies.
And unfortunately, the regulations that were developed for
equity crowdfunding has really made it not work. In this
enormous economy, I think the number is $37 million and maybe
$50 million nationally that has been raised around equity
crowdfunding.
And so to me the answer to your question is, first of all,
fix equity crowdfunding. And the second answer is in each state
there ought to be a major concerted effort to simplify the
regulations required to start new businesses because, I mean,
it is just daunting for entrepreneurs with all the various
steps and regulatory things that they need to go through. Those
are the two major barriers for getting new businesses off the
ground.
Ms. KERRIGAN. I agree on the fix crowdfunding front. You
know, the early players that have been raising money, there has
been some, I think, some very promising success. So we need to
allow that, leverage that success, and really make that
available to everybody, but we need regulatory fixes.
The congresswoman, I know she asked about sort of the
concentration in capital and how we sort of fix that as well. I
know there is legislation that has also been introduced in the
House to develop opportunity zones, if you will, that really
would leverage private sector money out there. And allow for
certain incentives or benefits, whether it is capital gains
exclusion, if they are investing in those areas of the country.
So I think there are a lot of different solutions and I do
agree a lot happens at the lower local level, too, in terms of
the regulatory front that we need to lower those barriers.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman's time has expired.
The ranking member is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Just one question.
Chairman CHABOT. For one question, which may or may not
take 5 minutes.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Mr. Schocken, are you aware of any work,
interagency work in terms of innovation economy? I know that
the White House put together a working group that is basically
comprised of CEOs, to address the issue of the innovation
economy and what could provide answers to the lack of business
formation in our country, if there is anything that is done by
the SEC, for example, or even SBA that you are aware of?
Mr. SCHOCKEN. Thank you. So first of all, the innovation
name in that commission on the White House I think is an
inaccurate name. That Innovation Commission was put together by
the White House to bring in best business practices into
government; it was not to address the needs of the innovation
economy. And I agree with you; that is a very misleading name
and kind of implies they are paying attention to the innovation
economy and I think they are not. They did create a commission
of businesspeople in the White House but that really deals with
big business. And I think they were very smart to do that, but
there is nobody on that commission that represents the small
companies and the innovation economy, and they should have a
similar commission for that.
Now, to your question, no. I do not see interagency
cooperation on this issue, and I think this issue is just
hugely important. We have got this train coming through the
tunnel right at us on globalization and automation. You have
seen the studies, something like 20 million jobs are going to
get destroyed by automation over the next 20-25 years. We have
to replace those jobs. The only place you were going to be able
to replace them is from the innovation economy. And so that is
why we have proposed this commission on the innovation economy.
Bring in the smart guys, the bankers, the lawyers, the
academics who really understand the innovation economy and be
there to give you, as the Congress, to give the White House,
here are the easy, short-term things you can do. I have
outlined five of those today that are pretty easy fixes that
would have major impacts. But we also need to begin to address
the major long-term systemic issues that I have also identified
that nobody is paying any attention to. And that would be a way
to bring all of these agencies, White House, Congress together
and prioritize the innovation economy.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. And I think I will recognize
myself for one question just to kind of follow up on that.
Ms. Kerrigan, let me ask you this. I think the impression,
or perhaps misimpression has been given that the new
administration, relatively new, they have been in office about
6 months now, that they are not doing anything about small
business. Now, I know we have a new Small Business
Administrator, Ms. McMahon, who has testified before this
Committee a couple of times and appears to be very serious
about kind of shaking up the SBA and making it much more
business friendly. Could you comment on your view as to what
you have seen with respect to her?
And secondly, one of the other things the administration
has announced fairly early on is that they would like to get
rid of two regulations for every new one that comes out of
Washington because the small business community in particular
has been burdened by being overregulated for many, many years
now. So if you could comment on those two things, I would
appreciate it.
Ms. KERRIGAN. Sure. Well, I think there are two things. One
is there are small businesses and the small business community,
existing small businesses, and then sort of what is happening
to encourage more startups. So sort of take those two things.
I do think Administrator McMahon is doing a great job. I
mean, she is traveling the country, talking to people, visiting
her centers, talking to small business people to really see
what needs to happen at the SBA in terms of their programs and
services.
Chairman CHABOT. Now, is she talking to Boeing and to the
oil companies? Or who is she talking to?
Ms. KERRIGAN. She is actually talking to roundtables of
small business owners in these local communities, in addition
to the staff themselves, to really understand sort of how the
SBA works. You know, sort of the impression that small business
owners have of the SBA. And she is doing this everywhere. And I
think that is a really good idea to listen to the customers, if
you will, to see what they need, if the SBA is relevant, what
else it can do to help small businesses.
So from a policy perspective, I think the executive orders
that the President put forward are just really good ideas to
look at sort of the regulatory environment in all of the
departments in all the agencies and see what needs to be done
to update, to streamline, to repeal, to clean out the
regulatory underbrush. I know we are taking part, providing
comments, going to meetings. The U.S. Treasury had a big
roundtable, very diverse roundtable of stakeholders, in terms
of what needs to happen from a financial service regulatory
perspective. So I think all those things are positive, and
hopefully, when the White House gets these ideas and
recommendations, they will actually move forward on this.
I agree though, I think the President, he has his larger
business council. I think it is a great idea that he is
listening to bigger businesses, but I think it would be a
fabulous idea if he put together a startup council and listened
to entrepreneurs, young entrepreneurs. I mean, they are the
ones that are on the ground. They are going to have the
innovative solutions to a lot of these countries' problems, and
he will really get a sense of where the economy is. And I think
that if you focus on entrepreneurship and small business and
their policies, you will get the broader policies right.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. We will make sure
that that gets conveyed.
Mr. SCHOCKEN. Mr. Chairman, if I could just for a moment,
you raised the question of the SBA. And I would like to advance
the idea that business and the innovation economy has changed
so much that it is time to consider perhaps dividing the SBA.
The SBA is designed to deal with small businesses, the
franchisees and the local stores and that traditional part of
the American economy. The needs of those businesses are
dramatically different than the needs of the high growth
innovation economy that is so important to job creation. And so
you have got kind of a mixed mission for the SBA. And so let me
just suggest considering really splitting the SBA into its
traditional constituency and the needs of the high growth
innovation economy.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
We want to thank all the witnesses. I think you all three
did a great job here this morning.
Obviously, encouraging entrepreneurship is absolutely
critical because an awful lot of the new jobs created in
America today are created by entrepreneurs and small
businesses. And the information that you have conveyed to us, I
can assure you on both sides of the aisle, we will do
everything we can to put it to good use. So thank you for
sharing that with us.
I would ask unanimous consent that members have 5
legislative days to submit statements and supporting materials
for the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
And if there is no further business to come before the
Committee, we are adjourned. Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 12:33 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

TESTIMONY OF JOSEPH L. SCHOCKEN

Founder and President, Broadmark Capital, LLC

Before the House Committee on Small Business

July 19, 2017

Good morning, Chairman Chabot, Representative Velazquez,
and members of the Committee. My name is Joseph Schocken, and I
am the founder and President of Broadmark Capital LLC, a FINRA
member broker-dealer based in Seattle, Washington. I appreciate
the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss the
critically important objective of reversing the decline in
entrepreneurship.

Today's hearing could not be more timely or important. The
United States is experiencing a serious decline in new company
formation just as the economy struggles to absorb the impacts
of automation and globalization. In fact, we now see companies
disappearing at a faster rate than new companies are forming. I
thank you for recognizing the significance of this trend and
the need to take action.

Automation and globalization have created great benefits to
consumers and investors, and at the same time fundamentally
disrupted and changed the way our economy works. This paradigm
shift is permanent, ongoing, and accelerating. A recent study
by Forrester Research, Inc. projects that automation and
robotics will displace nearly 25 million jobs--17 percent of
the American workforce--by 2027, and cause a net job loss of
9.8 million, or 10 percent of the workforce, over that same
time period. While automation and globalization produce
economic gains, more mature companies tend to shed US jobs in
the process of adopting new technology and expanding
internationally.

American workers are justifiably anxious about what this
means for their futures, and their children's futures. How can
people plan for retirement when they don't know whether their
jobs will exist in three years? How can they save for their
children's educations? How will the new generation joining the
workforce be able to afford home ownership, or even health
care?

The solution lies in the Innovation Economy, which has and
will continue to keep our economy resilient in response to
these changes. Innovation has been responsible for the vast
majority of American economic growth, and job creation, since
the Second World War. Young businesses have been the source of
all net new jobs and nearly 20 percent of gross job creation
over the past 30 years. Furthermore, employee compensation in
innovation-intensive sectors increased by 50 percent between
1990 and 2007, a rate nearly two and a half times the national
average.

We are here today, however, because the Innovation Economy
is in trouble. The White House too has recognized this problem,
and even before his inauguration President Trump announced the
establishment of a Strategic and Policy Forum to advise the
Administration on government policy to promote economic growth
and job creation. That forum, however, is led by the CEOs of
large corporate employers, whose challenges and economic
impacts are uniquely different from those companies in the
Innovation Economy.

Startups and small companies don't have the time or
capacity to come to Washington to tell you what they need, and
thus you don't have the feedback needed to make meaningful
changes. The administration has recognized the value of a
commission on economic issues; while this too is important, it
currently reflects the interest of big business. I am therefore
urging the formation of a Commission on the Innovation Economy
to promote innovation and entrepreneurship. This Commission
would collect and synthesize information and make bipartisan
recommendations for minor, near-term regulatory changes as well
as address the long-term systemic issues facing the innovation
economy.

This commission would address the two greatest challenges
facing would-be entrepreneurs and startup companies: accessing
capital and managing regulatory requirements.

Access to capital has never been easy, but it has become
especially difficult in recent years. New businesses must spend
a great deal of time and energy on finding capital, rather than
on executing their business plans, and too often this capital
is simply unavailable. Both the number of venture capital firms
and the number of public companies have declined by half over
the past twenty years, and we see capital increasingly
concentrated, both geographically and by company. Nearly fifty
percent of venture money now goes to firms in the Bay Area, and
in the second quarter of 2016, almost 40 percent of all venture
money went to so-called ``unicorn'' firms, startup companies
that already have a market value of more than a billion
dollars.

New companies must also wrestle with complex regulatory
environments that are often designed for much larger, more
mature companies. Even understanding compliance requirements
often requires hiring personnel or outside expertise that
startups cannot afford.

I was honored to be part of the legislative process that
produced the JOBS Act of 2012, which sought to address these
concerns. The JOBS Act passed with broad bipartisan support,
and has already revealed how small regulatory changes can make
a difference. The regulatory relief provisions of the JOBS Act
have led to new capital and job creation, with no negative
impacts.

Work, however, remains to be done. Our experience with the
JOBS Act and the five years of market response since its
passage suggest a path for further reform. This Congress has a
real opportunity to apply the market feedback to refine the
innovation economy's regulatory environment, and make an even
greater impact for small businesses and entrepreneurs.

In the near term, several minor policy tweaks would have
real and immediate positive effects on our Innovation Economy.

First, fix general solicitation. The ability to raise
capital from accredited investors in an enormously important
part of capital formation for early-stage companies. General
solicitation under JOBS Act reform was expected to boost
capital formation by expanding Regulation D; from September
2013 through 2015, $70 billion of the $2.9 trillion raised
under Regulation D used general solicitation. While only a
small part of the total Regulation D funding, this produced
capital which created new companies and jobs. This number,
however, would be much higher without the burdensome investor
verification requirement. The JOBS Act's changes to general
solicitation have already had a positive impact, but minor
regulatory changes could unleash this strategy's full
potential.

The SEC's regulations on third-party verification have had
a chilling effect on capital formation. These regulations fixed
a problem that did not exist. Congress should eliminate the
requirement for investor verification and allow investors to
self-certify under penalty of perjury, which would be a higher
standard than applies to other private security offerings. This
change alone would encourage capital formation and create
millions of jobs.

Even an SEC whitepaper from October 2015 raised early
concern that the investor verification requirement may be
stifling the success of general solicitation. Industry
participants corroborated these findings at the SEC's 2016
Forum on Small Business Capital.

When Congress considered the general solicitation
provisions of the JOBS Act, many academics, journalists, and
though leaders at the SEC expressed concern about the
possibility of investor fraud. In the spring of 2012, we saw
articles in the business press with headlines that warned,
``JOBS Act Will Open Door to Investment Scams.'' It is
important and gratifying to note that these concerns about
investor abuse never materialized. In fact, the SEC's Division
of Economic Risk and Analysis last year observed ``no measured
increase in the incidence of fraud in the new Rule 506(c)
market.''

Second, fix equity crowdfunding. Crowdfunding, perhaps the
JOBS Act's boldest provision, has failed to meet expectations.
A meager $38 million has been raised for 142 companies since
May 2016. By comparison, $1.3 trillion was raised under
Regulation D for more than 30,000 companies in the most recent
calendar year reported by the SEC (2014).

Despite the nominal dollar value, the SEC's research has
shown that crowdfunding is providing a new source of capital
for small businesses that may not have otherwise had access to
capital. Crowdfunding brings capital to areas underserved by
capital markets. Nearly forty percent of crowdfunding campaigns
were in areas classified as inner city by the Initiative for
Inner City Competitiveness, a non-profit dedicated to enhancing
inner city property through private investment.

The success of Kickstarter has demonstrated the need for
this type of capital, and Indiegogo, a rewards-based investor
website, has partnered with MicroVentures to provide both
rewards-based and equity crowdfunding. Government policies
should make it easier for entrepreneurs to attract traditional
investment through funding campaigns.

The rules for crowdfunding, however, remain overly
burdensome for small entrepreneurs seeking modest amounts of
capital. The audit requirements for crowdfunding are cumbersome
for small businesses, as evidenced by the transactions to date,
which have clustered just at the threshold for required audits.
Raising this capital threshold will encourage more businesses
to take advantage of crowdfunding. The rules should also
provide for relief from penalties for startups acting in good
faith.

Third, make it easier for small companies to make initial
public offerings (IPSs). Despite the intentions of the JOBS
Act, high costs and regulatory burden keep the traditional IPO
unattractive to small companies. These companies may have
access to private sources of equity, but the IPO is what
creates jobs. Investors in privately held companies prioritize
return on investment, while investors in public companies
expect growth. Growth creates jobs. Growth requires innovation.

Next, expand the pool of accredited investors. Keep the
current standards in place, but expand the qualification
criteria to allow people to meet those standards through
employment and/or education. Knowledgeable employees of early-
stage companies in high-growth industries may not have enough
money to qualify under current rules; they should be allowed to
invest in the companies they're helping to create, based on
their education and job experience.

The SEC is considering a proposal to tighten accreditation
standards, which would be exactly the wrong decision.
Tightening these standards could eliminate nearly 60% of
accredited investors, who provide more than one trillion
dollars of capital yearly, in private placements. Such a change
would devastate capital formation in the innovation economy. We
encourage you to support Congressional efforts that maintain
current standards, and allow these standards to rise with cost
of living adjustments.

Finally, allow early stage companies to sell net operating
losses to raise capital. If companies are permitted to treat
net operating losses as an asset, they can leverage the risk
capital invested in the company into additional cash--without
further investor risk. Profitable companies would be able to
provide significant new funding to early stage companies that
are not yet earning a profit.

The changes discussed above can be made before the
establishment of a Commission, although the Commission's
expertise and guidance would be valuable. That expertise and
guidance, however, will be essential as policymakers examine
and address the major long-term issues that impact the
Innovation Economy. These include:

The disappearance of small IPOs. Today's
IPOs start at $100 million, and the smaller IPOs have
disappeared. This is a major reordering of the American
economy, and requires policy changes beyond the small
fixes suggested above. The disappearance of small IPOs
is keeping job growth artificially low, and has
exacerbated the regional imbalance in entrepreneurship.
Regional and mid-sized businesses--small manufacturers,
retailers, and craft brewers, for example--used to be
able to make an initial public offering of $25 million
to fuel growth that created hundreds, even thousands of
jobs. When this source of capital disappeared, the jobs
disappeared as well. Reviving regional IPOs could make
a huge difference in parts of the country the economic
recovery has left behind. Regulation A+, mandated by
the JOBS Act, was intended to facilitate small
businesses' path to IPOs, but is still not the most
compelling option for financing. Structural issues have
magnified the headwinds facing small companies that
seek public capital. These include compliance burdens
that favor larger companies and the move to passive
investing and indexing, which means lower trading
volumes and valuations for equities outside of indexes,
and fewer retail brokers to sell an IPO.

The decline in the number of public
companies. The precipitous drop in the number of public
companies is harmful to the economy in many ways.
Public companies enhance the transparency of capital
markets and broaden the investment choices for
investors' portfolios, and their lower cost of capital
implies more efficient markets. As I have noted, and
will repeat, IPOs are also true job-creating events.
Investors in public companies expect long-term,
continuing growth, and this growth creates jobs. SEC
Chairman Clayton has said that the agency is
encouraging more companies to go public, noting last
month that the current trend ``ultimately results in
fewer opportunities for Main Street Americans to share
in our economy's growth, at a time when we are asking
them to do more on their own to save and invest for
their future and their children's futures.''

Geographic concentration of venture capital.
Fifty percent of all venture capital currently flows to
one state, California. This is a tremendous imbalance
that resonates throughout the country, and is already
causing systemic distortions in the job market. The
disparity in access to capital is a major contributor
to the divergence of wealth among regions throughout
the United States. Inventive ideas and people are not
confined to the coasts.

Concentration of control of venture capital.
Venture capital has not only become concentrated by
region, but it now comes from fewer sources and is
allocated to fewer companies. The number of venture
capital firms has declined by 50%, while the amount of
venture capital in the market remains steady. Fewer
people and companies are controlling the same amount of
money, and it's most efficient for them to allocate
those funds to fewer projects in larger dollar amounts.
The five to ten million-dollar first round of
professional investment has largely disappeared. A
Commission would examine the reasons for this
concentration, consider various reform possibilities,
and make meaningful policy recommendations.

The American economy has historically led the world in
innovation and entrepreneurship. Today, however, the United
States faces new levels of international competition as both
allies and adversaries recognize the importance of encouraging
innovation. As we seek to maintain our position in setting the
global standards for fostering entrepreneurship, the United
States can benefit from studying other nations' initiatives--
such as France's Station F, a new $265 million startup campus
in Paris that brings as many as 1,000 founders of new companies
together from around the world to share ideas and pool
resources.

If the United States is to remain the world leader in
innovation, we must restore the American innovation machine. A
bill to create a Commission on the Innovation Economy that
would make recommendations for both short-term fixes and long-
term policy goals is about to be introduced in both houses. I
want to thank the members on both sides of the aisle who are
leading this effort. You know that enacting legislation is a
time-consuming and laborious process. Action from the White
House in this area would also be welcome; the administration
could establish a commission similar to the Strategy and Policy
Forum, but for smaller, younger businesses.

A prospering Innovation Economy is the key to creating
jobs, increasing wages, and reducing income inequality as
companies compete for good employees. Again, I thank you for
taking the time to address this crucial issue, and I look
forward to working with you on solutions that will revive and
encourage entrepreneurship. I would be happy to answer any
questions you may have.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
