- BACKGROUND CHECK: ACHIEVABILITY OF NEW OZONE STANDARDS

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BACKGROUND CHECK:
ACHIEVABILITY OF NEW OZONE STANDARDS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 12, 2013

__________

Serial No. 113-35

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
81-724                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas, Chair
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 ZOE LOFGREN, California
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
Wisconsin                        DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             ERIC SWALWELL, California
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               DAN MAFFEI, New York
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   JOSEPH KENNEDY III, Massachusetts
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             SCOTT PETERS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               DEREK KILMER, Washington
STEVE STOCKMAN, Texas                AMI BERA, California
BILL POSEY, Florida                  ELIZABETH ESTY, Connecticut
CYNTHIA LUMMIS, Wyoming              MARC VEASEY, Texas
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona            JULIA BROWNLEY, California
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              MARK TAKANO, California
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota           ROBIN KELLY, Illinois
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma
RANDY WEBER, Texas
CHRIS STEWART, Utah
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Environment

HON. CHRIS STEWART, Utah, Chair
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma            SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         JULIA BROWNLEY, California
Wisconsin                        DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         MARK TAKANO, California
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
RANDY WEBER, Texas
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas

C O N T E N T S

Wednesday, June 12, 2013

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Chris Stewart, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Environment, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
U.S. House of Representatives..................................    10
Written Statement............................................    11

Statement by Representative Suzanne Bonamici, Ranking Minority
Member, Subcommittee on Environment, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    12
Written Statement............................................    14

Statement by Representative Lamar S. Smith, Chairman, Committee
on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    15
Written Statement............................................    16

Statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson, Ranking
Member, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House
of Representatives.............................................    17
Written Statement............................................    17

Witnesses:

Ms. Amanda Smith, Executive Director, Utah Department of
Environmental Quality
Oral Statement...............................................    18
Written Statement............................................    21

Mr. Samuel Oltmans, Senior Research Associate, Cooperative
Institute for Research in the Environmental Sciences,
University of Colorado, and Earth System Research Laboratory
Global Monitoring Division
Oral Statement...............................................    34
Written Statement............................................    36

Dr. Russell Dickerson, Professor, Department of Atmospheric and
Oceanic Science, University of Maryland
Oral Statement...............................................    51
Written Statement............................................    53

Mr. Jeffrey Holmstead, Partner, Bracewell & Giuliani LLP
Oral Statement...............................................    63
Written Statement............................................    65

Dr. John Vandenberg, Director, Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina Division, National Center for Environmental
Assessment, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Oral Statement...............................................    75
Written Statement............................................    77

Discussion.......................................................    73

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Ms. Amanda Smith, Executive Director, Utah Department of
Environmental Quality..........................................    96

Mr. Samuel Oltmans, Senior Research Associate, Cooperative
Institute for Research in the Environmental Sciences,
University of Colorado, and Earth System Research Laboratory
Global Monitoring Division.....................................   102

Dr. Russell Dickerson, Professor, Department of Atmospheric and
Oceanic Science, University of Maryland........................   106

Mr. Jeffrey Holmstead, Partner, Bracewell & Giuliani LLP.........   108

Dr. John Vandenberg, Director, Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina Division, National Center for Environmental
Assessment, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency...............   114

Appendix II: Aditional Material for the Record

Charts submitted by Representative Chris Stewart, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Environment, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................   134

BACKGROUND CHECK:
ACHIEVABILITY OF NEW OZONE STANDARDS

----------

Wednesday, June 12, 2013

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Chris
Stewart [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.008

Chairman Stewart. The Subcommittee on Environment will come
to order.
Good morning, everyone. Thank you for your time today.
Welcome to today's hearing entitled ``Background Check:
Achievability of New Ozone Standards.'' In front of you are
packets containing the written testimony, biographies, and
Truth in Testimony disclosures for today's witness panels, whom
I will be introducing in just a moment. The chair now
recognizes myself for five minutes for an opening statement.
Again, I would like to thank our excellent witnesses for
being here today. We have what is really a superb panel,
including the head of my state's world-class Department of
Environmental Quality. Welcome. And each of you, I know, intend
to tell us about recent science related to the background ozone
levels and how these developments should inform EPA's upcoming
revisions in the National Ambient Air Quality Standards, or
NAAQS, for ozone.
Recent studies suggest that EPA may be underestimating
multiple sources of background ozone, especially in the western
United States. Failure to acknowledge these uncontrollable
concentrations could lead to EPA setting a new ozone standard
next year that is at or near background levels, with
catastrophic economic impacts for large swaths of the country.
As this slide shows--and this slide was created from EPA data--
most of the Nation would be noncompliant with the new EPA
standard. More discouraging, many of these locations would find
it impossible to get in compliance because of naturally
occurring ozone, or from emissions that are imported from other
locations around the Nation or, in some cases, from around the
globe. In fact, EPA data suggests that areas in virtually every
state would violate these standards if the Agency went lower
than the current limit of 75 parts per billion. The result
leaves little room for states like Utah to demonstrate
compliance with the Clean Air Act, and the consequences include
draconian reduction requirements, severe economic sanctions,
threats to highway funding, and construction bans.
It is important to recognize that an unachievable standard
would result in little actual environmental improvement. Over
the past 30 years, the emissions of all precursors to ground-
level ozone have dropped more than 50 percent, and states have
not even begun to implement the tighter 2008 ozone standards.
The lower ozone standard of 60 parts per billion, which is
currently being discussed by EPA, would be incredibly
expensive. In fact, even the EPA's conservative cost estimate
of $90 billion a year would make this proposed rule the most
expensive regulation ever considered. But is this a record to
be proud of? And it is potentially much worse, for outside
analyses suggested the real cost of this proposed regulation is
closer to $1 trillion in annual attainment costs and reduced
gross domestic product. Recognizing the significant negative
economic consequences of this proposed action, in 2011 the
President showed restraint by withdrawing the proposal, citing
the importance of reducing regulatory burdens.
It is early in this standard-setting process, but once
again there are troubling signs. The Agency's Clean Air
Scientific Advisory Committee, which advises the Administrator
on NAAQS, has already flagged that the EPA fails to provide a
definition of ozone background or to discuss the role of
background in developing options for the standards in its
initial scientific documents.
EPA also has signaled an unprecedented break with past
practice in the Clean Air Act process by attempting to
disregard background levels in evaluating health risks,
essentially trying to load the dice to generate large
regulatory benefits by claiming that a new standard would
address ozone that cannot be controlled. One of the Agency's
own science advisors has called this shift a misinterpretation
that invites litigation against the Administrator and the
Agency. It is critical that these advisors carry out their
obligation under the Clean Air Act to advise EPA on the
relative contribution of concentrations of natural as well as
human activity and to inform the Administrator about any
adverse public health, welfare, social, economic and energy
effects from the new ozone standards.
It is very important that these scientists focus on their
role as independent peer reviewers. But the reality that I see
is concerning. For example, among the 28 panelists reviewing
EPA's scientific documents on ozone, 22 of them are cited by
the EPA in the Agency's Integrated Science Assessment and they
are referenced more than a thousand times in a document they
are being asked to critically examine.
Our witnesses will testify today about new modeling and
monitoring results that show that atmospheric events like
stratospheric intrusions, transported emissions from Asia, and
other sources could make new ozone standards unachievable. As
we will hear, these results are confirmed by EPA's monitors in
rural areas and isolated National Parks.
Let me be clear: if EPA lowers its standard to 60 parts per
billion, there are places in this country that could not meet
it even if they eliminated all human emissions. An air quality
standard that cannot be met in Yellowstone or Canyonlands or
Zion or the Grand Canyon is simply divorced from reality. EPA
claims that there are flexibilities within the Clean Air Act
implementation that could resolve these concerns about
compliance due to exceptional events or international
emissions. However, the Agency's track record on approving
state applications under these provisions leaves little room
for comfort.
I look forward to discussing these absolutely critical
issues with our witnesses today, and I now recognize the
Ranking Member, Ms. Bonamici, for her opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stewart follows:]

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee Chairman Chris Stewart

Good morning and welcome to the Environment Subcommittee's hearing
entitled ``Background Check: Achievability of New Ozone Standards.''
I'd like to thank our excellent witnesses for being here today. We
have a superb panel of experts, including the head of my state's world-
class Department of Environmental Quality, to tell us about recent
science related to background ozone levels and how these developments
should inform EPA's upcoming revisions to its National Ambient Air
Quality Standards, or NAAQS, for ozone.
Recent studies suggest that EPA may be underestimating multiple
sources of background ozone, especially in the Western United States.
Failure to acknowledge these uncontrollable concentrations could lead
to EPA setting a new ozone standard next year that is at or near
background levels, with catastrophic economic impacts for large swaths
of the country.
As this slide shows, and this slide was created from EPA data, most
of the nation would be non-compliant with the new EPA standard. More
discouraging, many of these locations would find it impossible to get
in compliance because of naturally occurring ozone, or emissions that
are imported from other locations around the nation or around the
globe. In fact, EPA data suggests that areas in virtually every state
would violate these standards if the Agency went lower than the current
limit of 75 parts per billion. The result leaves little room for states
like Utah to demonstrate compliance with the Clean Air Act, and the
consequences include draconian reduction requirements, severe economic
sanctions, threats to highway funding, and construction bans.
It's also important to recognize that an unachievable standard
would result in little actual environmental improvement. Over the last
30 years, the emissions of all precursors to ground-level ozone have
dropped more than 50 percent, and States have not even begun to
implement the tighter 2008 ozone standards.
The lower ozone standard of 60 parts per billion, which is
currently being discussed by EPA, would be incredibly expensive. In
fact, even the EPA's conservative cost estimate of $90 billion a year
would make this proposed rule the most expensive regulation ever
considered. But is this a record to be proud of? And it's potentially
much worse, for outside analyses suggested the real cost of this
proposed regulation is closer to one trillion dollars in annual
attainment costs and reduced gross domestic product. Recognizing the
significant negative economic consequences of this proposed action, in
2011, the President showed restraint by withdrawing the proposal,
citing ``the importance of reducing regulatory burdens.''
It is early in this standard-setting process, but once again there
are troubling signs. The Agency's Clean Air Scientific Advisory
Committee, which advises the Administrator on NAAQS, has already
flagged that the EPA ``fails to provide a. definition of ozone
background'' or to ``discuss the role of background in developing
options'' for the standards in its initial scientific documents.
EPA has also signaled an unprecedented break with past practice in
the Clean Air Act process by attempting to disregard background levels
in evaluating health risks--essentially trying to load the dice to
generate large regulatory benefits by claiming that a new standard
would address ozone that cannot be controlled. One of the Agency's own
science advisors has called this shift a misinterpretation that
``invites litigation against the Administrator and the Agency.''
It is critical that these advisors carry out their obligation under
the Clean Air Act to advise EPA on the ``relative contribution to
[ozone] concentrations of natural as well as'' human activity and to
inform the Administrator about ``any adverse public health, welfare,
social, economic, or energy effects'' from these new ozone standards.
It is very important for these scientists to focus on their role as
independent peer reviewers. But the reality that I see is concerning:
For example, among the 28 panelists reviewing EPA's scientific
documents on ozone, 22 of them are cited by EPA in the Agency's
Integrated Science Assessment and they are referenced more than a
thousand times in a document they are being asked to critically
examine.
Our witnesses will testify today about new modeling and monitoring
results that show that atmospheric events like stratospheric
intrusions, transported emissions from Asia, and other sources could
make new ozone standards unachievable. As we will hear, these results
are confirmed by EPA's monitors in rural areas and isolated National
Parks.
Let me be clear: if EPA lowers its standard to 60 parts per
billion, there are places in this country that could not meet it even
if they eliminated all human emissions. An air quality standard that
cannot be met in Yellowstone, Canyonlands, Zion, or the Grand Canyon is
divorced from reality.
EPA claims that there are flexibilities within Clean Air Act
implementation that could resolve these concerns about compliance due
to exceptional events or international emissions. However, the Agency's
track record on approving state applications under these provisions
leaves little room for comfort.
I look forward to discussing these absolutely critical issues with
our witnesses today. I now recognize the Ranking Member Ms. Bonamici,
for her opening statement.

Ms. Bonamici. Thank you very much, Chairman Stewart. I want
to thank all the witnesses for being here today. I hope that
this discussion about the latest science regarding the health
standard for ozone in the air we breathe, how ozone affects
health and our quality of life, will set the stage for a
positive outcome.
As we will hear this morning, the EPA is considering new
scientific information that will inform their work on setting
an ozone health standard later this year. The last time the EPA
reconsidered the ozone health standard in 2008, the scientific
recommendations of the Clean Air Science Advisory Committee
called for a more protective standard than we currently have in
place. Now, five years later, we know more about how ozone
impacts our health than ever before.
According to the American Lung Association, numerous health
studies show evidence of a causal link between inhaling ozone
levels well below the standard, and measurable respiratory harm
in children, the elderly, and people who exercise and work
outdoors. Inflammation of the lungs and increased asthma
attacks are just the start of the serious health problems
associated with breathing ozone.
Having a clean and healthy environment can build a stronger
economy in many ways. Sick workers are not productive workers.
Sick children are not learning and maximizing their potential.
Time spent with doctors and in hospitals is time lost from more
productive pursuits. And additionally, we cannot overlook the
impact that pollution has on a thriving agricultural community.
A vibrant economy can be the result of good environmental
practices, not a victim of those practices.
Over the years scientific and technological advancements
have dramatically improved our knowledge about how ozone is
formed and where sources of ozone precursors originate. The
majority of ozone in most parts of the country originates in
local human activities. Emissions from power plants and
tailpipes are often the leading culprit, but ozone can also
form from precursor emissions that may have originated
thousands of miles away or from biogenic sources such as forest
fires. Causes of ozone, especially at higher elevations and in
the Intermountain West, seem to differ from those found on the
East or West coasts and are often beyond the reach of our
regulators. We still do not fully understand all of these
complex processes, and strong investments in scientific
research would make it possible for us to better identify
sources, especially policy-relevant background conditions, with
more precision. Scientific research would provide regulators
with the information they would need to develop approaches to
managing ozone more appropriate to local conditions. However,
that kind of precision requires funding and, as Ms. Smith notes
in her testimony, research funding at EPA is under pressure,
and neither states nor universities are in a good position
fiscally to fill the gap.
The EPA has the responsibility to insure that its decision
to set a new ozone standard is guided by the best available
science. I am cognizant of the argument that local conditions
in the Intermountain West may require some new forms of
flexibility by the EPA in enforcing ozone standards, and I
encourage EPA to work with the states to develop such
flexibility. Despite that call for flexibility, the science on
ozone and health is sound. The need for more science on policy-
relevant background levels of ozone must not deter or prevent
the EPA from setting an ozone standard that is fully protective
of human health.
This country has proven time and time again that a cleaner
environment improves worker productivity, increases
agricultural yield, reduces mortality and illness, and achieves
other economic and public health benefits that outweigh the
costs of compliance. As we look ahead to the EPA's proposal to
set a new ozone standard, the EPA must examine the latest
scientific findings along with the cost of implementation and
the protection of human health.
I look forward to hearing from all the witnesses, and with
that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Bonamici follows:]

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee Ranking Member Suzanne Bonamici

Thank you, Chairman Stewart. I want to thank all of the witnesses
for being here today. I hope this discussion about the latest science
regarding the health standard for ozone in the air we breathe--how
ozone affects health and our quality of life--will set the stage for a
positive outcome.
As we will hear this morning, the EPA is considering new scientific
information that will inform their work on setting an ozone health
standard later this year. The last time the EPA revised the ozone
health standard in 2008, the advisory committee recommended a more
protective standard than we currently have in place.
Now, five years later, we know more about how ozone impacts our
health than ever before. According to the American Lung Association,
numerous health studies show evidence of a causal link between inhaling
ozone levels well below the standard, and measurable respiratory harm
in children, the elderly, and people who exercise and work outdoors.
Inflammation of the lungs and increased asthma attacks are just the
start of the serious health problems associated with breathing ozone.
Having a clean and healthy environment can build a stronger economy
in many ways. Sick workers are not productive workers. Sick children
are not learning and maximizing their potential. Time spent with
doctors and in hospitals is time lost from more productive pursuits.
Additionally, we cannot overlook the impact that pollution can have on
a thriving agriculture community. A vibrant economy can be the result
of good environmental practices, not the victim of those practices.
Over the years scientific and technological advancements have
dramatically improved our knowledge about how ozone is formed and where
sources of ozone precursors originate. The majority of ozone in most
parts of the country originates in local human activities. Emissions
from power plants and from tail pipes are often the leading culprit.
But ozone can also form from precursor emissions that may have
originated thousands of miles away or from biogenic sources such as
forest fires. Causes of ozone, especially at higher elevations and in
the Intermountain West, seem to differ from those found on the East or
West coasts and are often beyond the reach of our regulators.
We still do not fully understand all of these complex processes,
and strong investments in scientific research would make it possible
for us to identify sources, especially background conditions, with more
precision. Scientific research would provide regulators with the
information they would need to develop approaches to managing ozone
more appropriate to local conditions. However, that kind of precision
requires funding and, as Ms. Smith notes in her testimony, research
funding at EPA is under pressure and neither states nor universities
are in a good position fiscally to fill the gap.
EPA has the responsibility to insure that its decision to set a new
ozone standard is guided by the best available science. I am cognizant
of the argument that local conditions in the Intermountain West may
require some new forms of flexibility by EPA in enforcing ozone
standards, and I encourage EPA to work with the states to develop such
flexibility. Despite that call for flexibility, the science on ozone
and health is sound. The need for more science on background levels of
ozone must not deter or prevent the EPA from setting an ozone standard
that is fully protective of human health.
This country has proven time and time again that a cleaner
environment improves worker productivity, increases agricultural yield,
reduces mortality and illness, and achieves other economic and public
health benefits that outweigh the costs of compliance.
As we look ahead to the EPA's proposal to set a new ozone standard,
the EPA must consider the latest scientific findings and the protection
of human health. I look forward to hearing from the witnesses.

Chairman Stewart. Thank you very much, Ms. Bonamici. We now
recognize the Chairman of the full Committee, the gentleman
from Texas, Mr. Smith, for an opening statement.
Chairman Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, today's hearing comes at a critical time. The
Environmental Protection Agency is now reviewing the science
that it will use to determine whether to revise or retain the
National Ambient Air Quality Standards for ozone, called NAAQS.
This decision has significant implications that will drive
regulatory requirements across the country and will have a
significant impact on the economy. In 2010, the EPA itself
estimated that revised ozone standards could impose compliance
costs of $90 billion.
As we will hear from today's witnesses, the Agency is now
considering setting the NAAQS either at or below naturally
occurring background levels in many parts of the country. This
means two things. First, these areas will be out of compliance
with the Clean Air Act through no fault of their own. And
second, with no way to comply, these areas will face
significant regulatory hurdles, with little to no environmental
benefit.
A nonattainment designation under the Clean Air Act has
serious consequences. Additional permitting and compliance
obligations could halt any business expansion or new economic
development. And with limits on Federal highway funding,
nonattainment areas would also suffer direct Federal sanctions
that will harm their ability to make critical infrastructure
investments.
The effects could be devastating. Looking at EPA's
monitoring data, we see that if EPA lowers the ozone standards
to 60 parts per billion, over 90 percent of the U.S. population
could live or work in a nonattainment area. Many communities
still struggle to meet the standards that were set in 2008. In
these tough economic times, tighter regulations would put an
additional burden on the backs of hardworking American
families. Businesses and communities across the country
protested EPA's efforts to tighten these standards in 2010, and
such concerns eventually forced President Obama to withdraw the
proposal, a decision that is best remembered by former White
House Chief of Staff Bill Dailey's asking, ``What are the
health effects of unemployment?''
I am once again concerned that without transparency, the
EPA has incentive to further inflate the health benefit claims
associated with tighter ozone standards, and alarmingly, the
Agency may exaggerate benefits using undisclosed data with
highly questionable results. For two years this Committee has
asked the EPA for access to the data that supports two
federally funded studies: the Cancer Prevention Study and the
Harvard Six Cities Study. This data's significance goes well
beyond the ozone standards we now consider. It forms the basis
for nearly all benefit claims from Clean Air Act rulemaking in
this Administration and a disproportionate share of overall
Federal regulatory benefit claims. In other words, the EPA has
refused to provide the data that supports a majority of
regulatory benefit claims, and the EPA has repeatedly failed to
respond to Congressional requests to make the underlying data
publicly available. To the extent that any information has been
provided, it contains significant gaps that make full
replication and validation of the studies' original results
impossible. Further, these studies are decades old and have not
been comprehensively updated. Even the National Research
Council in 2004 cautioned that these studies, ``have little use
for decision making.'' That the agency now attempts to use this
data set to justify new onerous regulations is unjustified.
Today I will send a letter to the Acting EPA Administrator
cautioning the Agency not to rely on studies based on these
data in the ozone rulemaking. I am also once again asking the
Agency to release the underlying data in a manner that is
sufficient for independent analysis. If the Agency continues to
ignore this request, the Committee will be forced to resort to
formal action to obtain its release.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smith follows:]

Prepared Statement of Chairman Lamar S. Smith

Today's hearing comes at a critical time. The Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) is now reviewing the science that it will use
to determine whether to revise or retain the National Ambient Air
Quality Standards for ozone.
This decision has significant implications that will drive
regulatory requirements across the country and will have a significant
impact on the economy. In 2010, the EPA itself estimated that revised
ozone standards could impose compliance costs of $90 billion.
As we will hear from today's witnesses, the Agency is now
considering setting the NAAQS either at, or below, naturally occurring
background levels in many parts of the country. This means two things:
First, these areas will be out of compliance with the Clean Air Act
through no fault of their own. And second, with no way to comply, these
areas will face significant regulatory hurdles--with little to no
environmental benefit.
A nonattainment designation under the Clean Air Act has serious
consequences. Additional permitting and compliance obligations could
halt any business expansion or new economic development.
And with limits on federal highway funding, nonattainment areas
would also suffer direct federal sanctions that will harm their ability
to make critical infrastructure investments.
The effects could be devastating. Looking at EPA's monitoring data,
we see that if EPA lowers the ozone standards to 60 parts per billion,
over 90 percent of the U.S. population could live or work in a
nonattainment area. Many communities still struggle to meet the
standards that were set in 2008. In these tough economic times, tighter
regulations would put an additional burden on the backs of hard-working
American families. Businesses and communities across the country
protested EPA's efforts to tighten these standards in 2010. And such
concerns eventually forced President Obama to withdraw the proposal--a
decision that is best remembered by former White House Chief of Staff
Bill Dailey's asking, ``What are the health effects of unemployment?''
I am once again concerned that without transparency, the EPA has
incentive to further inflate the health benefit claims associated with
tighter ozone standards. And alarmingly, the agency may exaggerate
benefits using undisclosed data with highly questionable results.
For two years this Committee has asked EPA for access to the data
that supports two federally-funded studies: the ``Cancer Prevention
Study'' and the ``Harvard Six Cities Study.'' This data's significance
goes well beyond the ozone standards we now consider. It forms the
basis for nearly all benefit claims from Clean Air Act rulemaking in
this Administration and a disproportionate share of overall federal
regulatory benefit claims.
In other words, the EPA has refused to provide the data that
supports a majority of regulatory benefit claims. And the EPA has
repeatedly failed to respond to Congressional requests to make the
underlying data publicly available.
To the extent that any information has been provided, it contains
significant gaps that make full replication and validation of the
studies' original results impossible. Further, these studies are
decades old and have not been comprehensively updated. Even the
National Research Council in 2004 cautioned that these studies, ``have
little use for decision making.'' That the agency now attempts to use
this data set to justify new onerous regulations is unjustified.
Today I will send a letter to Acting EPA Administrator Bob
Perciasepe cautioning the agency not to rely on studies based on these
data in the ozone rulemaking. I am also, once again, asking the agency
to release the underlying data in a manner that is sufficient for
independent analysis. If the agency continues to ignore this request,
the Committee will be forced to resort to formal action to obtain its
release.

Chairman Stewart. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, the gentlelady from
Texas, Ms. Johnson, for an opening statement.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you for holding the hearing on the forthcoming National Ambient
Air Quality Standards for ground-level ozone, and I want to
thank all the witnesses for being here today.
As someone who has been in the public health field, I am
keenly sensitive to the problem poor air quality can have on
the health of our citizens, and especially the young and the
infirm. As a country, we need to do all that we can to ensure
that we have clean air to breathe. The EPA is at the forefront
of protecting our citizens' ability to breathe clean air,
whether it is in my home State of Texas or here in Washington,
D.C. To do its job correctly, the EPA must invest in research,
determining how pollutants occur and how they affect the health
of our population. The EPA's investment in scientific research
helps achieve regulations which are the fairest and most cost-
effective way of protecting our citizens from pollutants.
I am looking forward to the testimony from the EPA's
witness here today to explain the science behind the EPA's
Integrated Science Assessment of Ozone and Related
Photochemical Oxidants. This report is another reminder of the
importance of investing in research. If we are going to ask the
EPA protect the public health and the environment we must give
them the funding to carry out the best research, thereby
ensuring that the scientific justifications for any regulations
from the EPA are backed by the best science.
It has always seemed simple to me that protecting the
health of our citizens ensures a stronger and more vibrant
economy. I look forward to hearing about these new ozone air
quality standards from our witnesses.
I thank you, and yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Johnson follows:]

Prepared Statement of Ranking Member Eddie Bernice Johnson

I want to thank Chairman Stewart for holding this hearing on the
forthcoming National Ambient Air Quality Standards for ground level
ozone and I want to thank the witnesses on the panel.
As someone who has been in the public health field, I am keenly
sensitive to the problem poor air quality can have on the health of our
citizens, especially the young and the infirm.
As a country, we need to do all that we can to ensure that we have
clean air to breathe. The EPA is at the forefront of protecting our
citizen's ability to breathe clean air, whether it is in my home State
of Texas or here in Washington, D.C. To do its job correctly, the EPA
must invest in research, determining how pollutants occur and how they
affect the health of our population. The EPA's investment in scientific
research helps achieve regulations which are the fairest and most cost-
effective way of protecting our citizens from pollutants.
I am looking forward to the testimony from the EPA's witness here
today to explain the science behind the EPA's Integrated Science
Assessment of Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants. This report is
another reminder of the importance of investing in research.
If we are going to ask the EPA protect the public health and the
environment we must give them the funding to carry out the best
research; thereby ensuring that the scientific justifications for any
regulations from the EPA are backed by the best science.
It has always seemed simple to me that protecting the health of our
citizens ensures a stronger and more vibrant economy. I look forward to
hearing about these new ozone air quality standards from our witnesses
today.

Chairman Stewart. Thank you, Ms. Johnson.
And if there are Members who wish to submit additional
opening statements, your statements will be added to the record
at this point.
At this time I would like to introduce our witnesses. Our
first witness today I am proud to introduce here is Ms. Amanda
Smith, Executive Director at the Utah Department of
Environmental Quality. She is responsible for providing
leadership to the department and to the State of Utah to carry
out DEQ's mission of safeguarding human health and quality of
life by protecting and enhancing the environment. Prior to
this, Amanda was a Legislative Director and Rural Advisor to
Governor Huntsman. Amanda Smith received her law degree from
Gonzaga University.
And as our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is
limited to five minutes each after which Members of the
Committee will have five minutes each to ask questions. I will
introduce the subsequent witnesses as they get a chance for
their opening statements.
I now recognize Ms. Smith for five minutes to present her
testimony.

TESTIMONY OF MS. AMANDA SMITH,

EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,

UTAH DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY

Ms. Smith. Mr. Chairman Stewart, Ranking Member Bonamici
and Members of the Committee, my name is Amanda Smith. I am the
Executive Director of the Utah Department of Environmental
Quality.
Utah is fortunate to boast a high quality of life, a strong
economy and a safe, clean environment. Governor Herbert has
directed the Department to take a proactive approach to solve
Utah's air quality issues. From a strong idle reduction policy
for state vehicles, to formation of the independent air quality
organization, UCAIR, to address statewide air issues, to a
multi-partner state-of-the-science wintertime ozone study, Utah
has led.
I am speaking before you today to express Utah's concerns
about how the state will meet the ozone standard if it is
lowered from 75 parts per billion. Surprisingly high ozone
values have been measured at rural monitors in Utah and even
within National Parks. Similar high values have also been seen
throughout the Intermountain West. In Utah, our work to date
has focused on reductions in urban areas, successfully reducing
peak ozone levels to meet more stringent standards. However, in
rural Utah, where there are few sources, ozone values have not
been decreasing, rather values have remained fairly constant
despite these significant reductions in emissions of ozone
precursors in Utah and upwind states. National efforts to
reduce ozone since the 1970s have focused on the eastern United
States and California, with the accompanying research, modeling
and regulatory strategies designed to solve those problems. The
1990 Clean Air Act Amendments reflect that focus, and included
specific strategies and deadlines to solve an urban ozone
problem that was primarily caused by mobile sources. Only
recently, as ozone standards have become more stringent, has
attention been given to background ozone in the Intermountain
West. Recent research shows significantly higher impacts in the
West than in the rest of the country, with background ozone
increasing every year. Wildfires and stratospheric ozone
intrusions also contribute significantly to background ozone
levels, and have a disproportionate impact on the Intermountain
West. It is critical to recognize that the primary causes of
high background ozone are beyond the control of the states.
Before moving forward with a more stringent ozone standard,
EPA needs to have in place the necessary tools to allow states
to succeed in meeting this standard. These tools could include
potential legislation, regulations, technical tools, and
additional research on ozone formation and mitigation.
Additionally, EPA must define paths forward on how attainment
will be addressed through policies such as exceptional events,
policy-relevant background and rural transport area
designation. Again, these tools were designed for the East
Coast and currently are problematic and an ill fit for solving
ozone in the rural Intermountain West.
Specifically, the exceptional-events policy has proven to
be an impossibly high hurdle to meet and eats up literally
thousands of hours of critical staff time to develop each
submission. Since 2008, Utah has submitted 12 exceptional-event
demonstrations for particulate matter that have required over
4,000 hours of technical work. None of those have been approved
by Region 8. There were many other events, including ozone
levels affected by wildfires that we did not even attempt to
demonstrate as exceptional events because the technical
criteria are too difficult to meet. If the exceptional-event
process doesn't work for particulate matter, it will not work
for the complicated science behind rural background ozone. If
EPA moves forward with a more stringent standard without
workable measures to address background ozone, it will
guarantee failure for Utah, leading to severe consequences for
the state.
To put this in perspective, the Canyonlands monitor in San
Juan County regularly measures ozone above 70 parts per
billion, the upper end of EPA's standard proposal. San Juan
County is close to the size of New Jersey and has a population
of about 14,000 people. If designated nonattainment, permitting
regulations would require existing sources to reduce emissions
before new emission sources could be built, affecting economic
development. If the standards are not met after that, more
stringent strategies are required with additional reductions in
activities such traffic control measures, etc. These
requirements would be nearly meaningless in reducing ozone and
would have an exceptionally burdensome impact on an area of
Utah with one of the highest rates of poverty.
The Department of Environmental Quality's mission is to
safeguard public health and our quality of life by protecting
and enhancing the environment. We take that mission seriously.
Transportation-focused measures in small rural communities will
not be effective, nor will overly stringent controls applied to
remote sources. Setting an ozone standard that can't be met
will not improve public health.
Thank you, Chairman Stewart, Ranking Member Bonamici and
Members of the Committee. I appreciate the time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Smith follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6901.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6901.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6901.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6901.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6901.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6901.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6901.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6901.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6901.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6901.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6901.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6901.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6901.030

Chairman Stewart. Thank you, Ms. Smith.
Our second witness today then is Mr. Samuel Oltmans,
Research Associate with the Cooperative Institute for Research
in the Environmental Sciences at the University of Colorado at
Boulder. This is a joint institute between the University of
Colorado and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration. Mr. Oltmans conducted atmospheric and
environmental research for NOAA and its predecessors for nearly
40 years--and sir, you don't look that old. I find that hard to
believe--and was the Chief of the Ozone and Water Vapor Group
of NOAA's Earth Systems Research Lab for 15 years. Mr. Oltmans
pursued graduate studies in astrogeophysics at the University
of Colorado.
Mr. Oltmans, for your testimony then.

TESTIMONY OF MR. SAMUEL OLTMANS,

SENIOR RESEARCH ASSOCIATE,

COOPERATIVE INSTITUTE FOR RESEARCH

IN THE ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCES,

UNIVERSITY OF COLORADO,

AND EARTH SYSTEM RESEARCH LABORATORY

GLOBAL MONITORING DIVISION

Mr. Oltmans. Chairman Stewart, Ranking Member Bonamici,
honorable Members. My name is Sam Oltmans, and I am a Research
Associate at the University of Colorado. Thank you for this
opportunity to present recent developments both from an
observational and modeling perspective in our understanding of
background ozone and its relevance in determining an ozone
standard as part of the National Ambient Air Quality Standards
process.
In the previous review of the ozone standard culminating in
the current form of the standard with a maximum daily eight
hour average of 75 parts per billion background ozone, or as it
was referred to as policy-relevant background, was based solely
on an atmospheric modeling exercise from a single global model.
At that time, empirical observations representing background
ozone suggested levels higher than those determined by the
model, but these were not given significant weight by the EPA
and its Clean Air Scientific Advisory Committee in determining
background ozone levels.
As part of the review of the ozone standard currently
underway, the Integrated Science Assessment refers to several
terms to designate background ozone including North American
background and U.S. background. The term ``policy relevant
background'', or PRB, used in early discussions has generally
been abandoned. This is a positive step, in my mind, since it
at least implies that background ozone can be assessed from
relevant observations rather than being simply a model
construct.
Consideration of U.S. background reflects the reality that
the United States has no regulatory control of pollution
sources beyond its borders. Recent studies, including our own,
have shown that several key sites at or near the West Coast of
the United States regularly provide observational data that
represent background ozone levels. Two sites have been
extensively studied that include Trinidad Head, a marine
boundary layer site in northern California, and Mount Bachelor,
a higher altitude location in Oregon. At Trinidad Head,
springtime daily eight hour maximum ozone concentrations exceed
45 parts per billion one quarter of the time. At Mt. Bachelor,
May ozone levels are higher than 60 ppb 25 percent of the time.
These observations suggest that background ozone could be
substantial--could be a substantial contribution at sites where
ozone is measured near the NAAQS standard. Contribution--I will
show that recent modeling results also support this conclusion.
In the current Integrated Science Assessment, a comparison
of the model-derived ozone values for determining background
ozone for the assessment is significantly lower than the
observed values, as you can see in the slide. This suggests
background ozone is underestimated in the model since at
Trinidad Head, ozone levels under conditions representative of
background are almost always higher than non-background
conditions.
Recent work led by Dr. Meiyun Lin at the Geophysical
Research Laboratory and Princeton University and collaborators,
including myself, is a major advance within the modeling
framework in the ability to quantify the contributions to
background ozone. This new work by Lin and coauthors published
last year dramatically reinforces the important contribution of
North American background ozone, including a significant
stratospheric component, on 8-hour average concentrations at or
near current air quality standard levels. Unlike the modeling
work used in EPA assessments, the GFDL model explicitly
simulates ozone variability in the lower stratosphere and its
dynamic coupling with the troposphere, as opposed to using a
parameterized formulation. Based on this model, estimates of
stratospheric impacts on surface ozone over the western United
States are generally higher, and up to two to three times
greater during intrusions than previous model estimates. This
finding is in notable contrast to prior work concluding that
stratospheric influence on surface ozone concentrations is
rare. It should also be pointed out that these findings show
that the influence of ozone transported from the stratosphere
is not limited to episodes categorized as exceptional events.
In summary, the work of Lin and coauthors shows that
background ozone concentration contributes on average about 40
parts per billion to measured ozone in the Mountain West. A
significant portion of the time, background ozone exceeds 50
ppb under high measured ozone conditions. Based on these recent
results, the EPA and the Ozone Panel of CASAC should take
cognizance of the underestimates of background levels described
in the Assessment and utilize the more realistic estimates of
background ozone available. These more realistic estimates
should be used when developing the Human Health Risk and
Exposure Assessment, Welfare Risk and Exposure Assessment, and
Policy Assessment documents that will play a role in the
determination of the recommended ozone health and welfare
standards.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Oltmans follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.026

Chairman Stewart. Thank you, Mr. Oltmans.
Our third witness today is Dr. Russell Dickerson, Professor
at the University of Maryland's Department of Atmospheric and
Oceanic Studies--I am sorry--Oceanic Science. Dr. Dickerson has
served on EPA air quality panels and was a member of the
National Academy of Sciences and National Research Council
Committee on Animal Feeding Operations. Dr. Dickerson received
his Ph.D. from the University of Michigan studying radiation
and trace gases in the atmosphere, and Dr. Dickerson, your five
minutes, please.

TESTIMONY OF DR. RUSSELL DICKERSON,

PROFESSOR, DEPARTMENT OF ATMOSPHERIC

AND OCEANIC SCIENCE,

UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND

Dr. Dickerson. Thank you. Good morning. My name is Russ
Dickerson. I am with the University of Maryland, but I am
speaking on my own behalf.
[Slide.]
I like this picture because it is the NASA P3 research
aircraft during DISCOVER-AQ campaign conducted over the Mid-
Atlantic states in the summer of 2011, and that picture was
shot from the University of Maryland research aircraft. We have
a Cessna. Our pockets aren't quite as deep as NASA's. But both
of these aircraft were chockfull of research instruments and
they are flying in formation at this point to make sure we are
on the same page with respect to calibrations. In the middle of
that picture, you will see a little power plant on the Eastern
Shore.
So what has been the result of all of this what we hope is
policy-relevant science? Next slide, please. Oh, I can do it.
[Slide.]
These are the exceedance days over the past few decades for
a combination of Baltimore and Washington, and you can see that
we are making excellent progress. Why have we made this
progress? I like to think that it is because the science has
helped guide policy, and there should be some of these little
lenticulars that look like postcards that have been passed
around. They are NASA observations of NO2, the thing that
produces ozone, and you can see from this lenticular that we
made good progress. The concentrations in 2005 were quite a bit
higher than they were in 2010. So we are making good progress
but we are not there yet. You will notice that in the last
couple of years there are still a substantial number of
exceedances in the Baltimore-Washington area.
So my main point would be that ozone at concentrations of
60 to 70 parts per billion is harmful, causing morbidity and
mortality. This is what the standard should be. It is the best
science available, and that is my recommendation.
It is absolutely true that natural processes, as my
colleague, Mr. Oltmans, has indicated, are important, and as a
research scientist I have flown through these events and seen
them. They happen. But I have never seen one in the eastern
United States in my 20 years of flying through ozone events
that has come down below about 10,000 feet altitude. So for the
vast majority of nonattainment sites, these are not important.
They are, however, important for the Intermountain West.
What is background ozone? This is an image--I am an
experimentalist so I am always skeptical of models, but some
models are useful, and this is one that is useful, and it shows
what the background concentrations of ozone are, how much ozone
would we have if there were no emissions in America, and the
hotter the color, the higher the concentration of ozone here.
So this model makes sense with respect to observations. You can
see that in springtime, there is a substantial amount of ozone,
especially at high altitudes. In the summer, it is less. And if
you look at the United States east of the Rocky Mountains,
those concentrations are really pretty modest. So I think we
can achieve higher standards.
There is a mechanism in existence called exceptional
events. I sympathize with the difficulty of getting those. The
State of Maryland was successful in getting one. It was not
easy. EPA has begun streamlining that process. Oh, and the NASA
team of which I am a member that generated these lenticulars is
called the Air Quality Applied Science Team, AQAST. The Air
Quality Applied Sciences Team is prepared to provide support at
no expense to the States to help explain natural events, forest
fires and so on using in situ and remotely sensed data. So that
mechanism is in place, and that is appropriate for dealing with
exceptional events.
Now, for the eastern United States, certainly where I have
most of my experience, there are certainly pollution sources
that can be controlled. There are some power plants still using
the technology of the 1960s, ICI industrial, commercial
institutional boilers that are uncontrolled, even agricultural
processes that with judicious application of good agricultural
practices could help reduce nitric oxide, ``ozone precursor''
emissions, to the atmosphere.
However, in order for these to be effective, we will have
to realize that air pollution episodes are much larger in scope
than a single small eastern state. We need to consider the
entire eastern United States as one large air shed.
So in conclusion, I will say that I agree with tightening
the standards. I don't think it is appropriate to punish the
people of urban areas in the eastern United States by
maintaining looser standards, and we have made a lot of
progress, but as Robert Frost said, ``we have promises to keep
and miles to go before we sleep.''
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Dickerson follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.036

Chairman Stewart. Thank you, Dr. Dickerson.
Our fourth witness is Mr. Jeffrey Holmstead, Partner of
Bracewell & Giuliani. Mr. Holmstead is one of the Nation's
leading air quality lawyers and heads the Environmental
Strategies Group at Bracewell & Giuliani. He previously served
as the Assistant Administrator at the EPA for the Office of Air
and Radiation. He also served on the White House staff as
Associate Counsel to former President George H.W. Bush. Mr.
Holmstead received his law degree from Yale Law School. Mr.
Holmstead.

TESTIMONY OF MR. JEFFREY HOLMSTEAD,

PARTNER, BRACEWELL & GIULIANI LLP

Mr. Holmstead. Thank you. I am delighted to be here this
morning. As you mentioned, I am a Partner in the law firm of
Bracewell and Giuliani, but I am not appearing on behalf of my
law firm or any clients this morning. I am here to share my
views as a former EPA official and as a private attorney who
spent more than 25 years dealing with Clean Air Act issues.
One of the things that I think has become apparent is,
ozone is not a new issue. There are some issues that arise
under the Clean Air Act that really are kind of new. The focus
on fine particles, which I know many of you are aware of, is
something that really has only been a regulatory and science
issue over the last decade or so. But ozone has been an issue
now for more than 40 years, and I do think there is a couple of
things--and I have been sitting here trying to think what I can
add to this panel, and the first thing I want to say, which I
think we would all agree with, is, we really have made
remarkable progress over 40 years. By any measure, ozone levels
throughout almost certainly all urban areas have improved
pretty dramatically. You talk to people who lived in Los
Angeles or Houston back in the early 1970s, and it is really
pretty remarkable.
The issue, though--well, there is really a confluence of
two or three things that are going on now. As researchers have
become more sophisticated at looking at more subtle signals in
the data, we are seeing that at lower and lower levels, there
appear to be health effects. There is still debate over how
serious those are and how widespread they are, but certainly
EPA over the years has changed its view on what the safe level
is, so going back to when I first started thinking about these
issues, the standard people were thinking about was 120 parts
per billion, and that was measured in a slightly different way
so you can't exactly compare it with today's levels, but think
of this: the standard has gone from 120, and then in 1997 it
went down to 84, and then in 2008 it has gone down to 75, and
now EPA is talking about lowering it--a standard that was 120
and then 84 and 75, we are now talking, as Dr. Dickerson said,
somewhere between 60 and 70.
The other issue is--so we have made enormous progress but
EPA says we need to do more, and clearly there is more that we
need to do. The issue, though, is, notwithstanding this
considerable process, the history has shown us that just
changing the standard doesn't clean up the air. You need
technology, you need things that you can actually do, and the
way that the Clean Air Act works really hasn't changed since
1970 in terms of this particular program. Back in the 1970s,
the general view was, if you had a pollution problem, it was
largely a local problem, and so EPA would set the standard and
then states would be given the responsibility to go out and
control local sources to make sure that they met the standard,
and that is what people assumed was the way to clean up our
air. Well, we have discovered it is actually much more
complicated than that, as various people have talked about this
morning. There certainly are localized sources of pollution,
and I agree with Dr. Dickerson that there is more than we can
do in some cases, but the problem is, there are many parts of
the country where there is not much more we can do, especially
when it comes to these events that occur from time to time but
don't quality for EPA's exceptional-events policy.
And so my basic message this morning is, I think that the
Clean Air Act that has served us pretty well for the last 40
years on ozone is going to have to be reexamined, and I think
this Committee, even though you don't have regulatory
jurisdiction, can play a very important part in making sure
that the public and policymakers understand the issues that we
are facing today.
I would also like to suggest that we can rely more on EPA's
Clean Air Science Advisory Committee, the CASAC, which was
specifically set up by Congress to deal with some of these
issues, and for many years, CASAC has largely simply responded
to questions it has received from EPA staff. But Congress
clearly envisioned a more--a broader role for CASAC, and I
think it is important now that we have very fine scientists who
look at these issues about what is background, what more can we
do in the United States, and then how do we deal with the fact
that there are many states certainly in the Intermountain West
but in other parts of the country that now have a legal
obligation to do something that is impossible for them to do. I
hope that isn't related to my testimony. Is that----
Chairman Stewart. I think you are okay. Please continue.
Mr. Holmstead. So I think the fundamental question for
Congress is what does it mean to have a statute that imposes a
legal obligation that requires states to do something that is
impossible for them to do. I don't think that makes any sense.
I think it is contrary to our basic notions about what the rule
of law should mean, and so I think it is time for Congress to
start thinking about how we can be realistic about what we can
do, how we can continue to improve air quality throughout the
United States without imposing the burdens on states like Utah
and others that have really done largely what they can do and
are being affected by events and by actions that are outside of
their control.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Holmstead follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.046

Chairman Stewart. Thank you, sir. By the way, none of us
have any idea what any of those bells mean, so--our final
witness today is Dr. John Vandenberg, Director of Research
Triangle Park, North Carolina Division, at the National Center
for Environmental Assessment, U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency. Dr. Vandenberg began working in EPA in 1984 and was
responsible for performing national scale exposure and health
risk assessments for hazardous air pollutants. He received his
Ph.D. from Duke University in biophysical ecology. Dr.
Vandenberg.

TESTIMONY OF DR. JOHN VANDENBERG,

DIRECTOR, RESEARCH TRIANGLE PARK,

NORTH CAROLINA DIVISION,

NATIONAL CENTER FOR ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT,

U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

Dr. Vandenberg. Chairman Stewart and Members of the
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. My
name is John Vandenberg, and I am a Division Director in EPA's
National Center for Environmental Assessment in the Office of
Research and Development. My division is responsible for
identifying and evaluating the world's scientific literature to
create the Integrated Science Assessment, which I will refer to
as the ISA, for ozone. The ISA serves as the scientific
foundation for decisions by the Administrator on retaining or
revising the National Ambient Air Quality Standards, which I
will refer to as the NAAQS, for ozone. My testimony today will
include a brief overview of the process for reviewing the NAAQS
including how the ISA fits into this process, the scientific
information related to background ozone levels in the United
States.
The process for reviewing the NAAQS contains four major
components: science assessment, risk and exposure assessment,
and policy assessment and rulemaking. The ISAs are developed by
the Office of Research and Development to evaluate the
atmospheric chemistry involved in pollutant formation and
presence as well as the human health and environmental
consequences of exposure. The risk and exposure assessment as
well as the policy assessment are developed by the Office of
Air and Radiation, and they draw from the ISA but they do not
revisit the conclusions of the ISA. Each of these assessments
undergoes independent peer review by the Clean Air Scientific
Advisory Committee, or CASAC, and public review. The final
stage of the NAAQS review process is rulemaking, which involves
developing a proposed decision, considering public comments,
and completing the review with a final decision by the
Administrator.
Ozone is one of six pollutants for which a NAAQS has been
established under the Clean Air Act. Ozone in the atmosphere is
not directly emitted from sources but rather ozone is formed in
the atmosphere by photochemical reactions involving sunlight
and certain air pollutants or precursors. Based on a strong
body of evidence, in 2008 EPA lowered the NAAQS for ozone from
the 1997 level of 0.08 parts per million to 0.075 parts per
million.
The current review of the air quality criteria for ozone
was initiated in October of 2008. The final ISA for ozone
includes the evaluation of over 2,200 scientific studies, and
those were released in February of 2013 after three reviews by
CASAC. The final ISA incorporated revisions based on CASAC and
public comments. I have a copy here of half of the ISAs, twice
as much as that.
In the February 2013 ozone ISA, EPA concluded there is
clear, consistent evidence of a causal relationship between
short-term ozone exposure and respiratory health effects. EPA
also concluded that the current body of research provides
consistent evidence for causal relationship between exposure to
ozone and ecosystem effects.
In the context of review of the ozone NAAQS, EPA generally
defines background ozone in ways that distinguish between
concentrations that result from emissions of precursor
pollutants that are relatively less controllable from those
that are relatively more controllable through U.S. policies or
through international agreements. In the current review of the
ISA, defines background in three different ways. The most
narrow definition is referred to as natural background, which
includes those resulting from precursor emissions of only
natural origin from all over the world such as from wildfires
and stratospheric ozone intrusion. A second definition is
referred to as North American background, which is ozone
concentration that would occur in the United States in the
absence of manmade precursor emissions in continental North
America including the United States, Canada and Mexico. The
third definition is referred to as U.S. background, which
includes natural background plus manmade precursor emissions
from all countries outside of the United States including
outside of Canada and Mexico.
Estimates of background concentrations in the United
States, regardless of which definition is used, cannot be
obtained directly from measurements of ozone. Instead, air
quality models are used to estimate background concentrations,
and this approach has been supported by CASAC. The ISA included
several recent modeling studies which showed that background
concentrations vary by region of the country and by season.
These modeling efforts result in estimates of seasonal average
North American background ozone levels of 29 plus or minus 8
parts per billion at low elevations. Modeling results also
suggests that at high elevations, background concentrations can
make up a greater proportion of measured ozone on some high-
ozone days. In low elevations, background concentrations make
up a relatively small proportion of measured ozone on those
high-ozone days. These results indicate that in low-elevation
areas on high-ozone days, the ozone is mainly formed in the
United States from U.S. manmade emissions.
In closing, EPA's Integrated Science Assessment for ozone
evaluates the scientific information on atmospheric monitoring
and chemistry and on the health and welfare effects of ozone.
This information will be considered by the Administrator in the
decision-making process for ozone.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I am happy
to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Vandenberg follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.052

Chairman Stewart. Thank you, Dr. Vandenberg. I thank,
again, all of the witnesses for your testimony. I would like to
remind Members that the Committee rules limit questioning to
five minutes, and the chair will at this point open the round
of questions, and the chair recognizes himself for five
minutes.
Once again, I think that your expertise and the experience
that all of you bring to this panel, we greatly appreciate
that. Some of you know that I represent the State of Utah. Salt
Lake City is a big part of my district. It is one of the most
beautiful cities in the country, I believe, right at the
foothills of the Wasatch Range, but because of geography
primarily, we from time to time have inversions come in in the
winter and ozone becomes a real problem for us. I have
children. Some of them have respiratory illnesses, which was
aggravated by these conditions. Ms. Bonamici mentioned in her
opening statement children's health, and I appreciate that she
did that. This is something that all of us would like to
address. Something that all of us would like to make better if
we can.
Dr. Dickerson, you talked about some of the progress we
have made, and as well as some of the other witnesses, and we
celebrate that and we should be proud of that, and I think most
of us would agree that we want to help, we want to make this
better if we can. Dr. Dickerson, you said something I would
like to come back to in a moment for a question, but you said--
paraphrasing, I think--you said it is not fair to penalize
eastern communities or some eastern states with a standard that
if we were to lower that standard would help those communities,
and I would suggest that at the same time, it wouldn't be fair
to penalize western communities or western states with a
regulation that is unachievable for them.
If I could bring up the slide that I used in my opening
statement, and I know this is familiar to all of you, at least
I am guessing that it would, you can see that vast swaths of
this Nation that would be either not in compliance with the new
standard if the EPA sets the standard at 60 - 70 parts per
billion, as they have been discussing. Would any of you--I will
ask this individually very quickly--would any of you disagree
with the statement that there will be parts of the country that
cannot meet the new standard due to background concentrations
of ozone? Ms. Smith, I will start with you. Would you disagree
with that?
Ms. Smith. Thank you, Chairman Stewart. No, I would not
disagree with that. I think Utah is a case in point. We would
have counties that would be unable to achieve the standard.
Chairman Stewart. Okay. And if I could emphasize that for
just a minute while I am talking to you, Ms. Smith. I mean, if
you look at a map of Utah--and Utah isn't New York City, this
is a very rural part of the country--and you can see some of
the eastern and southern parts of my state where there are a
few thousand people living, and the ozone that is created there
is very small--very, very small parts of that are created by
manmade activity.
Ms. Smith. That is correct. If you look at the State of
Utah, the lower southeastern county is San Juan County. That
county has one major source.
Chairman Stewart. Yeah, one.
Ms. Smith. One.
Chairman Stewart. Other Members of the panel, would any of
you disagree with that statement that there will be large parts
of the country that would be in noncompliance because of
naturally occurring ozone? Okay. So none of you disagree with
that. Well, then I would ask very quickly, and maybe I will
start with you, Mr. Vandenberg, and I would like to save a
little time to come back to Dr. Dickerson, but I mean, what
would those counties do? What do you suggest that they do then?
Dr. Vandenberg. Thank you for your question. To go back to
the question before you were asking whether background itself
would lead to nonattainment in some counties, is that--did I
understand what you were implying?
Chairman Stewart. Yes.
Dr. Vandenberg. I have to say, I am not sure if it would be
the case or not. The way the monitors are evaluated is to look
at the fourth highest level in each of three years and average
across those years, so I don't--I am not aware of the data that
would lead me to the conclusion to say yes. I apologize for----
Chairman Stewart. Okay. Other Members of the panel, would
you think--Mr. Holmstead, would that be true, that there would
be some parts of the Nation that would be in nonattainment
because of background ozone?
Mr. Holmstead. I think that is almost certain to be the
case, given the way that the standard is currently done.
Chairman Stewart. Okay. So let us assume that that is true
because that is the testimony of some, and our information
indicates that is absolutely the case, then again, Dr.
Vandenberg, what would you suggest those parts of the country
do?
Dr. Vandenberg. I believe that the key thing is to bring to
bear the science information that is available. As I mentioned
in my testimony, ozone is formed from precursor emissions from
volatile organic compounds and nitrogen oxides, and to look at
the models to help evaluate what are the major contributors to
the ozone levels and recognize that there are stratospheric
intrusions as well as wildfires that contribute. And, as has
been mentioned, there is the exceptional-events policy that may
contribute to the evaluation of that.
Chairman Stewart. Okay, and I appreciate your answer, and
my time is up, and I wish it wasn't because I would really like
to come back to Dr. Dickerson but maybe we will have a second
round. I mean, for all of us, there is this, and it is worth
repeating: If you are in a part of this country that cannot
achieve compliance and there is nothing you can do about that
because of naturally occurring ozone and yet the economic
consequence of having to comply with an unachievable standard
and the frustration that that would create on the parts of many
people is certainly something that I think all of us would
appreciate and be sympathetic to.
My time has expired. Again, I hope we come back for a
second round. We will see how it goes. I now yield my time to
the Ranking Member, Ms. Bonamici.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you very much Mr. Chairman, and thank
you to all the witnesses again for your testimony.
Dr. Vandenberg, it is my understanding that the ISA review
for ozone is one of the most extensive studies to date
conducted by the EPA. You said you have half of it with you; it
is voluminous. Could you briefly discuss some of the recent
evidence that demonstrates the harmful effect of ozone on human
health?
Dr. Vandenberg. Thank you very much for that question.
There is a significant amount of new studies that build on
prior studies regarding the health effects of ozone. These
include hundreds of epidemiological studies of populations
throughout the United States and the world. It includes
controlled human exposure studies. It includes toxicological
studies, atmospheric sciences study, human exposure studies.
There is a tremendous body of evidence. As I mentioned in my
testimony, there are over 2,200 studies that have been
conducted that are included in this ISA, this is only half of
them, and over a thousand of those studies are on health
effects, so we have the great benefit here of tremendous
scientific weight that underscores the nature of that evidence,
and what is very clear about it is, it is very clear and
coherent. A lot of the data fits together very nicely. We have
got consistency in the results in terms of respiratory effects
caused by exposure to ozone, and it is clear to me that with
our Clean Air Scientific Advisory Committee, that there is
strong endorsement for the strength of that science and how it
can help inform ultimately the decision making that will be
down the road.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you. And you mentioned in your
testimony about the three definitions for defining background
ozone. Could you talk a little bit more about that, expand on
that, and how did this approach aid in analyzing the scientific
literature for the review?
Dr. Vandenberg. Again, thank you very much. I think as the
science has evolved, and as the other witnesses noted, in the
last 40 years we have had tremendous advances in terms of both
air quality management programs but the science that underlies
that, and in this document, the Integrated Science Assessment,
what we have done is, we have recognized that a broader set of
definitions may be informative as we move forward. So we have
brought to bear this sort of idea that you look at the world's
background influencing the United States, you look at the North
American background, which includes Canada and Mexico, and you
include just North America--or just the United States--excuse
me. So what that does is, it gives us more information, and I
think a key feature here is, we want to be as inclusive as we
can in terms of information to bring to bear as we move that
into the decision-making process.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you.
And Dr. Dickerson, thank you for your testimony. You had
talked about how you have worked on the exceptional-event
process and the issues with the State of Maryland, and you also
mentioned in your testimony, you offered some assistance to
states in this exceptional-event process. I wonder if you could
discuss a little bit about what you are offering and what
assistance might be available to States as they go through this
process, which Ms. Smith noted in her testimony was onerous.
Dr. Dickerson. Thank you. I am sympathetic. It took quite a
bit of work for the State of Maryland to get its exceptional
event approved. The NASA AQAST, Air Quality Applied Sciences
Team, has a number of scientists around the country who are
very clever at using satellite information and other NASA
information to help identify natural events or forest fires
from both space and in situ measurements. For example, in
answer to Mr. Stewart's question, what would you do if there
were a tremendous amount of ozone above 60 ppb at some
beautiful--and I agree completely that Utah is a spectacularly
beautiful state. I love going hiking there. And if you are on
top of a mountain and the ozone is above 60 ppb, the answer to
that question is, you can monitor with commercially available
instruments that have a proven track record, other pollutants,
other trace gases like carbon monoxide comes out of tailpipes
or oxides of nitrogen, and if the ozone is high and those other
pollutants are not high, this is not a controllable event; it
is probably a natural event. We know how to identify them, and
that is pretty conclusive scientific proof that this is not a
controllable ozone occurrence. So that is what I would
recommend.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you. And I want to go back to Dr.
Vandenberg because there are concerns raised about the
inability of states to comply if the standard is lowered. Do
you believe that the new definitions or these three definitions
plus the exceptional-event process could result in states being
able to comply even if the standards are lowered?
Dr. Vandenberg. I think one of the recognitions that we
have is that the process of standard setting and then
implementation are sort of phased. First, we set the standards
and then we implement them. A lot of information is brought to
bear there. I don't think you can speak to a particular
situation as to what would be the approach that you would use,
and I think the strength of our science is that we have a
variety of tools that we can apply to help evaluate the types
of events that are occurring. The key here is to use the
science to its best advantage.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, and I see my time is expired. I
yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Stewart. Thank you, Ms. Bonamici, and Mr.
Dickerson, thanks for answering my question, and if I could
just comment quickly regarding that.
You know, you took a very reasonable response to that, and
I would hope that would be the case, but my fear is that the
regulations wouldn't allow for the latitude of looking at what
is naturally versus what was manmade and that the control or
some of the mechanisms would kick in that would, you know,
again, not allow for the latitude that you described, but we
can talk about that after, perhaps.
We now recognize Mr. Weber for five minutes.
Mr. Weber. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Dickerson, I want to go back to something you said in
your testimony, and I didn't catch all of it at the time. You
said that some of the ozone occurrences that you saw were above
10,000 feet.
Dr. Dickerson. Yes. We have flown aircraft over the eastern
United States, and you can see what are called stratospheric
intrusions. That is a fancy expression for just natural ozone
coming down from the stratosphere, and you can identify it by
high ozone but it is very dry and there are no indications of
pollution in it. I have never seen one of these reach the
Earth's surface in the eastern United States, though. I would
love to. It would be very exciting. I would probably ask my
colleague Sam to help me write a paper on it.
Mr. Weber. Okay. It sounds like you might be a little bored
at times, I will tell you. You said that they didn't occur
except--they weren't substantial except out West. So those
don't occur very often in the East?
Dr. Dickerson. They are more frequent at high altitude
states.
Mr. Weber. Okay. And I will follow up on what you said
earlier about assistance to states. Let us go back to that
scenario for a minute, and before we do, if I remember
correctly, a lot of the NOX gases, according to the EPA's own
admission or should I say emission, they have come from--70
percent of those come from non-stationary-point sources. Is
that correct? Or maybe that is a question for Dr. Vandenberg.
Dr. Dickerson. No, I can address that. In the United States
as a whole, I think about 40 percent from vehicles, and the
remainder, there are a lot of power plant and boilers and then
a number of small sources including agricultural.
Mr. Weber. But non-stationary? You are saying it is only 40
percent of noxious gases come from non-stationary-point
sources?
Dr. Dickerson. The total--the single largest source of
oxides of nitrogen in the United States is now, according to
the EPA estimates, tailpipe emissions from vehicles.
Mr. Weber. Okay. And so basically can you explain why it is
that in the Northeast where there is a higher concentration of
people and probably more vehicles, why there is less
concentration there than over in the West or in the central
part of the country?
Dr. Dickerson. Okay. I think your question is, why is there
more NOX in the Northeast than there is----
Mr. Weber. Why isn't there?
Dr. Dickerson. Oh, isn't. There is. There is a picture we
will show you concentrations of NOX are higher certainly in
urban areas than in rural areas, and they are generally higher
in the eastern United States, excluding California, than in the
western United States.
Mr. Weber. So due in large part to a lot of the vehicles
you would say, but you are saying only 40 percent?
Dr. Dickerson. They are an important source, absolutely.
Mr. Weber. Okay. You said in one of my colleague's
questions, assistance to the states, that if there was an event
that was identifiable, you could provide assistance to the
states and then you said it not a controllable event, it is a
natural occurrence.
Dr. Dickerson. There are natural occurrences such as
stratospheric intrusions. These are identifiable from the
meteorology. Sometimes they can be seen from space. And if a
full monitor, a full air-pollution monitor were there, you
would----
Mr. Weber. So are you suggesting that in a real-time basis,
the Federal Government would get involved and interact with the
states and say we have this event going on and we need to send
you some assistance to take care of it?
Dr. Dickerson. I don't know about the real-time part but
certainly there are ongoing efforts from me and my colleagues
at the University of Maryland and another couple dozen
universities around the country where we use NASA observations
to identify----
Mr. Weber. Well, it scares me when you get the Federal
Government involved with the states because we are fixing to
put more regulations on them. Strings come attached with
everything that the feds tell the states to do. How often do
those occur? Once a year, twice a year, every month, every day,
every week?
Dr. Dickerson. Forest fires are extremely common and
identifiable.
Mr. Weber. So you are basically describing what is
happening out West, and I am running out of time here, so
forgive me.
Let me jump over to Dr. Vandenberg for just a second. You
said, Dr. Vandenberg, in your testimony, it scares me a little
bit because it doesn't seem commonsensical. Of course, let me
just be sarcastic for a minute. I think when it comes to common
sense, the EPA may be in nonattainment, okay? You said first we
set the standards and then we implement them. Wouldn't it be
commonsensical to have a stopgap measure that says what effect
does this have on industry? What are we fixing to mandate--that
is a Texas term, ``fixing.'' What are we fixing to mandate on
industry and are we fixing to drive everybody's cost of fuel,
heating oil, electricity, and everything sky high because we
are going to mandate on the industry? Shouldn't that be
considered, Dr. Vandenberg?
Dr. Vandenberg. Thank you for your question. The way the
Clean Air Act is constructed is I think the science is brought
to bear to set the standards and then the states are evaluating
their air quality conditions and developing state
implementation plans in order to attain those standards or
maintain the air quality that is necessary. So I think it is
the relationship between the Clean Air Act and the process is,
it is develop the standards and then work with the states'
state implementation plans, evaluate the monitoring data, look
at the sources as you were just discussing, and then determine
the appropriate approaches that would lead to attainment and
maintenance of acceptable air quality.
Mr. Weber. Well, there is a lot more I could say, but Mr.
Chairman, thank you. I am out of time and I yield back.
Chairman Stewart. Yes, you are, sir. Thank you, Mr. Weber.
And now Mr. Takano.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses for sharing your expertise today.
Clean air is an issue that is vitally important to my
constituents. I am reminded of it every time I enter this
committee room and I look over to see the portrait of former
Chairman George Brown hanging above me. Congressman Brown
represented parts of Riverside County in my own district during
his 34 years of service in the House, and during that time he
was a champion for science and fought to improve air quality
for millions across the country. He was an early supporter of
the legislation creating EPA and worked to include ozone
provisions in the Clean Air Act. It is because of leaders like
George Brown that we have seen air quality in southern
California make great improvements.
Growing up in Riverside, I remember days where we couldn't
go outside for physical education class because the smog was so
bad, days where you couldn't even see the mountains. In the
1970s, the ozone levels in southern California exceeded Federal
health standard levels more than 200 times out of the year. And
thanks to a lot of hard work and coordination between federal,
state and local stakeholders, we have cut that number of days
in half. Guidance from EPA has been and will continue to be a
critical component of efforts to improve air quality in
southern California, and I am glad to learn more about the
process of these standards today.
My first question, Ms. Smith, do you--can you tell me about
your background, your academic training? Do you have any
degrees, undergraduate degrees or advanced degrees, that are
scientific in nature?
Ms. Smith. I do not. I have a degree in political science
and history and law.
Mr. Takano. And so your assertion today that there are
parts of this country that could not meet these standards, is
that an evaluation based on science or based on background
training that is more political and legal in nature?
Ms. Smith. That is actually an assessment that is based on
the hundreds of air quality scientists and engineers that work
for the Department of Environmental Quality.
Mr. Takano. But you yourself do not have academic
background in science?
Ms. Smith. That is correct.
Mr. Takano. But you are here as an expert witness to offer
a scientific--or is it a scientific or a political assessment?
Ms. Smith. Actually, I was asked to come and give a state's
perspective on the policy implications and the ability for the
states to actually implement and create a plan to----
Mr. Takano. Thank you very much. Mr. Holmstead, can you
tell me whether or not you have any scientific advanced degrees
or undergraduate training?
Mr. Holmstead. No, and I don't purport to do that. My role
in this meeting as well as in much of my career is to deal with
regulatory policy and how it works, and so that is my view here
this morning is to talk about how the Clean Air Act works from
a regulatory perspective and so I rely on others, and I think
all of them have agreed, that there are sources that cannot be
controlled in the United States that contribute to a large
share of the problems that we have here. So I don't think there
is any scientific dispute about that. I think the question is,
well, what do you do once you recognize that those are the
data.
Mr. Takano. All right. Dr. Vandenberg, you believe that the
major basis on which we should establish levels of ozone that
are acceptable should be based on the science concerning what
ozone does to the health of the public. Is that right?
Dr. Vandenberg. Right. There is a tremendous body of
evidence, scientific evidence, on the health and environmental
effects that ozone produces with exposure.
Mr. Takano. And it points to the level of 60 parts per
billion. Is that right?
Dr. Vandenberg. Again, I am not going to speak to the
specifics in terms of a level but the scientific evidence does
go from higher levels down to 60 and below. We look at the
entirety of the exposures that are occurring. Some are
relatively low, some are relatively high, and we look at the
relationships between those exposures and effects.
Mr. Takano. Do you agree or disagree with the Chairman's
assertion that parts of this country could not comply or would
not be able to attain these ozone standards as proposed? Or is
the scientific evidence somewhat inconclusive?
Dr. Vandenberg. What I would like to say is, as I
understood the question, was whether the background levels of
ozone would lead to nonattainment areas, if I am correct about
that, and that is where I would have to say we would have to
look at the modeling that has been done as well as consider
those exceptional events that occurred to make those judgments.
I can't say that there are any places that would not meet the
standard specifically because of background levels. Background
contributes to the ozone but on top of that is the human-
derived emissions.
Mr. Takano. Thank you. Mr. Dickerson, same question.
Dr. Dickerson. Good question. I do not know conclusively if
there are areas that would fail to meet a 60 ppb. There are
certainly areas in the western United States where it might be
difficult.
Mr. Takano. Okay. But Ms. Smith, you categorically believe
that there would be?
Ms. Smith. Based on what we have looked at in terms of the
monitoring that we have seen coming from the State of Utah,
there are counties that would not meet the 60 ppb from past
history.
Mr. Takano. Okay. I have heard the scientists be
inconclusive but you are absolutely certain?
Ms. Smith. Yes.
Mr. Takano. Thank you.
Chairman Stewart. Thank you. Before we go on, I would like
to note that I was very clear in my questioning to the panel. I
gave you each the opportunity to say do you disagree with that
assertion, and none of you spoke up at that point. I am hearing
something slightly different right now, which again, we may
follow up with additional written questions.
The full Chairman, Mr. Smith, we will give you your five
minutes for questions.
Chairman Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and let me
apologize. I am having to shuttle back and forth between this
Committee and another committee I sit on, which is marking up
two bills, so I am trying to go to one place and ask questions
and then another, and if these questions have been answered,
let me know and we can go on.
Mr. Holmstead, let me address the first couple of questions
to you. First is this: Of the 28 members of the Clean Air
Scientific Advisory Committee review panel for ozone, 22 of the
28 are cited by EPA in the Integrated Science Assessment they
have been asked to review. Is this consistent with the
requirement in EPA's peer-review handbook that ``an independent
peer reviewer is an expert who is not associated with the
generation of the specific work product either directly or
indirectly''?
Mr. Holmstead. I have to say, I am not entirely clear of
how EPA's regulations work. I think people have raised
legitimate issues about the need for people outside of this
little community to be involved in the process, but I can't say
whether is it a violation of the peer-review requirements.
Chairman Smith. Okay. It seems on the face that it probably
is if you go by the common definitions involved, so I will just
say that that is my opinion and I look forward to hearing more
about that from the others.
My next question, though, to you is, the EPA appears poised
to rely on a single study to establish a link between ozone and
chronic mortality despite the overwhelming weight of evidence
from other studies. This study is based on data that has not
been made public or verified by independent scientists. Would
you agree that that is not the best way to pursue it and that
is not the best way to make decisions?
Mr. Holmstead. I do think that a lot of us are troubled
that important decisions are made based on data that is not
publicly available, and I am a little surprised that that
hasn't been resolved before now. The government has funded many
of these studies. It is surprising that the data are not
available to outside researchers. And again, these data sets
are so enormous that there is just different ways of looking at
the data, and maybe Dr. Dickerson has more familiarity with it
but I think we would all benefit from having public
availability of data that are used to set regulatory and other
requirements.
Chairman Smith. And Dr. Dickerson, would you agree with
that?
Dr. Dickerson. I am not really comfortable discussing EPA's
policy. I don't work for the EPA. But I would indicate that if
you were going to ask people to evaluate ozone science, that
you would expect all of them have written peer-reviewed
scientific publications that would be cited in criteria
documents or science assessments. How would you--that would
forbid me or my colleague Sam from----
Chairman Smith. You don't want to exclude anybody who had
been an expert on it. On the other hand, you don't want to have
a biased source that might have a vested interest in coming up
with a predetermined conclusion either.
But let me ask you and Mr. Holmstead a related question,
which is, you have got the EPA's Inspector General currently
reviewing potential conflicts of interest and a lack of
impartiality among the Clean Air Scientific Advisory Committee.
Don't you think that we should maybe wait until we see what the
Inspector General has to say before we issue too many more
regulations that might involve conflicts of interest and a lack
of impartiality? Mr. Holmstead?
Mr. Holmstead. There certainly are legitimate issues that
have been raised. I don't know anything about the IG
investigation, but I do think it is good for--you know, I am a
little uncomfortable about some of these issues because I am
not as familiar with them, but I do think it is good to have
all of these things aired publicly so that we really understand
more about the data on which these decisions are made and who
it is that--and what interests they may have.
Chairman Smith. Okay. Thank you.
Dr. Vandenberg, the person you report to is Dr. Kenneth
Olden, who is Director of the National Center for Environmental
Assessment at EPA. Dr. Olden has said, ``Studies used in the
formation of regulations should be subject to data access
requirements regardless of who funded the study.'' He has
followed this recommendation as head of the National Center. Do
you agree with his statement?
Dr. Vandenberg. Thank you for that question. This is a
complex area because some of the studies that we are referring
to here include private individual medical information and so I
think what is essential is to assure the protection of an
individual's private----
Chairman Smith. I am not talking about classified or
confidential information but just in general do you agree with
Dr. Olden's standard?
Dr. Vandenberg. That the data should be available?
Chairman Smith. Yes, correct.
Dr. Vandenberg. Of course, yes.
Chairman Smith. Good. Thank you, Dr. Vandenberg. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Yield back.
Chairman Stewart. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The final
questions will come today from Ms. Edwards.
Ms. Edwards. Mr. Chairman, thank you, and I actually hope
we do go to a second round of questions.
Dr. Dickerson, my question is for you. A key to some recent
findings is the discovery of a chemical signature that
differentiates emissions from oil and gas activity from those
given off by automobiles, cow manure, or other sources of
volatile organic compounds. The finding was fundamental to the
conclusion that oil and gas activity contributed about 55
percent of the volatile organic compounds linked to unhealthy
ground-level ozone. Can you please tell me whether this
chemical signature will help determine how much ozone levels
are due to things like gas wells versus the impact in a
metropolitan region such as ours where we experience high
levels of ozone, bad air quality, and we are always at the top
of those lists? Can you tell me how you think those--that
chemical signature could help in making determinations for EPA
and using its flexibility in setting ozone standards?
Dr. Dickerson. Yes, I would be happy to. I have to say wow,
I didn't expect such technical questions. It is absolutely true
that oil and gas operations have a characteristic signature of
isomers of pentane and other hydrocarbons that allow you to
differentiate those from tailpipe emissions, and these are
indeed useful investigations. Ozone can be made in a power-
plant plume that has one chemical signature. It can come from
tailpipe emissions. That has a different--forest fires are not
as efficient as internal combustion engines but they can make
ozone as well. They have yet another chemical signature. And
all of these are indeed distinguishable by hydrocarbon ratios
as well as other trace gases and aerosols.
Ms. Edwards. So let me just ask this, and maybe this goes
to Mr. Vandenberg. Wouldn't it be the case that if we are able
to make those distinctions in the source by this chemical
signature, that that could enable us to make adjustments in a
way that would accommodate some of the interests of some states
that are claiming or regions that are claiming to produce ozone
that they don't have--where there is ozone present, they don't
have any control of and we might actually use--the EPA could
use its regulatory authority to make some distinctions in those
regions so we really do get at the heart of the problem?
Dr. Vandenberg. Thank you for the question, and again, to
reinforce the comment, I think with the advancements in science
in terms of looking at chemical signatures, that is the kind of
information that I think helps inform the decision making
downstream in terms of what is a natural event, what is a
source of the contributors to the ozone that is in the air, and
I think that is a very important type of information that can
be brought to bear.
Ms. Edwards. And Mr. Oltmans, I probably should direct this
really to you because it is the work of the scientists at the
Cooperative Institute for Research and Environmental Sciences
at the University of Colorado that you are representing that
actually helped to reach this conclusion. How do you think the
discovery can clarify some of the questions that we have about
background ozone levels and contribute to EPA's research and
review process?
Mr. Oltmans. Yes, I am familiar with the work that you are
discussing. Most of it took place in the front range of
Colorado, Utah and in Wyoming. Personally, I am not sure that
this is that important a factor in determining the role of
background ozone. One of the things I think that is
misinterpreted about background ozone, it isn't that often that
background ozone itself leads to a violation of the standard
but it gives very little room for regulatory control to bring
ozone levels down to the standard. In other words, it is very
unusual for ozone to be 60 parts per billion in what would be
considered background conditions. But as you push up close to
60 parts per billion on the background, it is very difficult to
find any regulatory scheme that will reduce the result from
photochemically produced ozone either over a region or locally
to be controlled and meet the standard. I think that is one of
the things that needs to be considered, and background ozone
itself is not the violation of the standard by the background
but how difficult it makes it to control.
Ms. Edwards. I think I understand that. I guess my point,
and we can get to this at some other point, I suppose, is that
knowing, for example, that 40 percent is coming from that
background ozone that we don't have any control of, would that
allow then the EPA to exercise somewhat more flexibility in
those areas in order to have ozone settings that actually
reflected the things that we could have control over? Anyway, I
think my time is expired. I hope we get to a second round.
Chairman Stewart. Thank you, Ms. Edwards. Many of us would
actually really appreciate the opportunity for a second round.
However, the nature of what we do being what it is, a couple of
us have to go another committee where they are holding votes
for us now, so unfortunately, we won't be able to take that
opportunity at this time. However, I would like to remind
Members that we can follow up with written questions, and
several of us intend to do that.
I thank the witnesses for your valuable testimony and
Members for their questions, and as I said, Members of the
Committee may have additional questions, and we will ask you to
respond to this in writing. The record will remain open for two
weeks for additional comments and written questions from the
Members.
With that, the witnesses are excused and this hearing is
now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:26 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Responses by Ms. Amanda Smith

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.058

Responses by Mr. Samuel Oltmans

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.062

Responses by Dr. Russell Dickerson

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.064

Responses by Mr. Jeffrey Holmstead

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.070

Responses by Dr. John Vandenberg

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.093

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Charts submitted by Chairman Chris Stewart

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1724.071


