- AMERICA'S NEXT GENERATION SUPERCOMPUTER: THE EXASCALE CHALLENGE

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AMERICA'S NEXT GENERATION SUPERCOMPUTER:

THE EXASCALE CHALLENGE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, MAY 22, 2013

__________

Serial No. 113-31

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
81-195                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas, Chair
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 ZOE LOFGREN, California
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
Wisconsin                        DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             ERIC SWALWELL, California
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               DAN MAFFEI, New York
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   JOSEPH KENNEDY III, Massachusetts
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             SCOTT PETERS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               DEREK KILMER, Washington
STEVE STOCKMAN, Texas                AMI BERA, California
BILL POSEY, Florida                  ELIZABETH ESTY, Connecticut
CYNTHIA LUMMIS, Wyoming              MARC VEASEY, Texas
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona            JULIA BROWNLEY, California
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              MARK TAKANO, California
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota           ROBIN KELLY, Illinois
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma
RANDY WEBER, Texas
CHRIS STEWART, Utah
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Energy

HON. CYNTHIA LUMMIS, Wyoming, Chair
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 ERIC SWALWELL, California
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              JOSEPH KENNEDY III, Massachusetts
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             MARC VEASEY, Texas
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             MARK TAKANO, California
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ZOE LOFGREN, California
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota           DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
RANDY WEBER, Texas                   EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas

C O N T E N T S

Wednesday, May 22, 2013

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Cynthia Lummis, Chairwoman,
Subcommittee on Energy, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................     9
Written Statement............................................    10

Statement by Representative Randy Hultgren, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    11
Written Statement............................................    11

Statement by Representative Eric Swalwell, Ranking Minority
Member, Subcommittee on Energy, Committee on Science, Space,
and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..................    12
Written Statement............................................    13

Witnesses:

Dr. Roscoe Giles, Chairman, Advanced Scientific Computing
Advisory Committee
Oral Statement...............................................    16
Written Statement............................................    18

Dr. Rick Stevens, Associate Laboratory Director for Computing,
Environment and Life Sciences, Argonne National Laboratory
Oral Statement...............................................    32
Written Statement............................................    34

Ms. Dona Crawford, Associate Director for Computation, Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory
Oral Statement...............................................    46
Written Statement............................................    48

Dr. Daniel Reed, Vice President for Research and Economic
Development, University of Iowa
Oral Statement...............................................    60
Written Statement............................................    62

Discussion.......................................................    71

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Roscoe Giles, Chairman, Advanced Scientific Computing
Advisory Committee.............................................    84

Dr. Rick Stevens, Associate Laboratory Director for Computing,
Environment and Life Sciences, Argonne National Laboratory.....    91

Ms. Dona Crawford, Associate Director for Computation, Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory..................................    95

Dr. Daniel Reed, Vice President for Research and Economic
Development, University of Iowa................................   102

AMERICA'S NEXT GENERATION SUPERCOMPUTER:

THE EXASCALE CHALLENGE

----------

WEDNESDAY, MAY 22, 2013

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Cynthia
Lummis [Chairwoman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.007

Chairwoman Lummis. Good morning. The Subcommittee will come
to order. And we are delighted to have a terrific panel here
this morning, so welcome to our hearing entitled ``America's
Next Generation Supercomputer: the Exascale Challenge.'' In
front of you are packets containing the written testimonies,
biographies, and truth-in-testimony disclosures for today's
witness panel.
And now, I will recognize myself for five minutes for and
opening statement followed by our Ranking Member Mr. Swalwell.
The development and expanded availability of supercomputers
has enabled society to push the frontiers of nearly every
scientific discipline, and accelerate applications of that
science in countless fields. It has enabled modeling and
simulation necessary to address national security needs. It
drives the boundaries of medical research, reduces cost to
develop new products, and improves materials design processes,
just to name a few.
High performance computing has also revolutionized how the
energy sector operates. Advanced modeling and simulation
techniques, driven by computer algorithms and faster computing
speeds, improve the efficiency of energy production and
consumption technologies.
These advancements ultimately trace back to Federal
investments in basic research that provided the foundation for
most of today's computing technologies. From the first megaflop
supercomputers of the 1960s, the Federal investments have led
to push across each landmark thousand-fold speed barrier to
gigaflops, teraflops, and petaflops. I always think of floppy-
eared rabbits and when I was a kid showing critters in 4H, I
should have named them Giga, Tera, and Peta, but I just didn't
know about it back then because that proceeded the first
megaflop.
Throughout this computing age, we have witnesses--we have
witnessed yesterday's supercomputers become today's desktop
computers and consumer devices often in incredibly short time
frames. The spillover benefits to society are countless and
immeasurable.
The Department of Energy, led by the Advanced Scientific
Computing Research program, plays a critical role in driving
these computing technology breakthroughs. DOE supports world-
class computational science facilities, such as the National
Energy Research Scientific Computing Center. Additionally, DOE
funds cutting-edge applied mathematics research and next-
generation networking activities.
DOE's next major computing challenge, constructing an
``exascale'' computer system that is a thousand times faster
than current world-leading supercomputers, may be the most
daunting. Key scientific and technical obstacles associated
with the architecture and energy efficiency of an exascale
system must be overcome, and an immense amount of resources and
effort will be required.
As we head down this inevitable path to exascale computing,
it is important we take time to plan and budget thoroughly to
ensure a balanced approach that ensures broad buy-in from the
scientific computing community. The Federal Government has
limited resources and taxpayer funding must be spent on the
most impactful projects. We need to ensure DOE efforts to
develop an exascale system can be undertaken in concert with
other foundational advanced scientific computing activities.
This morning, we will hear testimony from expert witnesses
regarding how best to achieve this balance.
I would like to recognize if he is here, yes, he has come
in, a leader in this effort, my colleague on the Energy
Subcommittee, Representative Randy Hultgren.
I would now like to yield the balance of my time to the
gentleman from Illinois to summarize the discussion draft of
his bill, ``American High-End Computing Leadership Act.''
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Lummis follows:]

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee Chairman Cynthia Lummis
Good morning and welcome to today's Energy Subcommittee hearing to
examine high performance computing research and development challenges
and opportunities.
The development and expanded availability of supercomputers has
enabled society to push the frontiers of nearly every scientific
discipline, and accelerate applications of that science in countless
fields. It has enabled modeling and simulation necessary to address
national security needs. It drives the boundaries of medical research,
reduces cost to develop new products, and improves materials design
processes, just to name a few areas.
High performance computing has also revolutionized how the energy
sector operates. Advanced modeling and simulation techniques, driven by
complex algorithms and faster computing speeds, improve the efficiency
of energy production and consumption technologies.
These advancements ultimately trace back to Federal investments in
basic research that provided the foundation for most of today's
computing technologies. From the first megaflop supercomputers of the
1960s, Federal investments have led the push across each landmark
thousand-fold speed barrier-to gigaflops, teraflops, and petaflops.
Throughout this computing age, we have witnessed as yesterday's
supercomputers become today's desktop computers and consumer devices
often in incredibly short time frames. The spillover benefits to
society are countless and immeasurable.
The Department of Energy, led by the Advanced Scientific Computing
Research program, plays a unique and critical role in driving these
computing technology breakthroughs. DOE supports world-class
computational science facilities, such as the National Energy Research
Scientific Computing Center. Additionally, DOE funds cutting edge
applied mathematics research and next generation networking activities.
DOE's next major computing challenge-constructing an ``exascale''
computer system that is a thousand times faster than current world-
leading supercomputers-may be the most daunting. Key scientific and
technical obstacles associated with the architecture and energy
efficiency of an exascale system must be overcome, and an immense
amount of resources and effort will be required.
As we head down this inevitable path to exascale computing, it is
important we take time to plan and budget thoroughly to ensure a
balanced approach that ensures broad buy-in from the scientific
computing community. The Federal government has limited resources and
taxpayer funding must be spent on the most impactful projects. We need
to ensure DOE efforts to develop an exascale system can be undertaken
in concert with other foundational advanced scientific computing
activities. This morning, we will hear testimony from expert witnesses
regarding how best to achieve this balance.
I would like to recognize a leader of this effort, my colleague on
the Energy Subcommittee, Representative Randy Hultgren. I would now
like to yield the balance of my time to the gentleman from Illinois to
summarize the discussion draft of his bill, ``American High-End
Computing Leadership Act.''

Mr. Hultgren. Thank you, Madam Chair, for holding this
hearing today. Exascale computing represents a brave new world
of science for our Nation. The application of the next
generation of supercomputers is vast. A thousand-fold increase
in processing power will give us the intense computing tools
necessary to ensure our national security by better testing our
nuclear stockpile, revolutionized our understanding and
treatment of complicated healthcare problems like neurological
diseases or the genetics underpinning cancer with the ability
to model new treatments and ensure our Nation's competitiveness
in the big data economy of the 21st century by spilling over
knowledge and expertise into industry and academia.
And while I can postulate further on some of the applied
uses of faster machines, I also know that simply by making
these investments in basic science needed to overcome
challenges in the immensely massive parallelism, power
management, new architecture, and programming models, we will
enrich our Nation intellectually and ensure our labor force
remains competitive.
I think at that point I will yield back, Madam Chair. Let
me follow up if I have another minute. Do I?
Chairwoman Lummis. Mr. Hultgren, you do.
Mr. Hultgren. Madam Chair, let me summarize my bill
quickly. Thank you.
My bill would amend the existing statute by specifying the
need to target the specific challenges and power requirements
and parallelism required to make the leap to exascale. It also
will instruct the Secretary of Energy to conduct a coordinated
research program to develop exascale computing systems and
require an integrated strategy and program management plan to
ensure the health of existing research activities is not
harmed.
The bottom line is we do not know all of the ways we will
use this next-generation of supercomputers, but given the vast
and unpredictable ways that computing technology has already
enhanced every part of our lives and given the investments
being made in other countries to deploy large-scale systems, it
is more important than ever that we make this investment today.
I look forward to hearing the witnesses, what they think of
this legislative proposal, areas we can improve it, challenges
that we will face. And with that, I do thank you. I apologize
for my confusion here but I yield back to the Chairwoman. Thank
you very much, Madam Chair.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hultgren follows:]

Prepared Statement of Representative Randy Hultgren

Thank you, Madam Chair, for holding this hearing today.
Exascale computing represents an exciting new world of science for
our nation. The applications for the next generation of super computers
are vast.
A thousand fold increase in processing power will give us the
intense computing tools necessary to ensure our national security by
better testing our nuclear stockpile; revolutionize our understanding
and treatment of complicated health care problems like neurological
diseases or the genetics underpinning cancer with the ability to model
new treatments; and ensure our nation's competitiveness in the big data
economy of the 21st century by spilling over knowledge and expertise
into industry and academia.
And while I can postulate further on some of the applied uses of
faster machines; I also know that simply by making these investments in
the basic science needed to overcome challenges in immensely massive
parallelism, power management, new architectures and programming
models, we will enrich our nation intellectually and ensure our labor
force remains competitive.
Madam Chair, my bill would amend the existing statute by specifying
the need to target the specific challenges in power requirements and
parallelism required to make the leap to exascale. It would also
instruct the Secretary of Energy to conduct a coordinated research
program to develop exascale computing systems, and require an
integrated strategy and program management plan to ensure the health of
existing research activities is not harmed.
The bottom line is, we do not know all of the ways we will use the
next generation of supercomputers, but given the vast and unpredictable
ways that computing technology has already enhanced every part of our
lives, and given the investments being made in other countries to
deploy large scale systems, it is more important than ever that we make
this investment today.
I look forward to hearing what the witnesses think of this
legislative proposal, areas we can improve it, challenges we face, and
with that I thank you and I yield back.

Chairwoman Lummis. The gentleman yields back.
And I might add on a personal note, today, my daughter is
being awarded her master's degree in digital media from
Columbia University. I unfortunately cannot be at her
graduation because Congress is in session but I get to watch it
on the computer, so I will get to see it. And I think to
myself, first of all, what is a master's degree in digital
media? Somebody my age doesn't even know what that is. And
certainly, when I was her age, I could not have even begun to
envision the career that would be open to her as of today, and
the career that is open to her as of today is due in part to
the investment that the people in this room and that the
American people have made in computing, for science, and for
the benefit of mankind. So this is a very important subject.
The fact that it is such an important subject leads me to
let you all know that there will be several comings and goings
by Committee Members this morning. There are concurrent
meetings going on around the buildings. In my case, we have the
IRS in front of us down in Oversight and Government Reform and
I know there are other Members that may have to come and go
from time to time. We deeply appreciate your testimony here
today. In my absence, our Vice Chair Mr. Weber will be in the
chair, and of course, Mr. Swalwell, who is our Ranking Member,
who I will recognize now, the gentleman from California, Mr.
Swalwell.
Mr. Swalwell. Thank you, Chairman Lummis. And also
congratulations to your daughter on this achievement. And thank
you for holding this hearing today. And I want to thank the
witnesses for being here. I also thank the witnesses who are
not from the 15th Congressional District. We welcome you as
well but especially welcome Ms. Crawford from Livermore,
California.
I am excited to learn more about the work that the DOE is
doing in partnership with industry and our national
laboratories, including both Lawrence Livermore and Berkeley
national laboratories in particular and are carrying out to
maintain the United States' leadership in the critical area of
high-performance computing.
As I am sure the witnesses will all describe in more
detail, this capability enables our best and brightest minds to
gain new insights into societal concerns ranging from
Alzheimer's disease to climate change. Other examples of both
industrial and academic research that benefit from our
advanced, high-end computing capabilities include high-
temperature superconductivity to significantly reduce energy
losses in transmitting electricity; aerodynamic modeling for
aircraft and vehicle design; pharmaceutical development; next-
generation nuclear reactor design; fusion plasma modeling; and
combustion simulation to guide the design of fuel-efficient
clean engines such as work being carried out at the Sandia
National Laboratory's combustion research facility.
In short, many of the most pressing issues of our time,
whether it is how we find our energy resources, how we make our
energy resources more efficient, or how we solve the rising
cost of healthcare can be solved through investments in high-
performance computing.
A focus of today's hearing is the development of an
exascale computing capability. Now, my understanding is that
exascale is often interchangeably used with extreme scale to
refer to the next generation of supercomputers in general, but
it also refers to a computing system that would be able to
carry out a million trillion operations per second. Yes, a
million trillion or a 1 with 18 zeros after it. That is about
500 times faster than the world's fastest computer today. Such
a system would be critical to meeting the Nation's needs in a
number of important research areas like combustion science,
climate science, modeling of the human brain, and ensuring the
reliability of our nuclear weapons stockpile.
That said, as we pursue the next generation of
supercomputing capabilities, which I fully support, I want to
ensure that the Nation is getting the most bang for buck out of
our current world-leading facilities. It is noteworthy that
while Lawrence Livermore, Argonne, and Oak Ridge national
laboratories are three of the most powerful supercomputing
centers in the world, and they are addressing incredibly
important scientific issues that really require their advanced
computing capabilities. Lawrence Berkeley's National Energy
Research Scientific Computing Center actually serves thousands
more users with only a fraction of those leadership machines'
computing power.
The point is not every computational research effort
requires the fastest most sophisticated system we can possibly
build and I think we also need to work more to make sure that
what is sometimes called capacity supercomputing is more
accessible to both the academic and industrial research
communities that could benefit.
I have always believed whether it was as a local city
councilman or a sitting Member of Congress that the government
works best when we can share our resources with the private
sector. It doesn't serve anyone any good if we are just doing
the research in the government and not transferring that
research out to the private sector, and I think in high-
performance computing we have already shown in our laboratories
we are transferring it out. The transfer out makes us more
efficient, can reduce healthcare costs, and also more
importantly, especially in our area, it can create private-
sector jobs on top of the thousands of jobs that already exist
at our laboratories.
So with that, I look forward to discussing these important
issues with each of you today and I yield back the balance of
my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Swalwell follows:]

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee Ranking Member Eric Swalwell
Thank you Chairman Lummis for holding this hearing today, and I
also want to thank the witnesses for being here--even the ones from
outside of the 15th District of California!
I am excited to learn more about the great work that the Department
of Energy in partnership with industry and our national laboratories,
including both Lawrence Livermore and Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratories in particular, are carrying out to maintain and advance
U.S. leadership in the critical area of high performance computing.
As I'm sure the witnesses will describe in more detail, this
capability enables our best and brightest scientists to gain new
insights into societal concerns ranging from Alzheimer's disease to
climate change. Other examples of both industrial and academic research
that benefit from our advanced high-end computing capabilities include:
high temperature superconductivity to significantly reduce energy
losses in transmitting electricity; aerodynamic modeling for aircraft
and vehicle design; pharmaceutical development; next generation nuclear
reactor design; fusion plasma modeling; and combustion simulation to
guide the design of fuel-efficient clean engines, such as work being
carried out at the Sandia National Laboratories' Combustion Research
Facility.
A focus of today's hearing is the development of an exascale
computing capability. Now, my understanding is that ``exascale'' is
often used interchangeably with ``extreme scale'' to refer to the next
generation of supercomputers in general, but it also refers to a
computing system that would be able to carry out a million trillion
operations per second. (Yes, a million trillion, or a 1 with 18 zeros
after it.) That's about 500 times faster than the world's fastest
computers at today. Such a system would be critical to meeting that
nation's needs in a number of important research areas like combustion
science, climate science, modeling of the human brain, and ensuring the
reliability of our nuclear weapons stockpile.
That said, as we pursue the next generation of supercomputing
capabilities-which I fully support-I also want to ensure that the
nation is getting the most bang per buck out of our current world-
leading facilities. It is noteworthy that while Lawrence Livermore,
Argonne, and Oak Ridge National Laboratories are 3 of the most powerful
supercomputers in the world, and they are addressing incredibly
important scientific issues that really require their advanced
computing capabilities, Lawrence Berkeley's National Energy Research
Scientific Computing Center actually serves thousands of more users
with only a fraction of those leadership machines' computing power. The
point is, not every computational research effort requires the fastest,
most sophisticated system we can possibly build, and I think we also
need to do more to make what's sometimes called ``capacity''
supercomputing more accessible to both the academic and industrial
research communities that could benefit.
With that, I look forward to discussing these important issues with
each of you today, and I yield back the balance of my time.

Chairwoman Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Swalwell.
If there are Members who wish to submit additional opening
statements, your statements will be added to the record at this
point.
Well, at this time I would like to introduce our witnesses,
and the fun part today is we have two Members here who have
witnesses from their districts. So I will start by introducing
Dr. Roscoe Giles, Chairman of the Advanced Scientific Computing
Advisory Committee of the Department of Energy and Professor at
Boston University. Dr. Giles--and I have that right, don't I,
Dr. Giles? Thank you. He has served in a number of leadership
roles in the community including Member of the Board of
Associated Universities, Inc., Chair of the Boston University
Faculty Council, and General Chair of the SC Conference in
2002. He received his Ph.D. in physics from Stanford University
in 1975. That is a remarkable record of achievement, Dr. Giles.
Thank you for being here.
At this time, I would like to yield to the gentleman from
Illinois, Mr. Hultgren, to introduce our second witness.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Our second witness is Dr. Rick Stevens, Associate
Laboratory Director for Computing, Environment, and Life
Sciences at Argonne National Laboratory. He heads Argonne's
Computational Genomics Program and co-leads the DOE's
laboratory planning effort for exascale computing research. He
is also Professor of computer science at the University of
Chicago and is involved in several interdisciplinary studies at
the Argonne University of Chicago Computation Institute and at
the Argonne University of Chicago Institute for Genomics and
Systems Biology. He is doing amazing work at Argonne and at the
University and the entire Illinois community is proud of his
contributions to this cutting edge field of science. We are
very glad to have you here, Dr. Stevens. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Lummis. Thank you for your attendance today.
That was my field although at a much lower level of academic
achievement, Dr. Stevens. We are delighted you are here.
Now, I would like to yield to the gentleman from
California, Mr. Swalwell, to introduce our third witness.
Mr. Swalwell. Thank you, Chairman Lummis.
And I have been very eager on this Committee to have a
witness from Lawrence Livermore laboratory.
Chairwoman Lummis. I can testify to that.
Mr. Swalwell. I thank you for allowing this witness to be
here today. Lawrence Livermore is the largest employer in my
Congressional District and I have to really just commend the
laboratory for their advocacy of the issues facing Lawrence
Livermore. They are in constant contact with our office and
this Committee so I am honored to today introduced Dona
Crawford, who is the Associate Director of Computation at
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.
Ms. Crawford is responsible for a staff of roughly 900 to
develop and deploy an integrated computing environment for
advanced simulations of complex physical phenomena like climate
change, clean energy creation, biodefense, and
nonproliferation. She has served on Advisory Committees for the
National Academies and the National Science Foundation and
currently serves as co-Chair of the Council on Competitiveness
High-Performance Computing Advisory Committee, and is a member
of IBM's Deep Computing Institute External Advisory Board. Ms.
Crawford has a master's degree in operations research from
Stanford University and a bachelor's degree in mathematics from
the University of Redlands, California.
Ms. Crawford, thank you for being here today and I yield
back the balance of my time.
Chairwoman Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Swalwell. And my first
exposure to Livermore, I used to walk around the lab. My first
job out of college was working for a rodeo company in Northern
California, and we were putting on the rodeo at Livermore.
Mr. Swalwell. It is the fastest rodeo in the world. Did you
know that?
Chairwoman Lummis. You know, considering the rodeo company
I worked for, I would believe that. Those rodeos ran like that
and I used to go for walks around the lab just to get some
exercise when I was there at Livermore putting on rodeos. So I
know where you are, at least I knew where you are when I was a
young college graduate in my first job.
Our final witness is Dr. Daniel Reed, Vice President of
Research and Economic Development at the University of Iowa.
Previously, he served as a Senior Leader at Microsoft serving
as Microsoft's Computing Strategist to Corporate Vice President
for Extreme Computing, I love that, and Technology Policy. He
received his Ph.D. in computer science in 1983 from Purdue
University.
As our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is limited
to five minutes each, after which the Members of the Committee
will have five minutes each to ask questions. I now recognize
Dr. Giles for five minutes to present his testimony with deep
gratitude to all of you for your attendance today. Dr. Giles.

TESTIMONY OF DR. ROSCOE GILES, CHAIRMAN,

ADVANCED SCIENTIFIC COMPUTING ADVISORY COMMITTEE

Dr. Giles. Yes, thank you, Chairman Lummis. And thanks to
Members of the Committee for inviting me to testify today.
I think the bill you are considering is very, very
important for our field and for maintaining the Nation's
leadership in computing and computational science. I am
testifying today in my role as Chair of the Advisory Committee
to ASCR and I will try to reflect that committee's views of
some elements of the ASCR program and hope to demonstrate that
we are ready to move forward and sort of eager to move forward
in this direction. And it is important that we do so.
The Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research has
programs and investments that include computer and networking
facilities that support DOE's science programs; leadership
computing facilities for which the exascale discussion is very
directly relevant with unique high-end capabilities made
available to DOE and to all the Nation, including industry;
applied mathematics research whose results provide the
framework for future applications and systems; computer science
system and software research, whose results both enable
applications of current systems and chart the direction for
future systems.
And beyond this, ASCR investments--ASCR is the abbreviation
for Advanced Scientific Computer Research--we get lost in
acronyms sometimes. ASCR investments have also built human
expertise in the scientific and technical staff at the labs and
through attention to integrating the next generation of
computational science leaders into DOE programs and facilities
through programs like the Computational Science Graduate
Fellows Program, which I also am involved with.
It is hard in these few minutes to state the breadth and
depth of science productivity that is being enabled by these
machines. We now see the initial results of the petascale era.
As one measure, we might mention that more than 2,000 peer-
reviewed research articles based directly on projects supported
by ASCR computing facilities were published in 2012 alone. One
I love is a trillion-particle simulation in cosmology, since I
started out in the '80s struggling to do a million-particle
simulation of molecular dynamics, and to go another factor of a
million is astonishing.
In 2009 our advisory committee was charged with reviewing
ASCR's body of work on exascale computing. We delivered the
Rosner report, ``The Opportunities and Challenges of Exascale
Computing,'' in fall of 2010. We found the case for exascale
computing compelling and recommended the DOE should proceed
expeditiously with an exascale initiative so that it continues
to lead in using extreme scale computing to meet important
national needs.
As you have heard mentioned this morning, when we wrote
that, we were talking about growing a factor of 1,000 forward
in the future. Now, that is a factor of 500. I am glad to see
that we are starting to in this bill to really move forward on
this. And we have had a sense in the committee that we have
been waiting for that forward motion from the system.
Some of the--during this time, ASCR has been busy doing
foundational research to make this possible, so there--and we
will hear more about it, I am sure, from other speakers. But
the establishment of co-design centers, computing research, and
applied mathematics research and some prototype projects with
fast forward and design forward that are bringing us in this
direction, and I think we are making progress but not the
progress we should be making at the scale we should be making
it, and hopefully, the bill will help deal with that issue.
Our committee has been asked to review ASCR facility plans
for the relatively short-term future of the next ten years, not
including exascale deployment, and we found those facility
plans to be very sound and compelling that involve enhancements
to the petascale systems. We have also recently examined the
intersection of big data needs within the Department of Energy
and ASCR's exascale program and found them quite convergent.
The exascale technologies we are talking about developing will
be essential in systems that analyze big data problems of the
nature that come to the Department of Energy from both
experiment and theory, and we have a--quite a long and detailed
report about that.
I wanted to just summarize by saying I am very, very glad
to see the legislation that we have here. I am very supportive
of the direction we are going. I would only ask that the
funding level be sure to be sufficient for the scope of our
dreams. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Giles follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.021

Mr. Weber. [Presiding] Thank you, Dr. Giles.
Now, I recognize Dr. Stevens to present his testimony. Turn
your mike on.

TESTIMONY OF DR. RICK STEVENS,

ASSOCIATE LABORATORY DIRECTOR FOR COMPUTING,

ENVIRONMENT AND LIFE SCIENCES,

ARGONNE NATIONAL LABORATORY

Dr. Stevens. Oh, thanks. Thank you. Madam Chair, Ranking
Member Swalwell, Members of the Subcommittee, I appreciate this
opportunity to talk to you about the future of high-performance
computing research and development and about the importance of
U.S. leadership in the development and deployment of exascale
computing.
In my own work at Argonne and the University of Chicago I
split my time between trying to advance high-performance
computing architectures and systems and doing research on how
to do computational genomics in the pursuit of problems in
energy, the environment, and infectious disease. And those
projects have given me insight not only on the underlying
technology but on the impact of applications.
I believe that advancing American leadership in high-
performance computing is vital to our national interest. High-
performance computing is a critical technology for the Nation,
and it is also the underlying foundation for advancing progress
in modeling and simulation and big data. It serves both of
these needs. It is also needed by all branches of science and
engineering for forward progress. It is used more and more by
U.S. industry to maintain a competitive edge in the development
of new products and services, and it is emerging as a critical
policy tool for government leaders who can rely on simulations
to add insight to policy or technical decisions.
Today, the United States is the undisputed leader in the
development and use of high-performance computing technologies.
However, other nations are increasingly aware of the strategic
importance of HPC and are creating supercomputing research
programs that challenge our leadership.
Japan has significant programs for over a decade in this
area. They have fielded large-scale machines that are
comparable to the machines in the United States. But China is
emerging as a serious player as well and Europe has been
investing in revitalization of their own high-performance
computing sector. So we now have at least three sectors on the
planet besides the United States making serious progress.
All have set their sights on the development of machines
that are 1,000 times faster than those most powerful machines
today. Everyone is looking at exascale. And achieving this goal
is important. The drive to exascale will have a sustained
impact on American competitiveness. It gives companies and
researchers the means and the impetus for developing new
processes, new services, and new products.
For example, we need increased compute power to enable
first principle simulations of materials for energy storage
that would give us access to a potential 500-mile battery pack
for electric cars. We want to build end-to-end simulations of
advanced nuclear reactors that are modular, safe, and
affordable. We want to revolutionize small business
manufacturing and digital fabrication and put in place a
digital supply chain that would potentially revolutionize the
economy in the United States.
We want to model controls for power grids that have
significant amount of renewable energy, and we want to increase
the resolution of climate models to provide more details on
regional impacts. And finally, we want to create a personalized
medicine that can incorporate an individual's genomic
information into a specific customized plan for prevention or
treatment of disease.
All of these challenges require machines that are thousands
of times faster than the current machines. The development of
practical exascale system, however, will also mean affordable
petascale systems and broad deployment, broad accessibility.
The DOE Office of Science supercomputer centers at Argonne,
Berkeley, and Oak Ridge are currently oversubscribed by at
least a factor of three. This means that not all of the science
that we could be doing on these machines is getting done. With
current funding levels, these systems can only be upgraded
about once every four to five years. And at current research--
at current levels of research investment, the U.S. vendors are
not likely to reach an exascale performance level that we can
afford to deploy until considerably after 2020. This is a
problem for us if we want to maintain our leadership.
Both China and Japan are working on plans to reach the
level by 2020 or before. Japan is building a $1.1 billion
investment program aiming to deploy exascale machines by 2020,
and China has announced a goal to reach exascale before 2020.
China is aggressively spending on infrastructure for
supercomputing and succeeding in deploying large-scale systems
rivaling the largest systems deployed in the United States. It
is widely expected they will regain lead on this capability
this year, although their designs are mostly based on
incorporating U.S. components. In the future, they plan to
deploy systems based on Chinese components.
I have been working since 2007 building a plan with my
colleagues at the laboratories, academia, and DOE, and we
identified five hurdles that we must cross in order to reach
exascale. We have to reduce systems powered by a factor of 50;
we must improve memory performance and cost by a factor of 100;
we must improve our ability to program these systems; we must
increase the parallelism in our applications; and we must
improve reliability. These are not simple tasks but these are
very important if we are to reach this goal. And I believe we
have a duty to move as swiftly as we can on this objective.
Thank you. I would be more than happy to answer your
questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Stevens follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.033

Mr. Weber. Thank you, Dr. Stevens.
I recognize Ms. Crawford for her testimony.

TESTIMONY OF MS. DONA CRAWFORD,

ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR FOR COMPUTATION,

LAWRENCE LIVERMORE NATIONAL LABORATORY

Ms. Crawford. I thank you. I thank Chair Lummis and I thank
you, Mr. Vice Chairman Weber and Ranking Member Swalwell, for
inviting me to be here today. I ask that my full statement as
submitted to the Committee made part of the hearing record, and
if I may, I will summarize.
Mr. Weber. Without objection, so ordered.
Ms. Crawford. I am Dona Crawford, Associate Director of
Computation at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. I will
shorten that by saying LLNL or Livermore. Livermore is a
national security laboratory of the National Nuclear Security
Administration of the Department of Energy and home to Sequoia,
one of the fastest computers in the world.
Livermore has the responsibility for maintaining the
safety, security, and effectiveness of the Nation's strategic
nuclear deterrent through the Stockpile Stewardship Program.
High-performance computing has been a core competency of the
lab to meet this mission need since over 60 years. In fact, the
NNSA labs, working in close partnership with U.S. HPC industry,
were at the forefront of the last revolutionary design shift in
HPC computer architectures and applications development. That
is the foundation of today's HPC systems.
Over the past 20 years, the NNSA labs learned many valuable
lessons, including how to best structure R&D efforts to develop
computing architectures that meet our demanding mission
requirements while cost-effectively leveraging market-driven
technology within industry. These lessons are very valuable in
our efforts to develop exascale computing.
I applaud the Committee for its determined efforts to
sustain U.S. leadership in this vitally important and
increasingly competitive arena of high-performance computing.
It is imperative that the United States embark on an R&D
program to develop new technologies and computer architectures
to support exascale computing.
My main point of emphasis today is straightforward. This
pursuit must be a joint Office of Science/NNSA effort working
in tandem through partnership with U.S. HPC industry to ensure
system architectures that meet Office of Science and NNSA
mission requirements. Working together, the Office of Science
and NNSA have combined scarce resources and have already
initiated a number of R&D efforts and contracts with industrial
partners but lack the resources to invest at the magnitude
necessary to assure success over the next decade.
Due to the technically challenging nature of developing
exascale supporting technologies in computing capability, it is
vitally important to ensure there are competitive teams each
with Office of Science and NNSA laboratories partnered with
U.S. HPC industry collaborators. Equally important is the
development of an integrated strategy and program management
plan.
Current U.S. leadership in HPC is a direct result of the
Nation's investment in computational capability to support the
Stockpile Stewardship Program. U.S. HPC investment has provided
significant computing capability to maintain the U.S. nuclear
deterrent and this computing capability enables us to simulate
in 2-D at high resolution and high physics fidelity or simulate
in 3-D at low resolution. Today, we cannot simulate in 3-D at
high resolution and high physics fidelity which will be
required for the stockpile mission needs. Therefore, a new
architecture enabling exascale computing is required for the
NNSA mission.
This will not be easy. Development of exascale-class
systems cannot be achieved through a straightforward refinement
of today's technologies. Surmounting multiple technical issues
will require sustained research and development effort. But
there is no doubt exascale computing will yield valuable
benefits to near-term mission requirements, as well as to U.S.
economic competitiveness.
Over the last two decades, supercomputers have transformed
the way the world conducts scientific research and has enabled
discovery and development across a broad set of disciplines. In
a 2008 U.S. Council on Competitiveness report, the Council
states, ``supercomputing is part of the corporate arsenal to
beat rivals by staying one step ahead of the innovation curve.
It allows companies to design products and analyze data in ways
once unimaginable.''
In one example, Livermore is leveraging its HPC
capabilities in the California Energy Systems for the 21st
Century Initiative. The California Public Utilities Commission
and state investor-owned utilities are collaborating with
Livermore to improve and expand energy systems to meet our
future energy needs. The owners, operators, regulators, and a
joint team of technical experts will use the Nation's most
advanced modeling simulation and analytical tools to gain
unprecedented insight and generate new data to reduce risk and
inform solutions to issues facing 21st-century energy systems
such as renewable energy integration and use of smart grid
technology.
There are many other examples that highlight the importance
of supercomputing and reinforce the value of maintaining U.S.
HPC leadership. For now, let me close again by saying thank you
and I look forward to working with the Committee to ensure
continued U.S. HPC leadership.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Crawford follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.045

Mr. Weber. Thank you, Ms. Crawford.
Dr. Reed, I recognize you for your testimony.

TESTIMONY OF DR. DANIEL REED,

VICE PRESIDENT FOR RESEARCH AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT,
UNIVERSITY OF IOWA

Dr. Reed. Thank you. Chair Lummis, Vice Chair Weber,
Ranking Member Swalwell, Members of the Subcommittee, my name
is Dan Reed and I am the Vice President for Research and
Economic Development at the University of Iowa. Thank you for
the opportunity to share my perspectives on exascale computing
and to respond to your questions regarding the American High-
End Computing Leadership Act.
Today, I would like to make four points regarding the
exascale and high-performance computing program followed by a
set of specific recommendations for the future. They are drawn
from my nearly 30 years of experience in high-performance
computing as a researcher, as an academic and corporate leader,
as a Director of the National Science Foundation Supercomputing
Center, and as a participant in national science and technology
policy.
First of all, as others have noted, high-performance
computing is unique among scientific instruments. It is
distinguished by its universality as an intellectual amplifier.
New, more powerful supercomputers and computational models
yield insights across all scientific and engineering
disciplines. Advanced computing is also essential for analyzing
the torrent of experimental data produced by scientific
instruments and sensors, but it is about more than science.
With advanced computing, real-time data fusion, and powerful
numerical models, we have the potential to predict the tracks
of devastating tornadoes such as the recent one in Oklahoma,
saving lives, and ensuring the future of our children.
My second point is that we face an uncertain future of
computing and in particular high-performance computing
leadership in this country. As others have noted, today, HPC
systems from Oak Ridge, Lawrence Livermore, and Argonne
National Laboratories occupy the first, second, and fourth
place on the list of the world's fastest computers. From this,
one might surmise that all is well, yet U.S. leadership in both
deployed HPC capability and in the technologies needed to
create future systems is under challenge.
Also, as others have noted, other nations are investing
strategically in high-performance computing to advance national
priorities. And the U.S. research community has repeatedly
warned of the potential and actuality of eroding U.S.
leadership in computing and in high-performance computing and
emphasized the need for sustained and strategic investment. I
have had the privilege of chairing many of those studies
personally as a member PITAC, of PCAST, of National Academies'
boards, and yet many of these warnings have been largely
unheeded.
This brings me to my third point: the deep interdependence
a basic research of vibrant U.S. computing industry and high-
performance computing capability. It has long been axiomatic
that the United States is the world leader in information
technology. Our global leadership is not a birthright. As Andy
Grove, the former CEO of Intel, noted in his famous aphorism
``only the paranoid survive.'' U.S. leadership has been
repeatedly earned and hard-fought based on continued Federal
Government commitment to basic research, translation of that
research into technological innovations, and the creation of
new products by vibrant U.S. industry.
This brings me to my fourth point. Computing is in deep
transition to a new era with profound implications for the
future of U.S. industry and HPC. My colleague Mr. Stevens
touched on many of the issues around energy management and low-
power devices and they are key to this topic. U.S. consumers
and businesses are an increasingly small minority of the global
market for mobile devices and for cloud services.
We live in a post-PC world, as we all know, where U.S.
companies compete in a global device ecosystem. Unless we are
vigilant, these economic and technical changes could further
shift the center of enabling technology R&D away from the
United States with profound implications for our future HPC
capability. Given this, what are my recommendations for the
future? First and most importantly, we need to change our model
for HPC research and deployment if the United States is to
maintain its leadership. This must include deep and sustained
interagency collaborations defined by a regularly updated
strategic R&D plan and associated, verifiable metrics,
commensurate budget allocations, and accountability to realize
the plan's goals.
DOE's partners--it needs the National Science Foundation,
the Department of Defense, NIST and NIH, and other agencies to
fulfill their important and complementary roles to DOE as
engaged partners and supporters of basic research in technology
development. We also need long-term industry engagement.
Second, advanced HPC deployments are crucial, but the
computing R&D journey is as important as any single system
deployment. A vibrant U.S. ecosystem of talented and trained
people and technical innovation is the true lifeblood of
sustainable exascale computing.
Finally, we must balance and embrace dual-use technology
R&D supporting both high-performance computing and ensuring
U.S. industry competitiveness. Neither HPC nor big data R&D can
be sacrificed to advance the other, nor can hardware R&D
dominate investments in algorithms, software, applications, and
people. All are crucial.
Finally, let me again commend this Committee for its
continued commitment to high-performance computing. It has been
my privilege to testify here many times. I appreciate the
support of the Committee. And like my colleagues, I would be
delighted to answer questions at the appropriate time.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Reed follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.054

Mr. Weber. Thank you, Dr. Reed. And thank you all for your
testimony. Man, lots of questions come to mind. And, you know,
I guess I am an old-timer. I grew up back in the '60s and we
didn't have computers, actually, we did. There was a flat
table, you put a quarter in, and you chased a little Pac-Man
around. Those were our computers.
So I have a question here, and I think you kind of alluded
to it, Dr. Reed, but I will ask this maybe starting with Dr.
Giles. Is it Giles?
Dr. Giles. Giles actually.
Mr. Weber. Giles, there you go. Thank you.
In December 2011 Congress directed DOE to provide a
strategic roadmap relating to the development of an exascale
computing system. However, it is my understanding that after 15
months of the mandated completion date, the report is not yet
finalized. Are you aware of this report?
Dr. Giles. I am aware of it but my position is as an
external representative of the community relative to ASCR so I
am actually not an insider and I have not seen the report.
Mr. Weber. Okay.
Dr. Giles. My understanding is exactly what you said.
Mr. Weber. Okay.
Dr. Giles. But I don't have anything unfortunately to add
to that.
Mr. Weber. Nothing that you want to admit here publicly?
Dr. Giles. No, actually nothing that I know. Anything I
know, I will tell you.
Mr. Weber. Of course, our goal is to get it. Dr. Stevens,
how about you?
Dr. Stevens. Well, I am aware of the report. I think it is
a fine plan. I think that the internal process of getting that
report out is what has blocked it, and I hope it reaches you
quickly.
Mr. Weber. Okay. Any help you can give us in that endeavor?
Dr. Stevens. I don't have any specific recommendation
except to just reemphasize that this is a critical plan that
must be delivered and must be understood and articulated and
executed.
Mr. Weber. Okay. Thank you. And Ms. Crawford, I don't mean
to put you on the hot seat, but you are on the hot seat.
Ms. Crawford. I have nothing to add to what Dr. Stevens
said. We are--we work at the laboratories and we are not part
of the formal process between the DOE and the OMB to get that
report out. I do support what is written in the report. The
labs had a lot of input. I have not seen the final report.
Mr. Weber. And Dr. Reed, since you came to us with four
points followed by recommendations, and I love that by the way.
One of the things you said in your recommendation was the
Department of Energy needs partners and long-term industry
engagement. How do we expedite this? How do we make this
happen?
Dr. Reed. Well, I think there are several points relevant.
One is to recognize that, as I said, it is a false dichotomy to
pit investment and some of these big data issues against high-
performance computing, and I think frankly that is the root of
some of the issues that we have to resolve in terms of moving
forward.
In terms of the agencies, I believe, as I pointed out in my
written testimony, that they each fulfill and historically have
fulfilled important and complementary roles. The Department of
Energy has been crucial in terms of advanced prototyping and
deploying of the largest scale systems. The other agencies,
though, provide support for enabling technology research. The
National Science Foundation is one of the key enablers of that
long-term research.
What is important is that all those players be at the table
and be engaged in supporting this integrated agenda. I think
from the industry's perspective to sort of answer your specific
question, that is where industry--and I speak now again from my
industry experience--it is important that the government be a
committed and not fickle partner because the cost of money and
the time planning for companies to execute is really crucial.
And as I was saying, that combination is key to the future of
the U.S. industry not just for high-performance computing but
for how much information technology means to the U.S. economy.
Mr. Weber. All right. Thank you. And Ms. Crawford, let me
come back to you. I think you said that this exascale computing
either can't or won't be achieved through refinement. What did
you mean by that?
Ms. Crawford. What I mean by that is the current system
architectures today can't simply be scaled up to produce a
usable and cost-effective system. In principle, one could scale
it up and you would have a system that would fill the room and
would take 100 megawatts of power, so that is not a cost-
effective system. So the technologies have to change and we
have to change in memory, in processors, in storage and
networking and the programming models. And so that is what I
mean by we can't simply scale-up the programs of today.
Mr. Weber. Let me send that over to Dr. Stevens. And you
mentioned about more or less power, I guess explain, you said
less power.
Dr. Stevens. Right. We need to develop processors and
memory and network components that consume considerably less
power than current systems in order to scale-up. Right now, if
we took a current kind of 10 petaflop system and scaled it up
to an exascale, it would consume nearly a gigawatt of power,
which is not feasible from a physical infrastructure standpoint
or a----
Mr. Weber. Right.
Dr. Stevens. --cost standpoint. So we need much more power-
efficient devices. We also need better programming models
because we are going to have to have a lot more parallelism
inside these machines, 1 million--or 1,000 times more
parallelism than we have now and we need ways of accessing that
parallelism easily for programmers. So we have a lot of work to
do. We know what to do. The DOE's plan includes all of these
activities so it is--I think the United States has a good
position to do this; we just need the resources and the long-
term commitment.
Mr. Weber. All right. Thank you. And I just want to make an
observation before I yield to the Ranking Member and that is
that I am glad to hear you say that national security is
involved in this and tied up in this. That is very crucially
important. And I think it will carry a lot of weight with
Congress. Hopefully, it will. So I thank you for your
testimony. And with that, I yield to Mr. Swalwell.
Mr. Swalwell. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And my questions will
principally be for Ms. Crawford.
First, does research in high-performance computing require
the United States Government to make investments? And what I
mean is why can't we simply rely on the private sector to
innovate and invent the next supercomputing architecture and
software and then the government can just buy off-the-shelf
technology?
Ms. Crawford. The short answer is, yes, the U.S. Government
does need to invest in order to shape the exascale
architectures for our mission needs. I can use an old example.
When we started the Accelerated Strategic Computing Initiative
in the mid-1990s for the Stockpile Stewardship Program,
industry and the consumer base was driving computing in a
direction that would not meet our needs. And without our
investment and our sustained investment and focused on
cooperation and developing those processors that would meet our
needs, we wouldn't have had the computers and the computing
capability that we have today. And so today, it is essential
that we work together with the Office of Science laboratories
and the NNSA laboratories to meet this mission needs.
A shorter answer perhaps is that we are going to follow
industry technologies. We can't afford our own, you know,
brand-new fab or our brand-new machines. What we want to do is
pay on the margins to make those machines viable for our
particular applications, which is mimicking the, you know,
physical phenomena around us.
Mr. Swalwell. And when we look at our global competitors--
Japan, China, India, Brazil, Russia--are they allowing or
relying solely upon the private market or are they also having
government investment at the table as well?
Ms. Crawford. There is strong government investment in
Japan, China, Russia, the European Union. It is about $1.1
billion of investment in Japan. I would have to do the
translation but the Ministry of Science and Technology five-
year plan within China is investing and again not just in the
hardware technologies but they are investing in the low-level
software and the applications and making sure that they have
the ecosystem in order to be able to deploy these systems
effectively to make a difference to their underlying national
security and economic competitiveness. So----
Mr. Swalwell. So it sounds like----
Ms. Crawford. --they are going to be large investments.
Mr. Swalwell. It sounds like for the United States to keep
its edge in high-performance computing, we will need to
continue to have the Federal Government make investments in
these programs, is that right?
Ms. Crawford. Absolutely.
Mr. Swalwell. You talked a little bit about the joint
partnership that must take place between NNSA and the Office of
Science. Why is exascale capability so critical to DOE's
National Nuclear Security Administration?
Ms. Crawford. So then I will take a more focused view on
just what is going on within the NNSA laboratories. It is our
duty to assess the state of the stockpile on an annual basis,
and the stockpile is being decreased in the numbers of weapons
and the types of weapons. That makes each single weapon
remaining in the stockpile critically important to understand
what is going on----
Mr. Swalwell. Going toward a more leaner and meaner model,
right?
Ms. Crawford. Leaner and meaner, and so those systems, as
they age, they are being modernized as parts begin to fail, and
so there are a number of things that we need to understand, you
know, physically. You know, nuclear weapons are very complex.
Think about parking your car in the garage and not turning it
on but then wanting to be able to use it when you have to. You
know, there are special materials that are changing over time
and all kinds of things that go on just sitting there.
We need high fidelity 3-D simulations to understand, you
know, the initial conditions, the engineering features, safety
features, the security features, and today, we cannot simulate
at that high fidelity. So we have a number of--what we do is
look at the kinds of calculations we are going to do and the
kinds of computing that is required to do those calculations
and so--for stockpile assessment, for the life extension
programs for materials aging, for safety and surety, we have a
range of exascale needs for the kinds of calculations that will
have to go on in high fidelity, high-resolution 3-D, and they
range from half-an-exascale to 1,000 exascales over the period
of the next 10 years.
Mr. Swalwell. And Ms. Crawford----
Ms. Crawford. Starting in about 2018.
Mr. Swalwell. Can you tell me more about Livermore's work
to address industrial and medical research needs, for example,
your groundbreaking simulation of the human heart and your
recent work with the California Energy Commission to improve
energy management throughout the State and how exascale and HPC
have affected our ability to do this?
Ms. Crawford. I would be glad to. Having developed these
capabilities for our mission drivers, then they are applicable,
as Dr. Reed has said, to many other activities. Last year, we
worked with IBM to develop a code called cardioid and it does--
it models the electrical signals of the heart and it has the
potential to be used to test drugs or medical devices, the code
ran in nearly real-time across our 20 petaflop machine at
Livermore beating an astonishing 60 beats per minute, so this
is almost, you know, 12 percent of real-time. This calculation
ran at 59 percent of peak of this machine, and that is--you
know, it is very incredible and amazing thing to take a new
code and put it on a new machine and run at this scale. It runs
in a time to solution over 1,200 times faster than the previous
state-of-the-art and this work shows promise for what advanced
computing can do for understanding the human body. But it also
demonstrated the extreme level of specificity and technical
acuity required to achieve this result. And of course, these
insights that we gain there will then be applied back to the
stockpile.
Mr. Swalwell. Great. Well, thank you so much, Ms. Crawford.
And thank you again to our other witnesses. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Hultgren. [Presiding] Thank you. And I will recognize
myself for five minutes for a few questions.
Part of our challenge as a Subcommittee is certainly to
understand the right thing to do but also to present it to the
larger Committee and even beyond that to Members of Congress,
so a couple of questions. Just if you have been messaging or
how to present how important this is and why this is so
important so I would address this first question to Dr. Stevens
and Ms. Crawford. Wonder if you could just discuss the expected
breadth of applications for the exascale computing. Is this
something that could be used for a wide range of important
disciplines from material to chemistry to medicine to nuclear
science similar to the current supercomputers or is the
expected range of disciplines more narrow such as climate
science modeling or for weapons development?
Dr. Stevens. So the range of applications for exascale are
no less broad than the current machines. In fact, there are
many problems that haven't been tried in the past, particularly
in biomedical science where we were just afraid to try them. We
didn't have enough compute power. This idea of trying to build,
say, detailed models in the human body, not just the heart but
now include the lungs, include the nervous system, include the
gastrointestinal system and build a virtual human, that is a
problem that will require 1,000 times current machines. It is
not really feasible so people haven't tried it. So my sense is
that we will find more and more applications as we build more
capable systems.
We are also going to increase the ability for these systems
to deal with data, and so a new class of applications that is
emerging in both national security and in engineering research
is this idea of doing modeling simulation with uncertainty
quantification, this idea that not only will you get a result,
you will get some confidence measure on that result. And that
is something that requires hundreds of times more compute power
than the current capability which means you can only do one
simulation.
Ms. Crawford. I second everything that Dr. Stevens said.
And it is limitless. Computing is so foundational. Anything
that--any physical process that you can represent
mathematically, which are most of them, you can then model in
the computer with great fidelity. And the greater the fidelity
we have, the better we can understand the world around us. And
so I can just go on and on and on but, you know, we work at our
laboratory in a number of areas with industry, with other
national laboratories, with academia to make sure that we are
applying these to the breadth of possibilities.
Mr. Hultgren. Well, Ms. Crawford, if I can get into just a
little bit more specific and really following up on the Ranking
Member's discussion and also on the Vice Chairman's of what
does speak to Members of Congress and inspire us to make a
commitment, especially a financial commitment at a time like
this, and certainly, one of those is national security.
So I wondered if you could just talk briefly. Is exascale
computing considered critical to advancing national security,
and if so, has the National Nuclear Security Administration
gone on record to say that? If so, how is the NNSA prepared to
financially contribute to this effort and what would be an
appropriate percentage contribution to an exascale computer
from NNSA, would you say?
Ms. Crawford. There is a lot of questions there so----
Mr. Hultgren. Yes.
Ms. Crawford. --let's see if I can remember them.
Mr. Hultgren. The first thing is have they gone on record
of saying that this is a key component? And then basically then
what kind of commitment should we expect from them?
Ms. Crawford. Computing is the integrating element of
maintaining the safety, security, and reliability of the
nuclear weapons stockpile without returning to underground
tests. So by integrating element, what I mean is we have the
old test data, we have aboveground small experiments that we
are doing, and we have a lot of theory and we have our new
models. And we are bringing this all together in the computer.
So this is an integrating element and this is the only way that
we know to understand what is going on in the nuclear weapon.
And so for that reason, we believe that it is extremely
important.
The NNSA is making an investment in the Advanced Scientific
Computing Program. To maintain leadership, you need to have a
base program. You need to have, you know, sort of a near-term
program and you need to have a far-reaching program. Currently,
the Office of Science and the NNSA both have a very strong base
program. We have heard about the wonderful facilities at the
laboratories, and of course it is not just the computer
hardware itself but it is the applications that help us
understand the world around us.
We are investing with the Office of Science in some near-
term research with industrial partners to look at some of those
long lead time technology changes that need to be made. We need
to make additional investments that are not in our current
budgets in the programming environments for the exascale
computing and in the math libraries so that we can actually use
this billion-way parallelism.
Mr. Hultgren. Okay. I see my time is expired. At this
point, I hope that we will have an opportunity to have a second
round of questioning as well.
Mr. Swalwell. I don't have any objection.
Mr. Hultgren. We can talk about that. Well, let's go ahead
and we will recognize Mr. Veasey from Texas. Okay. Then Mr.
Lipinski from Illinois is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to ask everyone on the panel a question about
international partnerships. You know, obviously this cuts both
ways. You can reduce the cost of reaching exascale capabilities
with international partnerships but then there is the issue of,
you know, damaging our Nation's economic competitiveness,
potentially our national security, because we are not doing
this on our own. Now, where do you come down on this? Is it
worthwhile and how far should we go in international
partnerships and at what point is it still an advantage? At
what point does it become a disadvantage for us economically,
giving up our lead on high-end computing? So whoever wants to
start with that one. Dr. Stevens?
Dr. Stevens. I will start. So I think the primary
opportunity in international collaboration is in software, and
in particular, the components of software that are open source
that right now most of the software that runs on these machines
other than the applications is built on--based on open source
technologies developed largely in the United States. That is a
significant lift to move all of that software to next-
generation platforms, and international collaboration can help
there provided that the software is--stays in the open.
I think where we don't want to go at least in the near term
is in deep hardware partnerships internationally. I think that
is a place where we want to maintain our competitive edge. We
have significant advantages with the U.S. vendor community and
we want to maintain that as long as we can.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you. Anyone else? Ms. Crawford?
Ms. Crawford. Yes. I would like to add that it is very
important that the United States maintain the key intellectual
property for the next supercomputer levels. If we control that,
we have the high ground for the standards space base that will
make all the decisions in the coming decade, and I would not
want to cede that to another country. I cannot trust the U.S.
nuclear weapons technology to a system built in China, say.
That is untenable. I would like to not consider that those low-
power technologies are developed ahead of time in other
countries that we will use embedded in our intelligence
systems. To me, it is very important that the United States
take a very strong leadership position in this technology
arena.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you. Dr. Reed?
Dr. Reed. Yes, if I might add to that. It is part of the
reason in my testimony I spoke very specifically to the
importance of U.S. industry engagement. And as we move into
this increasingly mobile device, low-power world, which is one
of the key enabling technologies for future exascale systems,
it is really crucial that the U.S. vendors maintain the
competitive edge and strike a balance, as we do in terms of
investment, between the global market and maintaining the
unique capabilities for U.S. national security.
Now, that is part of the role of the Federal Government in
terms of, as Ms. Crawford said in her testimony, about shaping
the direction of industry to ensure that we have the technology
capability that we need.
And I would echo that there are other uses as well. As we
have talked about the rise of data analytics and its importance
for national security and signal intelligence and other
domains, that is another area where we must think carefully
about many of the enabling technologies of which hardware is
one, but the algorithms and other pieces need careful scrutiny
also.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you.
Dr. Giles. Yes, I would agree with what has been said. Just
two points: I think it would be truly shameful for us to give
up the elements of leadership that we have. And one of the
things we pointed out and we asked in our exascale report was
the criticality of time and of seizing the opportunity that in
some way is presented uniquely to us to advance this field. But
many, many countries will want to do that and we have a little
bit of a time advantage because of our starting place.
The other point, which is--it goes sort of in the direction
of the open source software is the observation that a lot of
the open science that is done in the world is done with
international collaboration and with international connections.
And we would, I think, like to still be in the position of
having a lot of influence on the under-layer of that on which
we will all build. But there certainly is international
collaboration in science and I wouldn't want to minimize that--
the importance of that for the open science community.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you very much. And I want to ask a
question if the Chairman would give me just a few extra seconds
here. I just want to also echo what I know some of my
colleagues have stated. I know exascale computing is important
but we have to make sure that we don't pursue that at the
expense of other important R&D activities that ASCR is doing.
And I yield back.
Mr. Hultgren. The gentleman yields back. We will go through
a second round of questioning if anyone would have other
questions, so I will begin by recognizing myself for five
minutes.
And I would address this first to Dr. Stevens but also ask
if any of you would have other thoughts on this and really
following up on Mr. Lipinski's questions of timing and
competitiveness. And I wondered, Dr. Stevens, if you would have
some thought of what level of investment is needed for the
United States to maintain global leadership in scientific and
technical computing for the next decade? And then something
specific of if we maintain current investment, at what point
would China surpass us in computing capabilities? And then also
just looking at dates, what type of approach and how much
investment would be necessary for us to lead to a deployable
system by 2020?
Dr. Stevens. Okay. So on the first one in terms of the
resources required to do this, in the plans developed by the
laboratories, we estimated that in addition to the current
funding levels that we have, we would need an increment over
time of approximately $400 million a year. That would be split
between the two partners, the Office of Science and the NNSA.
At that funding level, we think it is feasible--not guaranteed
but feasible--to deploy a system by 2020. Of course, we made
those estimates a few years ago when we had more runway than we
have now. And that investment would go to both hardware and
software and some applications of them--more applications would
be needed by that time.
At the current funding level, not including the bill----
Mr. Hultgren. Right.
Dr. Stevens. --that is in front of us, it is estimated that
we would not reach an exascale capability until middle of the
next decade. We don't have accurate estimates of precisely what
China will do but my guess is they will probably exceed us by
the end of the decade if we were in that scenario. I don't
remember your----
Mr. Hultgren. I think that covered it. So really it is, you
know, without the investment, it is going to be probably 2025
before we would reach that level?
Dr. Stevens. Absolutely.
Mr. Hultgren. Do you think with the investment, is it a
possible----
Dr. Stevens. We have----
Mr. Hultgren. --expectation to reach exascale levels by
2020?
Dr. Stevens. I think it is possible. I think we would have
to get moving faster than we are now and of course the industry
is ready to do this. Labs are ready to do it; academia is ready
to do it. We just need the resources and the commitment and
also to do it in a way that doesn't cannibalize the current
program. We need the base--we have to build on the base both in
the Office of Science and in NNSA, and so this is really,
really looking at incremental resources unfortunately to do it.
Mr. Hultgren. Okay. Thank you. Do any of the others have
any thoughts or disagreement?
Ms. Crawford. I would just add that understanding what the
sustained commitment is, whatever that dollar level turns out
to be, is critical because then we can plan into the future.
And not knowing whether, you know, the base budget is cut and
the exascale R&D budget is cut and we have got a commitment to
do this and then we are--now, we must do that because we have a
contract and yet that prevents us from doing something else. So
not knowing is really difficult to plan ahead and manage it
effectively. So understanding that and sustaining that is very
important.
Mr. Hultgren. I absolutely agree and it is one of the
things I am passionate about. I know other Members of our
Subcommittee and Committee are as well of bringing some
certainty specifically to research and to science. When we are
looking to advance these programs it is so important that we
are not budgeting month-to-month, which this place, Washington
D.C., has kind of fallen into the habit of doing, but it has
incredible detrimental impact, I know, on the great work that
you all are doing.
So I for one and I know my colleagues on both sides of the
aisle would love to see some of that change. We are going to be
fighting for that.
Let me switch gears just a little bit and address this to
Dr. Giles if I could and also to Dr. Stevens. But with respect
to achieving an extraordinary number of computations per
second, exascale appears to be a somewhat arbitrary goal. With
current budgetary constraints, could DOE consider slower
systems that would still be by far the fastest in the world or
how do you see that fitting into this challenge of kind of
keeping up with the rest of the world if DOE were to say, well,
you know, we want to do some advancement but we are not going
to go for that larger goal. We will just kind of settle for a
lesser goal. How do you see that impacting the work that you
are doing and the work that other nations are doing?
Dr. Giles. Okay. Well, I think the key research to lower
power consumption, to identify the pathway that takes us to
exascale is one that is defined by that goal but which is a
sort of--has a certain integrity of its own. Okay. If you do
that--if one does that and makes that commitment to do their
research and to do that beginning development, then how far you
take it is part of the deployment question of how big a machine
you build with the technology that you have done the research
for. It--so--at least that is my take on it. I am not the
technologist that Rick is and you may have a comment on that.
Dr. Stevens. Well, what I can say is that the laboratories
are excellent stewards of the Nation's money----
Dr. Giles. Yes.
Dr. Stevens. --and we will buy the most capable systems
that we can afford to buy when we have to replace and when we
can replace the current systems. So I think that the question
of, you know, can we settle is really a question of do we want
to settle for not being able to do all the science or the most
impactful engineering or address the most important national
security challenges? We will do the best we can with what is
provided to us. There is no question. I think lowering our
sights though is not in our DNA.
Mr. Hultgren. Right.
Dr. Stevens. Right.
Mr. Hultgren. No, that is helpful. Thank you. My time is
expired. I will recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Swalwell.
Mr. Swalwell. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I appreciate your
comments about providing more certainty to our national
laboratories. And we know that it is not just the laboratories
who need the certainty but also private industry or any
contractors who depend on work from the laboratories.
One of the first lessons I learned when I was a planning
commissioner years ago on a local sign ordinance issue from a
local small business owner was vote for me, vote against me,
but just give me certainty and, you know, do not have, you
know, month-to-month sign regulations that give us no certainty
at all, which now I have learned here, as the Chair said,
month-to-month budgets also don't serve our laboratories well
or private industry well. And so I join you in hoping that we
can find ways to provide more certainty.
I was hoping to just go witness by witness briefly and if
you could just tell me for my own edification, and I am sure
many others are curious, what are the private/public
partnerships that you have at your laboratories through the
exascale program?
Dr. Giles. Well, let's see. I don't run a laboratory.
Mr. Swalwell. Sure.
Dr. Giles. But I would note things like you do run a lab
that does the INCITE program in ASCR that invites researchers
from outside DOE and from industry and with the particular
emphasis on some industries to use the most advanced facilities
that we have, so I think that would be one that I would
identify coming out of ASCR.
Mr. Swalwell. Great. And Dr. Stevens?
Dr. Stevens. Well, just a few that we have done in the
recent past. We have got a collaboration with Pratt & Whitney
developing more efficient turbine engines, with Procter &
Gamble on a variety of improving consumer products, with
Cummins in improving diesel engines, and Caterpillar improving
their ability to model whole vehicles and including the
transmission systems and so forth, with the Mayo Clinic in
applying computations and larger-scale problems in
metagenomics, and so on. There is a long list. Some of these
are collaborations with end-user companies and some are
collaborations with companies like IBM or with Intel and with
Cray in developing next-generation technologies, and we also
work with small businesses.
So the laboratories have collaborations on both the end-
user component of this technology and the company is developing
the technology itself.
Mr. Swalwell. And when I hear some of those companies, IBM,
Intel, Cummins, Caterpillar, I think of billions and billions
and billions of dollars of exports. Those are some of the
largest exporters in the United States, and if we are going to
truly achieve our goal of doubling our exports over the next
five years, making sure that those companies can continue to
play a part in reducing that trade deficit--we have about $40
billion every month--is crucial and it sounds like the
laboratories are helping them to do that so they can sell their
goods and services to the marketplace outside the United
States.
Dr. Stevens. Absolutely. And we are also working with
companies like Dow and DuPont and Johnson Controls. And it is a
long list, right? And I think we exactly get this idea of
helping American industry be more competitive.
Mr. Swalwell. Great. And Ms. Crawford?
Ms. Crawford. So rather than going through the long list,
let me talk about the barriers for industrial adaptation of
advanced computing. There have been a number of studies and
there are three main barriers. One is the cost of establishing
a supercomputing facility, the computer itself, the computing
room, et cetera. The second one is the expertise, you know,
having the skilled workforce that understands how to use these
computers in a meaningful way for their products. And then the
third is the software itself that helps them understand their
products and how to improve those products. So the kind of
partnerships that Dr. Stevens is talking about and that we have
in our laboratory are helping to demonstrate to industry how to
overcome those barriers so that they can in fact utilize this.
And once they have firsthand demonstration and know the value,
then they will start making the investments themselves at a
higher level to drive their own productivity and
competitiveness.
Mr. Swalwell. Great. And Dr. Reed, I mean also just like
Dr. Giles I know you do not run a laboratory but any public/
private partnerships you are familiar with that are working
right now and also helping the innovation economy?
Dr. Reed. Certainly. And I have been in similar roles in
the past. As I mentioned, I used to run an NSF supercomputer
center and we did very similar things in Illinois when I was
there. Advanced manufacturing was certainly a target, logistics
and supply chain optimization. But in Iowa now, there are many
issues around advanced biological modeling and how we think
about the future of healthcare in terms of everything from
modeling the characteristics of lungs and what the implications
are for drug delivery, how we might work with companies about
those issues.
I would echo what Ms. Crawford said, though. What is really
crucial in those engagements and use of high-performance
computing is simplicity of use because the domain experts are
interested in advancing either the technology or the science or
its applications and less interested in understanding what
those of us in the technology business might view as the really
cool stuff.
Mr. Swalwell. Right.
Dr. Reed. It is a means to an end and so those software
user interface issues are really important.
When I was at Microsoft, I spent a great deal of time
working with the community in science on exactly those issues.
How do we bring the power of advanced computing into small
companies and into individual's hands where, from their
perspective, the ease-of-use that they find familiar in their
mobile device or their PC extends seamlessly and apparently
magically to exploit those advanced capabilities?
Mr. Swalwell. Great. Well, thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
This has been a great hearing. You know, I didn't pay enough
attention to this stuff when I was in high school. I am
learning a heck of a lot now in Congress and I could sit here
for another few hours but I know our witnesses and our panel
have other places to be. But thank you again.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you. Thank you. And I do want to thank
each one of you for being here today on a very busy day on
Capitol Hill. And with that, I just want to thank you for your
valuable testimony and I want to thank the Members for the
questions that they have had. The Members of the Committee may
have additional questions, especially with competing hearings
that were going on at the same time, so we will ask if you
would be willing to respond in writing to questions that we
would submit.
And with that thought, we will keep the record open for two
weeks for additional comments and written questions from
Members and request for your response to those.
With that, I again want to thank you so much for your time
and for your wisdom and information today. With that, the
witnesses are excused and this hearing is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 11:20 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. Roscoe Giles
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.061

Responses by Dr. Rick Stevens
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.065

Responses by Ms. Dona Crawford
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.072

Responses by Dr. Daniel Reed
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81195.075


