- CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT: CHALLENGES AND SOLUTIONS

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
AND DEVELOPMENT:
CHALLENGES AND SOLUTIONS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY &
SUBCOMMITTEE ON RESEARCH

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 26, 2013

__________

Serial No. 113-6

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
79-926                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas, Chair
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 ZOE LOFGREN, California
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
Wisconsin                        DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             ERIC SWALWELL, California
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               DAN MAFFEI, New York
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   JOSEPH KENNEDY III, Massachusetts
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             SCOTT PETERS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               DEREK KILMER, Washington
STEVE STOCKMAN, Texas                AMI BERA, California
BILL POSEY, Florida                  ELIZABETH ESTY, Connecticut
CYNTHIA LUMMIS, Wyoming              MARC VEASEY, Texas
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona            JULIA BROWNLEY, California
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              MARK TAKANO, California
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota           VACANCY
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma
RANDY WEBER, Texas
CHRIS STEWART, Utah
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Technology

HON. THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky, Chair
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma            FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             SCOTT PETERS, California
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona            DEREK KILMER, Washington
EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas
------

Subcommittee on Research

HON. LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana, Chair
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   ZOE LOFGREN, California
STEVE STOCKMAN, Texas                AMI BERA, California
CYNTHIA LUMMIS, Wyoming              ELIZABETH ESTY, Connecticut
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma            EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas

C O N T E N T S

Tuesday, February 26, 2013

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Thomas Massie, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Technology, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
U.S. House of Representatives..................................     6
Written Statement............................................     6

Statement by Representative Lamar S. Smith, Chairman, Committee
on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................     7
Written Statement............................................     7

Statement by Representative Frederica S. Wilson, Ranking Minority
Member, Subcommittee on Technology, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........     9
Written Statement............................................    10

Statement by Representative Larry Bucshon, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Research, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives.......................................    11
Written Statement............................................    11

Statement by Representative Daniel Lipinski, Ranking Minority
Member, Subcommittee on Research, Committee on Science, Space,
and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..................    13
Written Statement............................................    15

Witnesses:

Mr. Michael Barrett, Chief Information Security Officer, PayPal,
Inc.
Oral Statement...............................................    17
Written Statement............................................    19

Dr. Frederick R. Chang, President and Chief Operating Officer,
21CT, Inc.
Oral Statement...............................................    34
Written Statement............................................    36

Ms. Terry Benzel, Deputy Director, Cyber Networks and Cyber
Security, USC Information Sciences Institute
Oral Statement...............................................    46
Written Statement............................................    48

Discussion.......................................................    62

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Mr. Michael Barrett, Chief Information Security Officer, PayPal,
Inc............................................................    80

Dr. Frederick R. Chang, President and Chief Operating Officer,
21CT, Inc......................................................    81

Ms. Terry Benzel, Deputy Director Cyber Networks and Cyber
Security, USC Information Sciences Institute...................    83

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Department of Homeland Security letter submitted by
Representative Frederica S. Wilson, Ranking Minority Member,
Subcommittee on Technology, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................    88

National Science Foundation letter submitted by Representative
Frederica S. Wilson, Ranking Minority Member, Subcommittee on
Technology, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives.......................................    91

CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT:
CHALLENGES AND SOLUTIONS

----------

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 26, 2013

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Research
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 10:01 a.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Thomas
Massie [Chairman of the Subcommittee on Technology] presiding.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.004

Chairman Massie. This joint hearing of the Subcommittee on
Technology and the Subcommittee on Research will come to order.
Good morning. Welcome to today's joint hearing entitled
``Cybersecurity Research and Development: Challenges and
Solutions.'' In front of you are packets containing the written
testimony, biographies, and truth-in-testimony disclosures for
today's witnesses. Before we get started, since this is a joint
hearing involving two Subcommittees, I want to explain how we
will operate procedurally so all Members will understand how
the question-and-answer period will be handled.
As always, we will alternate between the majority and
minority Members and allow all Members an opportunity for
questioning before recognizing a Member for a second round of
questions. We will recognize those Members present at the gavel
in order of seniority on the full Committee, and those coming
in after the gavel will be recognized in order of arrival. I
now recognize myself for five minutes for my opening statement.
We convene the first hearing of the Technology Subcommittee
and the 113th Congress held jointly with my colleagues on the
Research Subcommittee. This Subcommittee sits at the
intersection of technology and innovation and is uniquely
positioned to address topics affecting competitiveness of
emerging high-growth industries. I look forward to learning
from our witnesses today about cybersecurity research and
development challenges, and I look forward to working with my
colleagues to determine how we can eliminate barriers to
entrepreneurship in our country going forward. In these
difficult times, it is important that we continue to empower
our Nation's innovators to maintain our economic
competitiveness.
I now yield two minutes of my time to the Chairman of the
full Committee, Mr. Smith of Texas.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Massie follows:]

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee on Technology
Chairman Thomas Massie

We convene the first hearing of the Technology Subcommittee in the
113th Congress, held jointly with my colleagues on the Research
Subcommittee. This Subcommittee sits at the intersection of technology
and innovation, and is uniquely positioned to address topics affecting
competitiveness of emerging high-growth industries. I look forward to
learning from our witnesses today about cybersecurity research and
development challenges, and I look forward to working with my
colleagues to determine how we can eliminate barriers to
entrepreneurship in our country going forward. In these difficult
times, it is important that we continue to empower our nation's
innovators to maintain our economic competitiveness.
Chairman Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for yielding me
the balance of your time.
Mr. Chairman, the Preamble to the Constitution states that
one of the primary responsibilities of our Federal Government
is to provide for the common defense. More than 200 years
later, the meaning has changed but the task remains the same.
National defense in the digital age no longer just means
protecting ourselves with arms against enemies who attack with
traditional weapons. It now means protecting America from
enemies who launch cyber attacks against our computers and
networks.
Cyber attacks against U.S. Government and private sector
networks are on the rise. In the last few weeks, some of
America's largest companies have been hacked. Even the most
sophisticated companies can be vulnerable to cyber attacks.
Recent targets include Apple, Facebook, Yahoo!, the New York
Times, and the Wall Street Journal. Various agencies of the
Federal Government also have been the target of attacks and
attempted attacks. Unfortunately, evidence suggests that
foreign governments may be among those responsible.
Protecting America's cyber systems is critical to our
economic and national security. Americans deserve better
protection, and the Federal Government can help make sensitive
information more secure. This challenge requires a thorough and
comprehensive effort in both the public and private sectors.
Private companies are increasing their investment in
cybersecurity. Congress should support those efforts. Only
Congress can provide the incentives and protections that would
permit necessary information-sharing among companies, and more
importantly, between private companies and the Federal
Government.
Today's hearing examines an important step that we can take
to foster the kind of cooperation that this challenge requires.
The Cybersecurity Enhancement Act introduced by Committee
Members Michael McCaul and Daniel Lipinski coordinates research
and development activities to better address evolving cyber
threats. The legislation promotes much-needed research and
development to help create new technologies and standards that
better protect America's information technology systems.
Cyber attacks threaten our national and economic security.
To solve this problem, America needs a solution that involves a
cooperation of many public and private sector entities. The
McCaul/Lipinski legislation helps foster such an effort, which
will make our computer systems more secure.
I hope we can learn how to improve the bill today and
quickly advance it through this Committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the balance of your
time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smith follows:]

Prepared Statement of Committee Chairman Lamar S. Smith

The preamble to the Constitution states that one of the primary
responsibilities of our federal government is to ``provide for the
common defense.'' More than two hundred years later, the meaning has
changed but the task remains the same.
National defense in the digital age no longer just means protecting
ourselves with arms against enemies who attack with traditional
weapons. It now means protecting America from enemies who launch cyber
attacks against our computers and networks.
Cyber attacks against U.S. government and private sector networks
are on the rise. In the last few weeks, some of America's largest
companies have been hacked. Even the most sophisticated companies can
be vulnerable to cyber attacks. Recent targets include Apple, Facebook,
Yahoo! the New York Times and the Wall Street Journal.
Various agencies of the federal government also have been the
target of attacks and attempted attacks. Unfortunately, evidence
suggests that foreign governments may be among those responsible.
Protecting America's cyber systems is critical to our economic and
national security. Americans deserve better protection and the federal
government can help make sensitive information more secure.
This challenge requires a thorough and comprehensive effort in both
the public and private sectors. Private companies are increasing their
investment in cybersecurity. Congress should support those efforts.
Only Congress can provide the incentives and protections that would
permit necessary information sharing among companies, and more
importantly, between private companies and the federal government.
Today's hearing examines an important step that we can take to
foster the kind of cooperation that this challenge requires. The
Cybersecurity Enhancement Act, introduced by Committee Members Michael
McCaul and Daniel Lipinski, coordinates research and development
activities to better address evolving cyber threats. The legislation
promotes much-needed research and development to help create new
technologies and standards that better protect America's information
technology systems.
Cyber attacks threaten our national and economic security. To solve
this problem, America needs a solution that involves the cooperation of
many public and private sector entities. The McCaul-Lipinski
legislation helps foster such an effort, which will make our computer
systems more secure.
I hope we can learn how to improve the bill today and quickly
advance it through this Committee.
Chairman Massie. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes Ms.
Wilson for her opening statement.
Ms. Wilson. Thank you, Chairman Massie, for holding this
joint hearing on cybersecurity, and thank you to our witnesses
for being here today.
Before I begin, I would like to say that I am pleased to be
the new Ranking Member of the Technology Subcommittee. As a
longtime educator, principal, teacher, I am a big believer in
the power of scientific innovation. Mr. Chairman, I am looking
forward to working with you this Congress to help enable
innovation that creates jobs and makes our Nation more secure.
Today's hearing is a perfect example of the work this
Subcommittee can do to bolster national security. Cyber crimes
are ever increasing. In fact, the number of attacks reported by
federal agencies increased by 782 percent between 2006 and
2012. The threats to federal systems in our critical
infrastructure are not only growing in number but in the level
of sophistication. Over the last month alone, the New York
Times, the Wall Street Journal, the Washington Post, Twitter,
and Facebook have all confirmed that they have been the target
of sophisticated cyber attacks. These crimes may include
identity theft, intellectual property theft, service
disruptions, and even espionage.
We are beginning to suffer the cost of cybercrime. A recent
study found that cybercrime now costs a U.S. business 8.9
million on average per year. The problem is so pervasive that
security experts now joke that there are only two types of
American companies these days: those that have been hacked and
those that don't know they have been hacked.
Earlier this month, the President signed an Executive Order
that begins the process of strengthening our networks of
critical infrastructure against cyber attacks by increasing
information-sharing and establishing a framework for the
development of standards and best practices. But the President
also acknowledged that Congress must act to pass comprehensive
cybersecurity legislation.
The bipartisan legislation introduced by our colleagues,
Mr. McCaul and Mr. Lipinski, and under consideration today
should be a part of this comprehensive package. I am looking
forward to hearing any recommendations our witnesses might have
about how to improve the legislation.
Additionally, I hope to hear more from our witnesses about
their thoughts on the role the Executive Order outlines for
NIST. In the past, Congress has asked NIST to bring the private
sector together to accelerate the development of voluntary
standards. It seems appropriate that NIST be tasked with the
similar role in cybersecurity, especially in light of their
expertise in this field.
Finally, I would be remiss if I did not mention the
potential impact sequestration will have on our ability to
deter, defend, and recover from cyber attacks. In a letter to
Appropriations, the National Science Foundation indicated that
vital investments in research and development would be
jeopardized, and that one of the areas that could be impacted
by sequestration is research into advances in cybersecurity.
The Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology
Directorate plays a large role in the development and
deployment of cybersecurity technologies. The Directorate has
indicated that under sequestration, they will have to cut their
cybersecurity research by 30 percent, eliminating research and
data, privacy, identity management, cybersecurity forensics,
and security for cloud-based systems. The need to invest in
research and development is critical as cyber threats continue
to grow and involve. I hope we will not let sequestration delay
and derail these essential investments.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back the balance of my
time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Wilson follows:]

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee on Technology
Ranking Minority Member Frederica S. Wilson

Thank you, Chairman Massie for holding this joint hearing on
cybersecurity, and thank you to our witnesses for being here today.
Before I begin, I'd like to say that I am pleased to be the new Ranking
Member of the Technology Subcommittee. As a longtime educator, I am a
big believer in the power of scientific innovation. Mr. Chairman, I am
looking forward to working with you this Congress to help enable
innovation that creates jobs and makes our nation more secure.
Today's hearing is a perfect example of the work this Subcommittee
can do to bolster national security. Cyber crimes are ever-increasing.
In fact, the number of attacks reported by federal agencies increased
by 782 percent between 2006 and 2012. The threats to federal systems
and our critical infrastructure are not only growing in number, but in
the level of sophistication.
Over the last month alone, The New York Times, The Wall Street
Journal, The Washington Post, Twitter, and Facebook have all confirmed
that they have been the target of sophisticated cyber attacks. These
crimes may include identity theft, intellectual property theft, service
disruptions, and even espionage.
We're beginning to suffer the costs of cybercrime. A recent study
found that cybercrime now costs a U.S. business $8.9 million on average
per year. The problem is so pervasive that security experts now joke
that there are only two types of American companies these days: those
that have been hacked and those that don't know they've been hacked.
Earlier this month, the President signed an executive order that
begins the process of strengthening our networks and critical
infrastructure against cyber attack by increasing information sharing
and establishing a framework for the development of standards and best
practices. But the President also acknowledged that Congress must act
to pass comprehensive cybersecurity legislation.
The bipartisan legislation introduced by our colleagues Mr. McCaul
and Mr. Lipiniski, and under consideration today, should be part of
this comprehensive package. I am looking forward to hearing any
recommendations our witnesses might have about how to improve the
legislation. Additionally, I hope to hear more from our witnesses about
their thoughts on the role the executive order outlines for NIST. In
the past, Congress has asked NIST to bring the private sector together
to accelerate the development of voluntary standards. It seems
appropriate that NIST be tasked with a similar role in cybersecurity--
especially in light of their expertise in this field.
Finally, I'd be remiss if I did not mention the potential impact
sequestration will have on our ability to deter, defend, and recover
from cyber attacks. In a letter to appropriators, the National Science
Foundation indicated that ``vital investments in research and
development would be jeopardized'' and that one of the areas that could
be impacted by sequestration is research into advances in
cybersecurity.
The Department of Homeland Security's Science and Technology
Directorate plays a large role in the development and deployment of
cybersecurity technologies. The Directorate has indicated that under
sequestration they will have to cut their cybersecurity research by 30
percent, eliminating research in data privacy, identity management,
cybersecurity forensics, and security for cloud based systems.
The need to invest in research and development is critical as cyber
threats continue to grow and evolve. I hope we will not let
sequestration delay and derail these essential investments.
Chairman Massie. Thank you, Ms. Wilson. I look forward to
working with you as well on this Committee.
The Chair now recognizes the Chairman of the Subcommittee
on Research, Mr. Bucshon, for his opening statement.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And good morning to
everyone. I am pleased that we are holding a hearing today on
such an important topic.
According to a recent report published by the Government
Accountability Office, there were nearly 50,000 cybersecurity
incidents reported by federal agencies in 2012. Considering
that number was 5,500 in 2006, there is no doubt that
addressing cybersecurity needs is critical to global economic
competitiveness and national security interests of our Nation.
In December 2012, the Center for Applied Cybersecurity
Research at Indiana University held a roundtable on cyber
threats, objectives, and responses. This issue impacts everyone
from children using the Internet in their homes to government
and industry officials trying to ensure our domestic
infrastructure is protected from cyber terrorists.
During the Research Subcommittee hearing on February 14 on
Networking and Information Technology Research and Development,
or NITRD, witnesses testified about the cybersecurity threats
our Nation faces and emphasized that cooperation is required
for stakeholders to research and design ways in which to build
and maintain safer computer network infrastructures. The NITRD
program, which was the primary subject of that hearing, is the
coordinating body which the McCaul/Lipinski Cybersecurity
Enhancement Act appropriately utilizes to establish a strategic
plan for specific cybersecurity research.
I am encouraged that the legislation we are discussing
today enhances the education and development of information
technology professionals, including those who work in the areas
of computer systems, computer security, and cybersecurity.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses about their
experiences and their recommendations on addressing America's
cybersecurity challenges.
I now yield the balance of my time to Chairman McCaul.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bucshon follows:]

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee on Research Chairman Larry Bucshon

According to a recent report published by the Government
Accountability Office, there were nearly 50,000 cybersecurity incidents
reported by federal agencies in 2012. Considering that number was 5,500
in 2006, there is no doubt that addressing cybersecurity needs is
critical to global economic competitiveness and national security
interests of our nation.
In December of 2012, the Center for Applied Cybersecurity Research
at Indiana University held a ``Roundtable on Cyber Threats, Objectives,
and Responses.'' This issue impacts everyone: from children using the
Internet in their homes to government and industry officials trying to
ensure our domestic infrastructure is protected from cyber terrorists.
During the Research Subcommittee hearing on February 14 on
Networking and Information Technology Research and Development (NITRD),
witnesses testified about the cybersecurity threats our nation faces
and emphasized that cooperation is required for stakeholders to
research and design ways in which to build and maintain safer computer
network infrastructures. The NITRD program, which was the primary
subject of that hearing, is the coordinating body which the McCaul-
Lipinski Cybersecurity Enhancement Act appropriately utilizes to
establish a strategic plan for specific cyber security research.
I am encouraged that the legislation we are discussing today
enhances the education and development of information technology
professionals, including those who work in the areas of computer
systems, computer security, and cybersecurity.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses about their
experiences and their recommendations on addressing America's
cybersecurity challenges.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Chairman Bucshon.
I want to thank Chairman Massie, Chairman Smith, Ranking
Members Lipinski and Wilson for allowing me to introduce this
bill once again. Again, I believe this is the third time we
have introduced this. Hopefully, the third time is a charm and
we will get this important legislation passed. It passed
overwhelmingly in two Congresses. I do believe this is the
Congress where we will get cybersecurity legislation passed
through the House, the Senate, and signed by the White House.
It is imperative as we hear reports almost every day of
hackings taking place not only within the critical
infrastructures but within our Federal Government. The report
about the Chinese military hacking into our military systems,
stealing our military secrets, the attacks recently from Iran
against Aramco in the Persian Gulf and against our financial
institutions in the United States, and of course Russia, one of
the most sophisticated countries that continue to hack this
country on a daily basis.
Whether it is criminal, whether it is espionage, or whether
it cyber warfare, we cannot afford to wait any longer. The
White House has acted through an Executive Order. I think it is
imperative now that the Congress act and legislate as we are
supposed to be doing. It is not a question of if, but when the
next--or when a cyber Pearl Harbor will occur. And that is why
I have worked very closely with my good friend Congressman
Lipinski to bolster our Nation's cybersecurity research and
development.
On February the 15th, we introduced this bill once again,
H.R. 756, the Cybersecurity Enhancement Act, which is identical
to the legislation passed overwhelmingly by the House last
Congress. It improves the coordination in government providing
for a strategic plan to assess the cybersecurity risk and guide
the overall direction of the federal cyber research and
development. It updates--and this responsibility is to develop
security standards for Federal computer systems and processes
for agencies to follow.
Our bill also establishes a federal university private
sector task force to coordinate research and development,
improving the training of cybersecurity professionals, and
continues much-needed cybersecurity research and development
programs at the National Science Foundation and the National
Institute of Standards and Technology.
Again, I would like to thank my colleague Chairman Smith
for allowing me to introduce this bill once again. I appreciate
your support for this bill, my colleague from Texas. And I look
forward to working with my colleagues on this Committee to find
solutions to the challenges of cyber research and development.
And with that, I yield back.
Chairman Massie. Thank you, Mr.----
Mr. Bucshon. I yield back.
Chairman Massie. Okay. Thank you, Mr. McCaul. And thank
you, Mr. Bucshon.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Lipinski for his opening
statement.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Chairman Massie.
I want to thank you, Chairman Smith and Chairman Bucshon,
for holding this hearing to examine the serious cybersecurity
challenges faced by our Nation and what we can do to facilitate
solutions, including the Cybersecurity Enhancement Act that Mr.
McCaul said we recently reintroduced and I know that we have
passed this overwhelmingly in a Democratic House. In a
Republican House, hopefully, this time we can get it all the
way through because our country especially needs it as the
threats grow every year.
Now, I want to echo my colleague's remarks about the nature
and severity of the challenges we face in cybersecurity in both
the public and private sectors. Four years ago, when we began
working on this legislation, I said I had no doubt that our use
of the Internet and other communication networks would continue
to grow and evolve, and that threats from individual hackers,
criminal syndicates, and even other governments would grow and
evolve, too. Today, it remains difficult to imagine just how
much more we will simultaneously benefit from and be made more
vulnerable by information technology.
Hacking is no longer just a realm of computer whizzes.
Today, anyone can rent a botnet or gain access to other
sophisticated hacking tools with just a few keystrokes and less
than $100.
Cybercrime threatens our national security, our critical
infrastructure, businesses of all sizes, and every single
American. As such, reducing our risk and improving the security
of cyberspace will take the collective effort of both the
Federal Government and the private sector, as well as
scientists, engineers, and the general public.
With respect to that collective effort, I need to emphasize
the importance of research into the social and behavioral
aspects of cybersecurity. People are perhaps the most
significant part of our IT infrastructure, but they are also
the weakest link. Many cyber attacks are successful because of
human error, bad cyber hygiene such as unwittingly opening a
malicious email. Having the most sophisticated security systems
available won't make any difference if users don't change
factory sets of all passwords or if they set easy-to-crack
passwords. Understanding the human element and educating users
to practice good cyber hygiene is necessary to combating
threats and reducing risk.
Mr. McCaul and I are hopeful that our R&D bill will be part
of a comprehensive bipartisan cybersecurity bill. Previous
efforts to move a larger bill have stalled over some
significant policy disagreements, but I am hopeful that we will
be able to resolve our differences and I look forward to
working with both my colleagues and the Administration to
ensure the development of a strong cybersecurity strategy this
Congress.
However, I am also concerned that top-line cuts to our
federal R&D budgets will have a negative impact on any long-
term cybersecurity strategy. So we must also take actions to
mitigate the impact of those cuts.
Today, we will hear from witnesses who are actively engaged
in efforts to improve the security of our digital
infrastructure. I look forward to their valuable insights and
the challenges we face in tackling this complex issue and the
role of cybersecurity R&D and education in any comprehensive
solutions.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the balance of my
time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lipinski follows:]

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee on Research
Ranking Minority Member Daniel Lipinski

I want to thank both Chairman Massie and Chairman Bucshon for
holding this hearing to examine the serious cybersecurity challenges
faced by our nation. In particular, I look forward to hearing feedback
from our witnesses on H.R. 756, The Cybersecurity Enhancement Act, that
I recently reintroduced along with Mr. McCaul.
I echo my colleagues' remarks about the nature and severity of the
challenges we face in cybersecurity in both the public and private
sectors. Four years ago when I began working on this legislation I said
that I had no doubt that our use of the Internet and other
communication networks would continue to grow and evolve, and that
threats from individual hackers, criminal syndicates, and even other
governments would grow and evolve too.
Today it remains difficult to imagine just how much more we will
simultaneously benefit from, and be made more vulnerable by,
information technology. Hacking is no longer just the realm of computer
whizzes. Today, anyone can ``rent'' a botnet or gain access to other
sophisticated hacking tools with just a few key strokes and less than a
hundred dollars.
Cybercrime threatens our national security, our critical
infrastructure, businesses of all sizes, and every single American. As
such, reducing our risk and improving the security of cyberspace will
take the collective effort of both the Federal government and the
private sector, as well as scientists, engineers, and the general
public.
With respect to that collective effort, I need to emphasize the
importance of research into the social and behavioral aspects of
cybersecurity. People are perhaps the most significant part of our IT
infrastructure, but they are also the `weakest link.' Many cyber
attacks are successful because of human error--bad cyber hygiene--such
as unwittingly opening a malicious email. Having the most sophisticated
security systems available won't make any difference if users don't
change factory-set default passwords or they set easy to crack
passwords. Understanding the human element and educating users to
practice good cyber hygiene is necessary to combating threats and
reducing risk.
Mr. McCaul and I are hopeful that our R&D bill will be part of a
comprehensive, bipartisan cybersecurity bill. Previous efforts to move
a larger bill have stalled over some significant policy disagreements,
but I am hopeful that we will be able to resolve our differences and I
look forward to working with both my colleagues and the Administration
to ensure the development of a strong cybersecurity strategy this
Congress.
However, I am also concerned that top line cuts to our federal R&D
budgets will have a negative impact on any long-term cybersecurity
strategy. So we must also take actions to mitigate the impact of those
cuts.
Today, we will hear from witnesses who are actively engaged in
efforts to improve the security of our digital infrastructure. I look
forward to their valuable insight into the challenges we face in
tackling this complex issue and the role of cybersecurity R&D and
education in any comprehensive solution.
Chairman Massie. Thank you, Mr. Lipinski.
If there are Members who wish to submit additional opening
statements, your statements will be added to the record at this
point.
It is now time to introduce our panel of witnesses. I yield
to Ms. Lofgren of California, who will introduce our first
witness.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And
it is indeed an honor to introduce Michael Barrett, who is the
Chief Information Security Officer for PayPal, located in San
Jose, California. He is the, as I say, the Chief Information
Security Officer for PayPal, and in his role, he is responsible
for ensuring the security of PayPal's 113 million users
worldwide.
Prior to joining PayPal, he was Vice President of Security
and Utility Strategy at American Express, where he helped
defined the company's Information Security Program, and in
prior years, he was President of the Liberty Alliance, an Open
Standards Consortium focused on identity management standards
and guidelines. He was the driving force behind the
introduction and standardization of the Alliance's federated
identity concepts, and he also co-chaired its Identity Threat
Prevention Working Group.
He was twice named one of the 50 most powerful people in
networking by Network World magazine, and it is wonderful that
he is testifying today about our bill that focuses on NIST and
NSF, but I am also pleased that he has identified in his
testimony certain outdated statutes like EPCA, the Electronic
Communications Privacy Act, that have prevented anti-
cybercrime-related programs, which is also an important service
that he is performing for the Committee today.
So thank you for letting me introduce this important
witness who comes from back home.
And I yield back.
Chairman Massie. Thank you, Ms. Lofgren.
I recognize Chairman Smith to introduce our second witness.
Chairman Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman, our second witness, Dr. Frederick Chang, is a
President and Chief Operating Officer of 21CT. 21CT
appropriately is headquartered within Texas' 21st Congressional
District, which is home to Cyber City USA, otherwise known as
San Antonio, thanks in part to technology organizations like
Dr. Chang's.
Dr. Chang brings to us today with 30 years of public and
private sector cybersecurity knowledge serving as the Director
of Research at the National Security Agency and then in an
executive role at SBC Communications. Additionally, he has
served in academia at both the University of Texas in San
Antonio and the University of Texas in Austin. He received his
B.A. degree from the University of California San Diego and
both his M.A. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Oregon.
We welcome you, Dr. Chang.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Massie. Thank you, Chairman Smith.
Our final witness is Ms. Terry Benzel, the Deputy Director
of Cyber Networks and Cyber Security of the USC Information
Sciences Institute.
As our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is limited
to five minutes each after which Members of the Committee have
five minutes each to ask questions. Your written testimony will
be included in the record of this hearing.
I now recognize our first witness, Mr. Michael Barrett, for
five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. MICHAEL BARRETT,

CHIEF INFORMATION SECURITY OFFICER, PAYPAL, INC.

Mr. Barrett. Chairman Bucshon, Chairman Massie, Ranking
Member Lipinski, Ranking Member Wilson, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today
about what PayPal and the eBay Inc. family of companies are
doing to protect our users from the growing cybersecurity
challenges facing Internet-enabled companies and what our
Nation's policymakers can do to assist us in tackling these
problems.
My name is Michael Barrett and I am the Chief Information
Security Officer for PayPal. EBay and PayPal connects millions
of buyers and sellers across the globe through eBay
Marketplaces, PayPal, GSI, and other mobile-based businesses.
And we believe all sustainable 21st century retail business
models will use the Internet and mobile technology. However, as
the Internet and mobile platforms become more attractive to
consumers and businesses alike, they also attract criminals.
Companies like PayPal will continue to work to protect the
safety and security of our platform and our users.
However, we believe that the traditional technical measures
alone cannot significantly move the trend line and that there
are concrete steps that industry and policymakers should take
to significantly mitigate the impact of cybercrime. For
example, on a daily basis Internet companies are run into sites
where they have been compromised and they are used as
``phishing'' or ``spoof sites.''
Recognizing the growing threat, PayPal launched an industry
standards program called DMARC, which is intended to increase
trust and combat email deception and fraud. DMARC allows
senders to experience consistent authentication results for
their messages at AOL, Gmail, Hotmail, Yahoo!, and any other
email receiver implementing DMARC. The program removes the
guesswork from the receiver's handling of any failed messages,
limiting or eliminating the user's exposure to potentially
fraudulent and harmful messages. In its first year, DMARC
protected 60 percent of the world's email inboxes and rejected
hundreds of millions of potentially fraudulent messages.
In addition to email authentication, we have also been
engaged in efforts to create a reliable identity management
system. We have participated in two different programs: the
National Strategy for Trusted Identities in Cyberspace (NSTIC)
and the Fast Identity Online Alliance, or FIDO.
NSTIC is a White House initiative led by the National
Institute of Standards and Technology, which is intended to
work collaboratively with all interested stakeholders to
improve the privacy, security, and convenience of sensitive
online transactions. PayPal will be offering more services to
our customers over the coming months that directly support both
the NSTIC vision, which we expect will result in many new
benefits to both our customers and the Internet overall.
PayPal was also one of the cofounders of the FIDO Alliance,
which is intended to address the lack of interoperability among
strong authentication solutions, as well as the problems users
face with creating and remembering multiple usernames and
passwords. By giving the option to replace passwords with
authentication methods embedded in hardware, it can be used in
biometric tools such as fingerprint scanners, voice and facial
recognition, or more traditional security methods. Our goal is
to provide an easier and safer solution to every company,
vendor, and organization that needs to verify a user's
identity.
Although it is the responsibility of industry leaders like
PayPal to ensure the safety and security of our platforms and
our users, federal policymakers have an important role to play
in creating a secure Internet and mobile ecosystem. What we
have found from our years of combating cybercrime is that
quantifying the forecast is difficult, if not impossible,
because many incidents are not reported. Estimates of the
magnitude and scope of cybercrime vary widely, making it
difficult for policymakers and industry to fully understand the
problem and the level of effort that will be needed to combat
it.
We recommend that policymakers fund some research that
helps fill some of the information gaps that currently exist as
it relates to cybercrime. We believe that this research will be
a critical tool in arming policymakers, law enforcement, and
industry against the growing threat of cybercrime.
In addition, PayPal appreciates the bipartisan efforts of
the Committee to create a legislative framework that creates
innovative solutions to issues such as cybersecurity R&D,
education and workforce training, and standards development.
Importantly, it achieves these ends without creating undesired
side effects, and we welcome the opportunity to work with the
Committee on these priorities.
To conclude, it is our hope that in the years to come the
challenges we face today from cybercrime will be a faint
memory. But until then, PayPal is committed to partnering with
policymakers and private and public stakeholders to ensure that
everything we do in our power to create an ecosystem that is
safe and secure.
I appreciate the opportunity to testify before the
Committee and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Barrett follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.019

Chairman Massie. I now recognize our next witness, Dr.
Frederick Chang.

STATEMENT OF DR. FREDERICK R. CHANG,

PRESIDENT AND CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER, 21CT, INC.

Dr. Chang. Chairman Massie, Chairman Bucshon, Chairman
Smith, Ranking Member Wilson, Ranking Member Lipinski, Members
of the Subcommittees, thank you for the opportunity to testify
before you today on the hearing on the topic of cyber R&D
challenges and solutions.
My name is Frederick R. Chang and I am currently the
President and COO of 21CT, Inc., a small high-tech company in
Austin, Texas. In prior positions, I have served as the
Director of Research at the National Security Agency, in
academia at the University of Texas--at both the San Antonio
and Austin campuses, and in the telecommunications industry.
I would also mention that I have served as a member of the
CSIS Commission on Cybersecurity for the 44th Presidency, and I
am currently a member of the Texas Cybersecurity Education and
Economic Development Council.
I do not have to tell you that we are under attack in
cyberspace. Those of us in the field of security have known
about it for some time now, but now the problem has broadened
and deepened its scope. Our friends know, our neighbors know,
our kids know.
The field of cybersecurity is too reactive and after-the-
fact. We wait for something bad to happen and then we respond.
We lack the fundamental scientific understanding of causes, of
solutions, of countermeasures. Science uses words like
evidence, metrics, repeatability, predictability. In
cybersecurity these words are not used often enough. Indeed,
when it comes to predictability, about the only thing we can
predict with a high degree of confidence is that a determined
hacker will be able to compromise the target system.
At the turn of the 20th century, life expectancy in the
United States was a little over 47 years. A century later, it
was nearly 77 years. Why did this happen? A large part of the
improvement can be traced to advances in public health and an
improved understanding of the science of infectious diseases.
After World War II, scientists isolated causes and developed
solutions for diseases like polio, measles, and chickenpox. I
am not arguing that the cybersecurity problem today is as bad
as polio was in the '40s and '50s, but I am suggesting that we
know how to make a dent in the problem.
It won't be easy because the problem is truly a daunting
one against a highly adaptive adversary. I believe that a broad
and interdisciplinary approach will be necessary. I offered a
few ideas in my written testimony.
One of the major obstacles to more progress in
cybersecurity is a lack of qualified and well-trained
professionals in the field. Just as a generation of students
became fascinated by and intellectually curious about space,
science, and engineering after the launch of Sputnik, we need
for that to happen now for a new generation of students about
cyberspace science and engineering.
The skills gap comes up time and time again. It was a key
issue in our work on the CSIS Cybersecurity Commission co-
chaired by Congressman McCaul and Congressman Langevin, and it
was a key issue in our work on the Texas Cybersecurity Council.
And representing a small company with ongoing demand for
highly technical cyber hires, it is a constant challenge for us
to identify and recruit the necessary expertise. Not only do we
need a long-term pipeline of well-trained students to fill the
many jobs that will be necessary, but the demand is
particularly acute with respect to the requirement for the
extremely deep technical skills needed to operate at the very
highest levels.
In a CSIS Commission report from 2010, there was an
estimate that we have about 1,000 deeply technical people in
the United States who can operate at the most elite levels but
that we need something like 10,000 to 30,000. The report went
on to say we not only have a shortage of the highly technically
skilled people required to operate in support systems already
deployed, but also and even more desperate--a more desperate
charge of people who can design secure systems, write safe
computer code, and create the evermore sophisticated tools to
prevent, detect, mitigate, and reconstitute from damage due to
system failures and malicious acts.
The legislation in H.R. 2096 places front and center two of
the items I believe are central to making more progress in
improving the Nation's cybersecurity posture: research and
development and cybersecurity workforce development.
Let me close by saying that I have suggested some things in
my testimony that will take a long time to implement. For
example, producing a long-term, robust, and deeply technical
cybersecurity workforce or creating a science of cybersecurity
could take decades.
I am reminded of an old proverb. The best time to plant a
tree was 20 years ago. The second best time is now. It is my
sincere hope that 20 years from now we can look back at this
time and say that this is when we began to turn the tables on
our cyber adversaries and took the advantage back.
Thank you again for the opportunity to speak with you
today.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Chang follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.029

Chairman Massie. Thank you, Dr. Chang.
I now recognize our final witness, Ms. Terry Benzel.

STATEMENT OF MS. TERRY BENZEL,

DEPUTY DIRECTOR CYBER NETWORKS AND CYBER SECURITY,

USC INFORMATION SCIENCES INSTITUTE

Ms. Benzel. Thank you, Chairman Massie, Ranking Member
Wilson, Chairman Bucshon, Ranking Member Lipinski, and Members
of the Subcommittees. I am pleased to offer my perspective on
cyber R&D challenges and solutions based on 30 years in the
cybersecurity community.
I bring an interesting perspective stemming from Principal
at a startup company, Vice President at McAfee Software, and
now the Deputy Director of our Cyber Networks and Cyber
Security Division at the Information Sciences Institute, a
research lab with the University of Southern California's
Viterbi School where I direct the DETER project, a
cybersecurity research, experimentation, and test facility.
I would like to address four key points today: one, the
importance of broadening the purview of cybersecurity R&D; two,
the importance of research infrastructure for experimental
cybersecurity R&D; three, the importance of new models for
technology transfer from university research into commercial
practices and products; and four, the importance of higher
education for developing next-generation cybersecurity
researchers and technologies.
Let me start with the importance of broadening the purview
of cybersecurity R&D. All too often our research is narrowly
focused on single topics. For example, we have many people
conducting excellent research in distributed denial of service,
worms, botnets, and Internet routing, each studied individually
and deeply. But believe me, our adversaries are not looking
narrowly. In fact, they are looking at the combinations of
these different kinds of threats and vulnerabilities, as well
as combining that with cyber physical systems and social
engineering.
We can no longer afford to look narrowly at the hard
problems. Even more so, cybersecurity is no longer solely an
engineering discipline. We must involve economists,
sociologists, anthropologists, and other disciplines. While
there has been some progress in these areas by the National
Science Foundation, DHS S&T, and others, my first
recommendation is we must increase the breadth and scope of
strategic cyber R&D and increase opportunities for
multidisciplinary research.
Let me next address the need for research infrastructure
for cyber R&D. Historically, we have struggled to prove the
value of security technologies. Security is often viewed as the
absence of something bad happening. I didn't get broken into,
so I must be secure. When I was a Vice President at McAfee
Software, I visited large customers--banking, manufacturing,
and retail--and I was always asked about return on investment,
how much to spend and how best to leverage cybersecurity
investments. The truth is we had no easy answers except, of
course, to buy our products.
We need to be able to conduct science-based cyber
experimentation and tests just as in other scientific
disciplines, real hypothesis-based testing, what-if scenarios,
repeatable, demonstrable results. We provide this in the DHS-
and NSF-funded DETER project where we provide tools and
methodologies for researchers to live in the future creating
new capabilities not yet imaginable. We must as a Nation create
a paradigm shift in experimental cybersecurity. While NSF, DHS
S&T, DOE, and DARPA have all invested in cyber testbeds and
ranges, the results are uneven and not widely available.
And this brings me to my second recommendation. Formulate a
research strategy agenda to develop a broad multi-
organizational cybersecurity experimentation and testing
capability.
Let me now address technology transfer. We have had major
investments over the last 20 to 30 years, yet we are still
inadequately prepared. Much research fails to see the light of
day. While historically we have had insufficient awareness of
the complexity of cybersecurity tech transfer, we have had
scattershot approaches to cyber R&D, and a mismatch between
markets and threats. To address these growing demands, it is
imperative we create new models of technology transfer where
the government-funded efforts help steer strategic
cybersecurity R&D and their new university public partnerships.
As I have said already, we need to finally have education.
More than just training, we need to educate the next generation
of researchers and technologists and we need to do this by
offering hands-on exercises and educational opportunities.
Let me summarize. We are beginning to see progress in all
of these areas. NSF, DHS, and others deserve recognition for
the focus they have brought to strategic programs. However, the
current steps are not enough. We are lacking by orders of
magnitude. In order to shift the dynamic in the battlefield,
the Security Enhancement Act of 2013 includes provisions for
these recommendations. Taken together, the four recommendations
I have outlined today form a basis for multipronged,
sustainable, national projects to address R&D challenges, and I
urge you to take action now. Thank you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Benzel follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.043

Chairman Massie. Thank you, Ms. Benzel.
I thank all the witnesses for their testimony today.
Reminding Members that Committee rules limit questioning to
five minutes, the Chair will at this point open the round of
questions. And I now recognize myself for five minutes.
Mr. Barrett, as a representative of private industry, it
was good to hear you acknowledge that it is PayPal's
responsibility to ensure security for PayPal's customers. But
you alluded to some gaps in the research that exists and that
there might be a role for the Federal Government to fund
research in these gaps. Can you motivate the need for federal
funding in this area and then also talk about what some of
those gaps are?
Mr. Barrett. Yes, I alluded to this problem a little bit in
my oral testimony. Essentially, we have a problem at the moment
which is we actually don't know how bad the problem is. We--it
sounds perverse to say it that way, but essentially, there are
hugely disparate estimates that you see flying around in
various publications of the scale of the problem. Everybody
agrees it is getting worse, but I have three rhetorical
questions that I would like to ask and they are significant
ones. And actually, at the moment, I defy anybody to answer
them.
So again, I am purely talking about cybercrime, not cyber
terrorism or cyber warfare. So I work for a commercial
enterprise so we have a narrow worldview.
So the questions are these: how much money is lost to
cybercrime on an annual basis in the United States alone? And I
am not talking about how much money people like me spend on
running a defensive team. I am actually talking about dollars
that our customers--and therefore we--lose. So that is question
one.
Question two is where does it go? Is it all going back into
the United States or is it going overseas? And what are the
distributions of country? Now, various people in my industry
have various hypotheses about where it is going, and certainly,
my team has all sorts of interesting hypotheses. But
fundamentally, it is unsupported by large-scale data.
And then finally, do those countries actually have good
programs themselves to manage cybersecurity, and do they in
fact prosecute cyber criminals? Do they even recognize
cybercrime violations as being violations of law or are they
just oh, well? It is kind of the equivalent of doing some
antisocial act and there are no consequences.
We have no answers to those questions today and they are
really important ones that I think are at the heart of what the
Federal Government could do to help understand the problem
better.
Chairman Massie. Thank you.
My next question is for Ms. Benzel.
In this bill we are contemplating expanding funding at
universities which are typically open universities where
sharing is encouraged. And you mentioned the DeterLab at your
institution, which is funded by DHS and DOD I think. Can you
tell us or give us some level of comfort that we wouldn't be
funding efforts that could then be used by our adversaries?
Thank you.
Ms. Benzel. Being part of a major university and having a
deep faith in the need for education, we do run an open
facility. It is funded, as I said, by Department of Homeland
Security. And so the DeterLab is a national--and yes--it is an
international resource that is available for anyone to be able
to use. Obviously, we vet our users. Our approach within the
DETER system is to be looking at defenses. And defenses need to
be something that can be openly developed. Looking at security
by obscurity is sure to get us into trouble.
Now, having said that, I am being a deep believer in being
able to educate our next generation and to do publications, et
cetera, there are opportunities to do research in other
environments which might be more closed and might be providing
some classified support for. But we advocate an openness in
educating the next generation. Thank you.
Chairman Massie. Thank you very much. DeterLab makes a lot
more sense than DeterLab.
Ms. Benzel. We do try and deter the attackers as we say.
Thank you.
Chairman Massie. Okay. I now recognize Ranking Member Ms.
Wilson for five minutes.
Ms. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, as
outlined in my opening statement, a few of the agencies within
our Committee's jurisdiction have indicated that sequestration
could impact their cybersecurity research and development
portfolios. I would like to place two letters in the record,
one from NSF and one from DHS, detailing those potential
impacts.
To all, in his testimony, Dr. Chang recommends that the
legislation raise the trajectory of cybersecurity research and
development spending from its historical levels because it
would create long-term benefits in our effort to improve the
Nation's cybersecurity posture. As you are all likely aware,
sequestration is set to take effect on Friday. Sequestration
will cut federal R&D budgets by 8.2 percent, and agencies like
NSF and DHS have indicated that research in cybersecurity may
be affected.
How would the security posture of the United States be
impacted if sequestration were to take effect and cybersecurity
research and development was significantly cut? Dr. Chang?
Dr. Chang. In the 2010 CSIS report, we reported a number of
about 2/10 of one percent of the federal R&D budget was spent
on cybersecurity. And I looked recently. That number is just a
little bit larger now. If you think about the priorities that
the Nation is now placing on cybersecurity, the fact that it is
something less than one percent seems to be a small number. It
is not for me to determine what the priorities are but that
just strikes me as a sort of a low number.
I guess I am suggesting that it needs to be a long-term
prospect. I mentioned this analogy with planting trees. I am
suggesting that we need to plant a few trees to place some bets
on some research issues that are going to build over time.
Research certainly won't guarantee answers, but as I mentioned
as related to infectious diseases, we need to understand
causes. We need to understand solutions. We need to understand
countermeasures. We know how to do it. We have done it before.
We have gone after large public programs before. And my
suggestion is research is required to make some long-term bets
and begin changing the vector on what the defensive posture
looks like.
Ms. Wilson. Ms. Benzel?
Ms. Benzel. Yes, I think that we have begun to see some
progress in the funding, of course, at a very small level as
Dr. Chang says in being strategic about our cybersecurity R&D.
If we are to slow that down as a result of funding cuts with
sequestration, then we have set ourselves back. We are already
on the losing end of an asymmetric battle. And giving our
adversaries another year to gain a leg up while we fight our
own internal budget is only going to make the situation much
worse.
You know, as it is with funding cycles with places like the
National Science Foundation it takes close to a year from the
time I, as a researcher, have an idea, submit that idea, and
get a contract. And so again introducing another delay as a
result of the budget battles is only going to set us back. And
in particular, a point in time when these agencies have become
much more strategic, better coordinated, and better focused in
their research. We have researchers in the pipeline. We have
projects that are happening today, and we can't afford to stop
them, slow them down, or lessen and weaken their effects while
the adversaries are on a dramatic increase as we have seen
recently.
The change that we see in the adversarial landscape in the
last year is ten times what we saw in the ten years before. And
so any gap in funding is going to be extremely detrimental.
Thank you.
Ms. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Massie. On the gentlelady's request to include two
letters in the record?
Ms. Wilson. I have them.
Chairman Massie. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears in Appendix II]
Chairman Massie. I now recognize Chairman Bucshon for five
minutes.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And there has been some emphasis on the importance of
social science research and cybersecurity, among other areas,
partly because so much security has to do with human behavior.
And the Cybersecurity Enhancement Act supports this type of
work in Section 104 of the legislation.
The question is--I will direct this to Mr. Barrett first--
is--let me say a couple of things that have been funded
recently--$1.2 million to pay seniors to play video games,
$764,825 to study how college students use mobile devices for
social networking. So with these type of things being funded,
how should we prioritize social science research conducted by
the National Science Foundation to ensure that such work is
focused on critical national needs such as cybersecurity?
Mr. Barrett. I am not sure whether it is necessarily proper
for me to have an opinion on how Congress should prioritize the
work of the National Science Foundation, but I do think there
are key research gaps, and certainly, in a number of areas in
part about cybersecurity education, which is woefully lacking
across the spectrum from young kids up through college-level
curricula and various different levels. As Dr. Chang alluded
earlier, we don't frankly have enough information security
professionals in the field. There is essentially a major skills
shortage there. There was basically zero unemployment in my
field throughout the recession. And that in its own right is
saying something.
Very clearly, there is a lot of work that can be done in
understanding behavior around how people interact with
computers from a security perspective. And that certainly is a
topic worthy of research. Because if you don't understand how
people use the computers, especially for security tasks, then
it is very hard to see what you can do with them. But I
should----
Mr. Bucshon. Yes, thank you very much. And again, the
Cybersecurity Enhancement Act supports this type of work.
Dr. Chang, do you have anything to add?
Dr. Chang. I do. Thank you. I mention in my written
testimony that cybersecurity is a wicked problem, wicked not
meaning evil but wicked being resilient to solution. A
characteristic of the wicked problem is that what you believe
is a solution may actually make things worse. As it relates to
that kind of the human component, I am reminded of a concept
known as risk homeostasis, and that is basically the idea that
people have sort of a risk level that they generally operate
at, and if they believe that something is now more safe, they
will actually act riskier.
There are some classic experiments showing that when taxi
drivers are given better safety on their taxicabs, let us say
antilock brakes, you would think that the incidents of
accidents would actually go down because the cars are safer,
you can steer better and stuff at high speeds. It turns out
that the level of accidents might actually go up a little bit
because the taxi driver started thinking they were safe and
started driving faster and causing more accidents.
Same thing might be happening in cybersecurity such that
you are actually making--you are telling the user that they are
actually now more safe. When they think now I am more safe, and
now I am going to start doing riskier things. And so it is just
a sort of very complex thing where you have the best intention
that a solution is making something better but it actually
makes it worse.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you. And this will be directed at Ms.
Benzel. I am a parent. I have kids. And I know how my kids
almost shut down one of my computers, essentially a black
screen. I had to get a computer guy to come out and get it
back, and there were literally hundreds of viruses and Trojans
and everything else. So I mean I am amazed at what children can
do on a computer. And however, there are threats that are
directed at all of us through children. Does the current
parental control technology adequately protect minors against
this type of threat if used properly or are there areas of
research and developmental efforts to address this?
Ms. Benzel. Yes, I would have to say I am not a particular
expert in the current set of parental control technology that
is out there. I believe that looking at how we model the human
behavior and understanding, as Dr. Chang said, the relationship
between the way people use their computers. And I am just as
concerned about our children as we are to the seniors or the
uneducated users. And so I believe that we do need to advance
that technology, but I would have to get back to you on the
state-of-the-art in the current parental technology.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Massie. Thank you. I now recognize Mr. Lipinski
for five minutes.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As many people here know, I am a--used to be--maybe I still
am--a political scientist, and I know that there is--I have
seen plenty of bad social science research in my time. But I
think it is important--and I am not trying to start a fight
here on this but I know that the--I pay attention--I look to
see what is going on and what is being said about some of the
supposedly bad research that is being funded. And my
understanding is--was the $1.2 million videogame claim was
given a pants-on-fire by PolitiFact because it was helping to
study how to keep seniors sharp and keep their cognitive skills
up as they are getting older.
But that said, I mean there is some bad research but we
need to be doing good research. Obviously, there are--as all of
you have pointed out--social science research and how people
interact is key because it is one of the weakest links that we
have right now in cybersecurity.
I wanted to ask about technology transfer. Ms. Benzel had
mentioned barrier technology transfer in your testimony. I have
a great deal of interest in this, particularly in areas like
cybersecurity. It is vital that we translate as much federal
research as possible to new products and new companies that we
can help keep our cyber infrastructure secure, and also it has
the added benefit of creating new jobs so long as we can also
address the workforce and education issues that our witnesses
have raised.
But I just want to ask the panel, what steps can Federal
Government take the best partner with industry in encouraging
technology transfer in the cybersecurity sector? Ms. Benzel?
Ms. Benzel. Yes, thank you very much for your question. It
is an important area.
So we do need Federal Government to help us fill the gap
between the university research and industry. And I think I can
speak somewhat authoritatively to that having spent much time
in a university, as well as being a Vice President of Research
at McAfee. We have all heard about the Valley of Death.
So we really do have some models that are broken between
expecting that industry can just pick up and take research
prototypes that have been developed in a university kind of
setting. So we need strategic funding which pushes us in a
particular direction with an awareness. The DHS S&T program run
by Dr. Doug Maughan has introduced new efforts to work with VCs
to its signet organization to be able to get venture
capitalists and to have the researchers be aware of technology
transfer from the day that they write their proposals.
The National Science Foundation had introduced its
Transition to Practice. I am arguing that we need a lot more of
these sorts of things where we have very early-on awareness of
where we want to go. And as a researcher, we want to do the
fundamental basic research, and that is absolutely necessary.
But as researchers, we also want to see our work have an
impact. And we need help in working with the different types of
organizations. And that is where we call for, as the bill
currently does, industry partnerships with venture capitalists,
with different kinds of technology organizations. There is
really nothing currently in that middle to help fill the gap
between the research dollars and the product dollars. And I
have to say, unfortunately, it is not realistic to believe that
industry can simply pick up and do it. Industry is focused on
its near-term market, next quarter features, and are totally
market-driven and sales driven, particularly in today's
economy. And so we need some bridging dollars which should come
from combinations of university, public/private partnerships,
and federal funding in that new area.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Lipinski. Dr. Chang, do you want to add something?
Dr. Chang. Sure. I will just support what Terry mentioned.
There is this model I like to use: technology transfer is a
contact sport. So it is not uncommon for the private sector to
establish sort of I guess what you might call lab-lets or sort
of mini-labs with the university. And the folks in the private
sector would work sort of shoulder-to-shoulder with the folks
at the university such that when an innovation is developed, it
isn't sort of tossed over the cubicle wall and you would like
for the private sector company to incorporate it. But rather,
they are generated together.
To the extent that this kind of notion, of kind of, working
hand-in-hand between the government, between the private sector
and academia would be representative of this notion of let us
develop the technologies together. Technology transfer is a
contact sport. Let us have them work together. I think that is
a useful concept here.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you.
A quick question. Mr. Barrett mentioned NSTIC. I just want
to know when will we be able to do--instead of having
passwords, have a thumbprint that we use to identify ourselves?
Chairman Massie. Very quickly, please.
Mr. Barrett. Yes, we are actually working on that. That is
the FIDO Alliance work that I mentioned at the beginning, which
is trying to develop open standards to actually make those kind
of technologies become much more widely used. And I think you
will actually see products deployed in the market before the
end of the year that do exactly that.
Chairman Massie. Thank you.
I now recognize Mr. Hultgren.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you all for being
here. I appreciate it very much.
This would be first addressed to all of you. My
understanding is this growing mass of data that is available
online certainly has implications for cybersecurity. In some
ways, I know the data can be analyzed to help identify
potential cyber threats, but I also know in another way the
data provides bad actors with additional opportunities to
exploit that data.
I wonder can you discuss how the emerging big data
phenomenon poses both challenges and opportunities for
cybersecurity research and development, and also just any
recommendations you might have for policymakers to address this
phenomenon in a beneficial way and not a harmful way?
Dr. Chang. Sure. I guess I will kind of mention the notion
of dual use. So many of the cyber technologies are so-called
dual use. So my company, 21CT, Inc., basically has capabilities
to analyze big data to sort of find suspicious behaviors in an
attempt to improve the defensive posture of somebody's network.
At the same time, an adversary could use similar technologies
to sort of target folks similarly to look for vulnerabilities
and so forth.
So it is always kind of a really important kind of
balancing act and kind of risk assessment proposition such that
you will always know that the technologies that could be used
for defense could potentially be flipped over. So it is
important to kind of understand both sides, understand the
technologies deep enough and then make sure you sort of come to
the right balance point.
Ms. Benzel. Well, as a researcher I find big data to be
very exciting. From the research point of view and networking
and network cybersecurity, we have always been lacking in data.
And so again, DHS has its PREDICT program and some of the
researchers in my organization have done some really
groundbreaking work at analyzing the data, mapping the
Internet, the first Internet census to give us information both
about the known spaces and the dark spaces.
Clearly, in all of our research, there are two sides to it
and we need to be very understanding about how things could be
used against us.
I say the other point to also bring in to this discussion
about big data are issues with privacy. And so as citizens, we
need to understand how the data is being used, stored, and
moved about in transit.
Mr. Hultgren. Mr. Barrett, before you answer, I would love
to hear your thoughts on this as well, but I have one other
additional question I would like to ask you so if maybe you can
respond to both. We already talked a little bit about
authentication--online authentication and the challenges there.
I understand many European governments issue voluntary
electronic identification cards combining two unique
identifiers to serve as a type of online passport. But for
various reasons, I believe the United States is unlikely to
endorse any sort of government-sanctioned identification
mechanism. I understand businesses have been working for years
on providing different online identity schemes to consumers and
that the Administration's National Strategy for Trusted
Identities in Cyberspace, or NSTIC, intend to use that work to
find common standards for online identities.
I wondered in your view should the government be involved
at all in this process? If so, is NIST the appropriate agency
to coordinate the effort? How do we ensure privacy? And what
prevents this effort from eventually resulting in regulations
that inhibit innovation?
Mr. Barrett. So we have been enthusiastic supporters of the
NSTIC initiative ever since it was first proposed. Simply
because, as Congresswoman Lofgren said when she introduced me,
a decade ago I chaired the Liberty Alliance, which is an open
standards organization in the identity management space. It has
actually proven quite difficult to develop really large-scale
identity ecosystems on the Internet.
We show a lot of promise for users, and so tying that back
to the question about breaches in big data, the silver lining
in the cloud of all of the data that has been published in last
few years essentially as a byproduct of criminal activities is
that we now actually understand how consumers in large-scale
use passwords in particular. And the answer is a depressingly
large number of them, something like 2/3 of them, use the same
password absolutely everywhere they go on the Internet, with a
net effect that their security of every single account they
possess is now the security of that least secure place they
visited.
And so having an ecosystem that is built around consumers
managing their own identity online and allowing the Federal
Government to help kind of just appropriately nudge that but
not place too constricting a role is very important. And that
is actually why a guy on my team was the first Co-Chair of the
Identity Ecosystem Steering Group so--
Mr. Hultgren. My time is expired. Thank you all very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Massie. Thank you.
I now recognize Mr. Bera.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As an academic physician who comes out of a research
background, I truly appreciate the analogy with healthcare and
what we do in medicine and the importance of doing research in
our academic and research universities. The fact that we do a
lot of experiments, that we look for solutions and we fail a
lot, but we are constantly feeding that back into the system.
And then we have that major breakthrough. Where we fall down in
the academic centers--and Ms. Benzel touched on it--is we don't
know how to then take those ideas to market.
You touched on the issue of technology transfer and how
important that is. I am a firm believer that we would not be
able to do the research that we do without the Federal
Government's funding of our academic centers. But we do need to
do a better job with technology transfer.
What would your suggestion be as a best practice model of
taking idea to market given that you have worked on both sides
of this?
Ms. Benzel. Well, thank you very much. You know, I agree
with Dr. Chang. It is a contact sport. We can't do the wait-
until-the-end-and-throw-it-over. And so I think the best
practice model is early engagement. Engage early and often. So
they say encouraging the fundamental research funding
organizations to call out for tech transfer from day one from
the time you write your proposal and come up with your idea,
opportunities for communications and meetings with a variety of
industry partners, opportunities to understand the needs that
are out there and to work with different kinds of funding
models both with things such as venture capital organizations
who might be willing to take some of the risk in early
technology and also on the university side.
So at the University of Southern California we have the
Stevens Institute that works with our researchers early on. So
early and often. Thank you.
Mr. Bera. Absolutely.
Now, also as a former Associate Dean out of University of
California Medical School, we focus a lot on the workforce
issue recruiting the best and the brightest and then retaining
those individuals. You know, on the issue of cybersecurity, on
the issue of making sure we have the computer science
professionals, we don't have enough engineers in this country
and we are not graduating enough engineering students or
programmers. In other sectors of IT we are certainly trying to
get that workforce from abroad. But on the issue of
cybersecurity, we need a homegrown workforce because this--
these are issues that are critical to national security.
Dr. Chang, you touched on this a bit. What are some models
that we can use to continue to recruit and retain the best and
the brightest to go into areas of information technology and
then go into both the service sector working for the Federal
Government, working for our Department of Defense and
Department of Homeland Security? Because they can make 10 times
as much going off into the private sector but we need some of
the best and the brightest working to protect our country.
Dr. Chang. I was recently in a meeting with some folks in
Austin where we talked about a very sort of broad approach that
would incorporate trying to recruit students of many ages in
many disciplines. There is a program that has recently started
in New Jersey. It is referred to as Cybersecurity Centers, and
they basically have these kind of initial competitions that
begin attracting people from all walks of life, maybe former
military. There are 16 roles, just a whole group of folks. And
then depending on how they do in that initial competition--and
it is a fun competition. It sort of capitalizes on people's
interest in just competing and sort of a person-on-person
competition. And then depending on how you do with that, the
people who are more skillful sort of move on.
But it is this notion of can we come up with ideas that
attract many, many people, and then if they have a particular
propensity to kind of move forward, then you can kind of winnow
them down. I mentioned that there was this need for extremely
technical deeply elite people. But you have to have a broad
funnel to kind of bring them in and then a way to successfully
kind of pull out the people who operate the highest levels.
Mr. Bera. Wonderful. So playing off of what you just
mentioned, I would ask our Committee to look at returning
veterans, men and women who have already shown their patriotism
to this country, already understand the service to our Country
and the immediate need to protect ourselves and looking for
strategic ways to get those folks engaged through our modern GI
Bill and so forth to get these skills.
I yield back.
Chairman Massie. Thank you.
I recognize Mr. Schweikert.
Mr. Schweikert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Barrett, first off, you have a bunch of PayPal folks in
Scottsdale, don't you? Yes, it is--when I am in-district, I
seem to start every morning having coffee with them. We all
attend the same Starbucks. As a company, you have been trying
to roll out a number of different products, you know, cell
phone billfolds or some of those types of mechanics. When we
are talking about cybersecurity, how much is the threat on this
site slowing down your adoption and introduction of new
products?
Mr. Barrett. That is a really interesting question. It is
hard to measure. There is certainly good evidence that
consumers have been worried about security aspects of Internet
solutions ever since the beginning of the Internet. And there
is certainly some evidence that they care in the same way about
mobile solutions, for example, and that they want to see that
they are appropriately protected in those areas.
The difficulty, of course, is in saying how much does the
apparent lack of those features really impact their adoption?
And so, for example, if you see a--one solution that has a lot
of barriers to it, in terms of it is hard to use and has a lot
of security features; but on the other hand, you have another
very similar product that was much easier to use because it
didn't have all these apparent security things that you have to
do. Whether or not the consumers actually believe that, the one
with the more security features is actually safer. And that
ties back to the initial research we were talking about a
little while ago.
Mr. Schweikert. Well, Mr. Barrett, some of that is the
adoption side. I am interested on your engineering side. Is it
a suppressing effect to the design, you know, studio you would
have on the introduction of new technologies?
Mr. Barrett. If I am understanding the question correctly,
it would depend on how much overhead we impose on the
engineering teams in terms of how much we try to partition them
and so forth. So, if we were working on confidential projects,
then clearly we will partition those off as well as, yes, we do
impose a number of security overheads as we develop those
applications. But it is a--it has lots of tentacles in terms
of----
Mr. Schweikert. It is just having a fixation on expansion,
economic growth, and new technology. I have always wondered how
much of a suppressing effect I have over here.
Mr. Chairman, Ms.--is it Benzel?
Do you agree with Mr. Barrett's earlier comments that we--
it is hard to have a quality census of how many bad actors, bad
events, bad things that are actually going on in the cyber
marketplace?
Ms. Benzel. Well, most absolutely. I thought his questions
were very astute and exactly right on. So----
Mr. Schweikert. So as a Member of Congress, where would you
send me if I really wanted to get from your academic, sort of,
view of the world as much data saying, look, here is what the
best census we have of banking attacks and this type of
attacks? Or where would you go?
Ms. Benzel. I think that is a very hard question. I mean,
clearly, some of our intelligence agencies on the dark side
have a good census of some of the levels of attacks that are
happening, particularly in nation-state and against nation
targets. The different industries tend to keep those things
pretty closely held. Now, some of the work that has been done
in the past to set up the Information-Sharing and Analysis
Centers, the ISACs, are places where that knowledge is known
but held close to the chest.
Mr. Schweikert. Okay. And so right now, you are not sure
there is a good collection of the census, shall we say?
Ms. Benzel. Oh, I don't believe so.
Mr. Schweikert. Okay. Mr. Chairman, Dr. Chang--and sorry, I
am down to just a few, but you actually started to touch on
something that I would love to have an extended discussion with
you. And that is, how do we finance ourselves right now? Right
now, we are sort of in a classic academic sort of model of
finance, primary research. And hopefully, there is something
that comes out of it.
But what you were describing a little while ago in your
experience sounds more like almost the X-prize-type mechanic of
bringing people together, whether it be a garage engineer or an
academic. And the person that produces something great gets to
move forward. Do you think it is time we also start to wedge
and design some other ways to finance innovation here?
Dr. Chang. I will answer that in--maybe in kind of in
connection with the question you asked to Mr. Barrett.
Basically, security today is not where it needs to be, and
fundamentally, somebody is going to have to pay to move
security up. It will be the government because they have to
prosecute more criminals. It will be software companies because
they have to make software more secure. It will be people
because people are bearing losses.
So overall I would love to have a longer conversation.
Mr. Schweikert. Mr. Chairman, thank you for your patience.
Sorry.
Chairman Massie. Thank you. If Dr. Chang would like to
respond in writing for the record, that would be fine.
I now recognize Ms. Esty. Oh, I am sorry. Mr. Peters.
Sorry.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I appreciate the chance to be here today. This is an
important industry in my district as well in San Diego, both
because we are developing a lot of the software and also
because the Navy has a lot of--or the military has a lot of
interest in the field.
And Dr. Chang, I am glad you are a UCSD grad, too. I
appreciate that.
My question is sort of, you know, we know that--I think it
was yesterday that the Global Information Security Workforce
Study from Booz Allen Hamilton said that 56 percent of
cybersecurity professionals feel that security organizations
are short-staffed and that the cybersecurity field is projected
to grow 11 percent annually over the next five years. And so
there is--I think it is widely understood that there is a gap
in the workforce. But what I am sort of interested in is what
are the--what is the field of cybersecurity from an academic
sense? You described it as an interdisciplinary exercise. We
know it is not just computer science or software. But if you
were trying to certify someone in cybersecurity, kind of--do
you have a sense--maybe you can help me understand what it is
that that person would need to know. And that is for anyone.
Dr. Chang. Sure. I can start. So there are the traditional
disciplines that you learn in computer science about
programming, about algorithms, about discrete math and so
forth. You would add some elements to that in order to focus
more specifically in cybersecurity. And so you would add more
about networking, perhaps more about analysis. There is this
interesting conversation happening at universities now where
they talk about--that there is a classic computer science major
and that maybe there ought to be a cybersecurity major as well.
So there are many things in common but it is different
enough such that it is worth an interesting dialogue about the
extent that there is the creation of a specific major in
cybersecurity.
Mr. Peters. Well, I guess I think it would be helpful for
us because the intent of the legislation before us is to kind
of secure our future in that. But if we don't know kind of what
we are educating--if you don't understand--if you don't have a
sense or a consensus about what it is we are seeking to educate
people in, we are going to--I think we face some of the
concerns that we are not going to be or that the money is going
to be bleeding, or we are not going to be effective?
So if it is anthropology or if it is law in addition to
these technical things, is there a way to land that plane?
Ms. Benzel. So first off, I think you need to make a
distinction between education and training. So many of the
training organizations and CISSP certifications, that is one
level of something that is about operations and being able to
run things.
And then there is the education challenge in terms of
creating new researchers and new educators and Ph.D.'s. I think
that we are just as a community--as Dr. Chang said--beginning
to put forth master's curriculums in cybersecurity. USC is just
about to introduce one starting next fall. And really, there
are different fields. So cybersecurity is not one narrow field.
So there are cybersecurity researchers in defenses, in active
security, in mathematical analysis, in networking. And so even
in a master's degree, there will be specializations in these
different areas drawing from primarily a computer science
curriculum but also some engineering, some systems kind of
work, networking, and then bringing in an understanding of
human behavior.
Mr. Peters. I guess there is going to be some sense we are
going to have to keep adjusting as we go.
Ms. Benzel. That is right. There is not one answer that
fits all.
Mr. Peters. Mr. Barrett, maybe quickly, you might touch on
the first of your rhetorical questions which is how much money
are we losing? Do you have a sense of how we go about answering
that question?
Mr. Barrett. I believe the answer is we need to put in
place more detailed reporting frameworks in order to actually
ascertain the scope of the problem. Because the estimates range
all over the place, I mean as low as a few billion up into the
trillion range. My own personal view is it is probably in the
tens of billions of range. But that would be hard to----
Mr. Peters. That would be something that would be done by
industry presumably. Is that right?
Mr. Barrett. I believe so, yes.
Mr. Peters. Okay.
Mr. Barrett. It certainly could be done. A reporting
framework could be developed, but at the moment, what we have
is entirely voluntary and it models how much money is lost with
how much the company spends on defenses, and those two numbers
are quite different as well. And how much do you turn away?
Mr. Peters. Again, I very much appreciate your being here.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Massie. Thank you.
I want to recognize Ms. Esty--Etsy.
Ms. Esty. Esty, not the crafting website. Although I would
be much wealthier if it were mine.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
For Dr. Chang and Ms. Benzel, both of you had talked about
the need to create a science of cybersecurity. And if you can
elaborate a little bit on that, what are the metrics we would
need? If we don't know right now if a company is more secure
than it was a month ago, where do we even start with this? What
sort of research do we need? What sort of metrics do we need to
develop so that we even know what we are talking about?
Dr. Chang. Well, that is one of the key issues. We actually
don't have the right language, the right set of metrics to even
begin to understand this notion of whether my--the computer
this year is more secure than it was last year, if this
computer is more secure than somebody else's.
There is kind of this idea of understanding the limits of
what is possible. So that is what a science allows you to do.
Can I understand how secure something can be? We sort of don't
know, kind of what is possible, you know, what are kind of the
control bounds. Cybersecurity is an adversarial science. And
like anything adversarial, we will probably never completely
eliminate it. But if we can establish some sort of control bars
that basically say we are going to make it harder for an
adversary to kind of get through and maybe the difficulty that
their--you know, if we make it too hard for them to get
through, then, they will quit trying. But it is this motion of
kind of setting some control bars and trying to keep it within
that. We certainly won't eliminate crime.
Ms. Benzel. So we advocate being able to do experimental
science. So in many other sciences we have workbenches and labs
and we can go in and we can also repeat our peers' experiments
and be able to understand what they are. Unfortunately, in
computer science and in--particularly in cybersecurity, the
experiments are very ad hoc. And so it might work once or it
might work in my lab or in my example.
This is one of the challenges also in technology transfer.
It may have worked in some researcher's lab under some
conditions, but I don't know that it is really going to work.
So what we really advocate is that we need an experimental
science where we can create hypotheses, we can do an
experiment, see the results, modify some parameters, rerun the
experiment. And my colleagues similarly have an opportunity to
do that just as they would in any of the hard sciences.
Ms. Esty. Are there any of the federal agencies that are
actually doing work on this notion of the metrics that we would
even use to measure?
Dr. Chang. I am aware of some work that has started at
NIST, and I would tell you I haven't looked at the work in more
detail. I probably need to. But I am recalling from some years
ago, oh, maybe 2009 or 2010 within the Computer Security
Division at NIST, they started up a program in metrics. It is
something I would need to look at further. But I believe there
is some activity happening.
Ms. Benzel. Metrics is a very difficult area in security
and has plagued us for a long time. I would say that DARPA has
started some work there and some very fundamental research. The
National Science Foundation and DHS S&T always include metrics
as a research topic in their calls.
Ms. Esty. And one final question. As I know some colleagues
and friends of my son who is a junior in college, if you could
elaborate a little bit more on this adversarial science notion
because I think it is different--it strikes me as different
than a lot of times what attracts people to science and a sense
of the purity and how you go about thinking about recruiting
young people designing programs--if they need to have this
back-and-forth adversarial approach.
Dr. Chang. I would have to do some more thinking about
this, but the models of the human immune system strike me as a
reasonable model. So basically, the human immune system is
fighting off adversaries of all kinds. And it is just sort of
amazing how versatile and how flexible the human immune system
is. The human immune system--by the way, about one percent of
human cells are leukocytes, are actually defensive. So when you
think about the body is basically allocating about one percent
of its cells to defense, that is a pretty substantial number.
If you look at the number of lines of computer code, I doubt
one percent is dedicated to defense.
The other model that seems to make sense to me in terms of
the science is in the field of actually agriculture. So
agriculture also has pests, and the pests try to eat the crops.
And you can either make the crops more resilient or you kill
the pests. I mean that is another sort of adversarial model
that seems to be relevant.
Chairman Massie. Thank you. I want to thank Chairman McCaul
for his initiative with this bill and his persistence in
reintroducing it and especially his patience today.
And I recognize him now for five minutes.
Mr. McCaul. I thank the Chairman.
And Dr. Chang, let me say thank you for your service on the
CSIS Commission and to the Nation and to the University of
Texas in Austin.
And Ms. Benzel, I agree with you our adversaries are moving
forward, moving ahead. They are attacking our federal agencies
every day. In support--and building a record in support of this
legislation, I see this bill doing several things, applying
NIST standards to the Federal Government. It provides--it
bolsters research and development in this area, a private-
sector university federal task force, education and awareness
piece and procurement standards within the Federal Government.
And I would like to go through each of you and if you could
tell me how you believe--if you do--that this legislation will
advance the cause for enhancing cybersecurity for this Nation.
Mr. Barrett?
Mr. Barrett. I would give a very brief answer which is
maybe not quite so brief.
In general, philosophically, we think that cybersecurity,
as Dr. Chang said, is a wicked problem. And as such, there is
probably no single bill that could be passed that will, on its
own, materially change the trend line. But on the other hand,
the sort of lack of a grand unification theory shouldn't stop
us from doing good work. And this bill would definitely appear
to be falling into that place where it does no harm and it also
does good work in the specific areas it has chosen.
Mr. McCaul. That is a very good point. I think--I served on
the Speaker's Cybersecurity Task Force, and our first action
was to do no harm by legislation. So I appreciate you saying
that.
Dr. Chang?
Dr. Chang. Thank you.
So in advance of reading the bill if I could have picked
two things that are critical to improving the Nation's
cybersecurity posture it would be research and development and
workforce development. And so this legislation to me is just
right on target relative to addressing the top two problems. I
guess I would add, as I mentioned in my spoken testimony, the
notion that we need to be patient about this. You know, I guess
it would be great if we could sort of plant a forest and all
the trees turn into something that resulted in wonderful
research. But we--I see this legislation as important in that
it is at least planting a few trees. It allows us to plant
some--a few things that will grow into the future.
I would sure hate to be sitting here ten years from now, 20
years from now still saying that we actually don't understand
causes. We don't understand solutions. We don't understand
countermeasures. And this legislation I believe begins planting
a few trees. Thank you.
Mr. McCaul. And thanks for making the point about the cyber
workforce in the Federal Government. I think that is very, very
important as well.
Ms. Benzel?
Ms. Benzel. Yes, thank you for the opportunity and thank
you for your perseverance in this area.
I agree with my colleagues. There is no one answer. It is a
very difficult field. But I was quite--very impressed to see
this particular bill in two areas that I would call out. And
one is the technology transfer recognition of the difficulty of
that problem. And I have worked in a number of different
public-private partnerships over the years. I was part of the
PCAST Committee back in the early 2000s. I see that the
opportunity here to do some real planning around university
kinds of partnerships and bringing the universities into it so
it is a three--tri-part aspect is very exciting in the bill.
The other one is in the science of cybersecurity and
understanding that there is a need for research and development
kinds of testbeds and experimentation. That is called out in
the bill for experimental science.
So I think technology transfer and experimental
cybersecurity have a chance to be fundamentally changing. And
of course the education and training are important, too.
Mr. McCaul. Well, let me thank the witnesses for your
expertise and for appearing here today.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for allowing me to participate in
this hearing even though I don't sit on the Subcommittee. And I
look forward to the markup and hopefully overwhelmingly passage
of the bill and signed into law by the President. Thank you. I
yield back.
Chairman Massie. Thank you, Chairman McCaul.
In closing this joint hearing, I would like to recognize
Chairman Bucshon for a moment to say a few words.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just want to remind everyone about a few facts. Overall
spending in the Federal Government has gone up 17 percent since
2008. This year, we are on track to spend $3.6 trillion with a
tax collection of $2.7 trillion, which, by the way, is the
highest amount in history that is being projected. We have 16.5
trillion in national debt, over 1 trillion in annual deficits
for the past five years running. Recently reported, 110 billion
in inappropriate payments the government made just last year
across a multitude of federal programs and the current
sequester is 85 billion.
I agree that spending cuts need to be more targeted. That
is why the House has passed two bills over the last year that
would target these cuts more appropriately. So I think that we
are very well aware of research and development dollars that
need to be there, not only on cybersecurity but other issues.
And we will work towards this--a resolution that will help with
that situation. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Massie. Thank you.
I want to thank the witnesses for traveling here today and
for their valuable testimony and to the Members for their
questions.
Members of the Committee may have additional questions for
you and we will ask you to respond to those questions in
writing. The record will remain open for two weeks for
additional comments and written questions for Members.
The witnesses are excused and this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:33 a.m., the Subcommittees were
adjourned.]
Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Responses by Mr. Michael Barrett

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.044

Responses by Dr. Frederick R. Chang

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.046

Responses by Ms. Terry Benzel

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.050

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Department of Homeland Security letter submitted by
Representative Frederica S. Wilson

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.053

National Science Foundation letter submitted by
Representative Frederica S. Wilson

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9926.055


