- SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH AT THE SMITHSONIAN

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH AT THE

SMITHSONIAN--MORE THAN A MUSEUM
======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JANUARY 14, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-61

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
86-899                    WASHINGTON : 2014
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas, Chair
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 ZOE LOFGREN, California
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
Wisconsin                        DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             ERIC SWALWELL, California
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               DAN MAFFEI, New York
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   JOSEPH KENNEDY III, Massachusetts
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             SCOTT PETERS, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               DEREK KILMER, Washington
STEVE STOCKMAN, Texas                AMI BERA, California
BILL POSEY, Florida                  ELIZABETH ESTY, Connecticut
CYNTHIA LUMMIS, Wyoming              MARC VEASEY, Texas
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona            JULIA BROWNLEY, California
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              MARK TAKANO, California
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota           ROBIN KELLY, Illinois
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma
RANDY WEBER, Texas
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Research and Technology

HON. LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana, Chair
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   FEDERICA WILSON, Florida
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             ZOE LOFGREN, California
STEVE STOCKMAN, Texas                SCOTT PETERS, California
CYNTHIA LUMMIS, Wyoming              AMI BERA, California
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona            DEREK KILMER, Washington
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ELIZABETH ESTY, Connecticut
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma            ROBIN KELLY, Illinois
CHRIS COLLINS, New York              EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas

C O N T E N T S

January 14, 2013

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Larry Bucshon, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Research and Technology, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................     6
Written Statement............................................     6

Statement by Representative Daniel Lipinski, Ranking Minority
Member, Subcommittee on Research and Technology, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..     8
Written Statement............................................     9

Witnesses:

Dr. G. Wayne Clough, Secretary, Smithsonian Institution
Oral Statement...............................................    12
Written Statement............................................    14

Dr. Eva Pell, Under Secretary for Science, Smithsonian
Institution
Oral Statement...............................................    28
Written Statement............................................    30

Dr. Kirk Johnson, Director, National Museum of Natural History
Oral Statement...............................................    47
Written Statement............................................    49

Discussion.......................................................    58

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. G. Wayne Clough, Secretary, Smithsonian Institution..........    70

Dr. Eva Pell, Under Secretary for Science, Smithsonian
Institution....................................................    71

Dr. Kirk Johnson, Director, National Museum of Natural History...    72

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Submitted statement of Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson,
Ranking Member, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology....    74

SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH AT THE SMITHSONIAN--MORE THAN A MUSEUM

----------

TUESDAY, JANUARY 14, 2014

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Research and Technology
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:29 p.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Larry
Bucshon [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.004

Chairman Bucshon. All right. The Subcommittee on Research
and Technology will come to order.
Good afternoon, everyone. Welcome to today's hearing
entitled ``Scientific Research at the Smithsonian.'' In front
of you are packets containing the written testimony,
biographies, and truth-in-testimony disclosures for today's
witnesses. I now recognize myself for five minutes for an
opening statement.
Founded in 1846, the Smithsonian is the world's largest
museum and research complex, consisting of 19 museums and
galleries, the National Zoological Park, and nine research
facilities. In addition, the Smithsonian Institution houses 137
million objects--and probably increasing every day--artworks,
and specimens. The Institution has been busy digitizing its
records, with 8.45 million records currently available online.
In 2013, 31 million people visited Smithsonian museums and
there were over 102 million visits to its website.
However, the Smithsonian Institution is more than a museum;
it is home to nine research centers and numerous research
programs, which range from astronomy to marine biodiversity and
ecosystems of Florida to understanding tropical biodiversity.
Today's hearing will focus on the world-class scientific
research activities at the Smithsonian Institution.
In 2013, the Smithsonian's Submillimeter Array peered
through the galaxy to provide the first clear view of W49A, a
stellar nursery where star formation takes place, revealing a
giant star cluster in the making. In another finding, a team of
Smithsonian scientists further explored overlooked preserved
museum specimens. The journey that started at a museum in
Chicago led to the cloud forests of Ecuador in the Northern
Andes and back to the genetics labs in Washington, D.C., ending
in the discovery of the olinguito, the first carnivorous mammal
species discovered in the Americas in 35 years. This discovery
was one of the top science stories of 2013. In other research,
the first wild horse species was born from artificial
insemination at the Smithsonian Conservation Biology Institute.
These are a few of the research highlights being done that we
will hear about during today's hearing.
In its 168-year history, the Smithsonian has inspired
millions of Americans, and also given us the opportunity to
learn about our Nation's history, culture, and values. At the
same time, it is important that the Smithsonian focus its
resources on research that will maintain its world-class status
and will allow its researchers to solve problems that are vital
to the national interest.
Our witnesses today will display and have displayed some of
the important research activities that are ongoing at the
Smithsonian and will provide a vision for future activities. I
look forward to hearing from our distinguished witnesses and
having a productive discussion.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bucshon follows:]

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee on Research and Technology Chairman
Larry Bucshon

Founded in 1846, the Smithsonian is the world's largest museum and
research complex, consisting of 19 museums and galleries, the National
Zoological Park, and nine research facilities. In addition, the
Smithsonian Institution houses 137 million objects, artworks, and
specimens. The Institution has been busy digitizing its records, with
8.45 million records currently available online. In 2013, 31 million
people visited Smithsonian museums and there were over 102 million
visits to its website.
However, the Smithsonian Institution is more than a museum; it is
home to nine research centers and numerous research programs, which
range from astronomy to marine biodiversity and ecosystems of Florida
to understanding tropical biodiversity. Today's hearing will focus on
the world-class scientific research activities at the Smithsonian
Institution.
In 2013, the Smithsonian's Submillimeter Array peered through the
galaxy to provide the first clear view of W49A, a stellar nursery where
star formation takes place, revealing a giant star cluster in the
making. In another finding, a team of Smithsonian scientists further
explored overlooked preserved museum specimens. The journey that
started at a museum in Chicago led to the cloud forests of Ecuador in
the Northern Andes and back to genetics labs in Washington, D.C.,
ending in the discovery of the olinguito--the first carnivorous mammal
species discovered in the Americas in 35 years.
This discovery was one of the top science stories of 2013. In other
research, the first wild horse species was born from artificial
insemination at the Smithsonian Conservation Biology Institute. These
are a few highlights among the research being done that we will hear
about during today's hearing.
In its 168 year history, the Smithsonian has inspired millions of
Americans, and also given us the opportunity to learn about our
nation's history, culture and values. At the same time, it is important
that the Smithsonian focus its resources on research that will maintain
its world-class status and will allow its researchers to solve problems
that are vital to the national interest.
Our witnesses today will display some of the important research
activities that are on-going at the Smithsonian, and will provide a
vision for future activities. I look forward to hearing from our
distinguished witnesses and having a productive discussion.
Chairman Bucshon. With that, I will now recognize the
Ranking Member, Mr. Lipinski from Illinois, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
distinguished witnesses who will testify here today.
Many of us remember school field trips and family outings
to local museums, zoos, and aquaria, and you only have to visit
the National Mall on any given weekend to see droves of young
kids and families in line to see a range of Smithsonian
exhibits. From the full skeleton of a Stegosaurus at the Museum
of Natural History, to the command module of the Apollo 11 Moon
landing at the Air and Space Museum, and a little further
northwest, Bao Bao, the giant panda cub at the National Zoo who
has gotten so much attention. I have to say, for not the
Smithsonian so much, but going to museums and zoos back home
were certainly important to me as a kid.
So for young people, the Smithsonian, thousands of museums
and other science centers around the country, find some of the
earliest exposures they have to science and some of the things
that really hook many of them into an interest in science.
We heard a few years ago from the Chicago Zoological
Society's Brookfield Zoo about their informal education
programs and the important role they play in my own community.
I am co-chair of the Congressional Zoo and Aquarium Caucus and
have long been an advocate of the important role of museums,
science centers, zoos, and aquaria, and informal science ed.
This Committee held a hearing last June to hear more about
the Administration's proposal for the Smithsonian to take on
new leadership in federal efforts on informal STEM education.
While the Smithsonian has an impressive track record in
providing informal education, it doesn't do everything that
other science agencies now do. For example, unlike NSF, the
Smithsonian does not make grants to external organizations
including science centers and museums across the country. I am
interested in hearing how the Smithsonian in its proposed new
role would strengthen the partnerships it has with its 184
affiliate museums and how these local organizations and
communities they serve will continue to benefit from their
long-standing partnership with the federal government.
In addition to the opportunities it provides as a
collection of museums and centers of science education, the
Smithsonian is also a leading research institution, as Chairman
Bucshon mentioned. The scientists at the Smithsonian's research
centers conduct research on many topics of today's most
interesting and important science from species preservation to
climate change.
The Smithsonian collections also allow great science to
take place and allow millions of visitors a firsthand glimpse
of our national history. However, if these collections are not
preserved, all this work could be lost. This Committee included
a provision in the 2010 America COMPETES reauthorization
requiring OSTP to develop consistent policies for the
management and disposal of federal scientific collections and
ensure development of an online clearinghouse for information
on federal scientific collections. The Smithsonian is a natural
leader among federal agencies in this effort along with the
U.S. Department of Agriculture with a significant collection of
its own. I am interested in hearing from the panel what means
are being taken to preserve these artifacts and digitize them
so that they can be studied and viewed for generations to come.
And finally, the way the Smithsonian is funded is somewhat
unique since it receives around $800 million annually in
federal appropriations in addition to its many sources of
private funds. But as everyone knows, we have been in a reduced
budget environment, which the Smithsonian has not escaped. The
American people also have slimmer checkbooks, and as such, may
not be donating in the amounts that they have in the past. I
would be very interested in hearing how the Smithsonian is
prioritizing their research and what challenges they have faced
during the last few years of budget cutting.
Again, I want to thank Chairman Bucshon for calling this
hearing and the witnesses as well for being here. I look
forward to your testimony and a productive discussion. With
that, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lipinski follows:]

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee on Research and Technology
Ranking Minority Member Daniel Lipinski

Thank you Mr. Chairman for holding this hearing, and thank you to
the distinguished witnesses who are testifying.
Many of us remember school field trips and family outings to local
museums, zoos, and aquaria, and you only have to visit the National
Mall on any given weekend to see droves of young kids and families in
line to see a range of Smithsonian exhibits; from the full skeleton of
a stegosaurus at the Museum of Natural History, to the command module
of the Apollo 11 Moon landing at the Air and Space Museum, and--a
little further northwest--Bao Bao, the giant panda cub at the National
Zoo. For many young people, the Smithsonian and the thousands of
museums and other science centers around the country provide some of
the earliest exposures they have to science. We heard a few years ago
from the Chicago Zoological Society's Brookfield Zoo about their
informal education programs and the important role they play in my own
community. I am a co-chair of the Congressional Zoo and Aquarium Caucus
and have long been an advocate of the important role of museums,
science centers, zoos, and aquaria in informal science education.
This Committee held a hearing last June to hear more about the
Administration's proposal for the Smithsonian to take on new leadership
in federal efforts on informal STEM education. While the Smithsonian
has an impressive track record in providing informal education, it
doesn't do everything that other science agencies now do. For example,
unlike NSF, the Smithsonian does not make grants to external
organizations, including science centers and museums across the
country. I am interested in hearing how the Smithsonian, in its
proposed new role, would strengthen the partnerships it has with its
184 affiliate museums and how these local organizations and the
communities they serve will continue to benefit from their long-
standing partnership with the federal government.
In addition to the opportunities it provides as a collection of
museums and centers of science education, the Smithsonian is also a
leading research institution. The scientists at the Smithsonian's
research centers conduct research on many of today's most interesting
and important scientific topics, from species preservation to climate
change.
Smithsonian collections also allow great science to take place and
allow its millions of visitors a first-hand glimpse of our natural
history. However, if these collections are not preserved, all of this
work could be lost. This Committee included a provision in the 2010
America COMPETES Reauthorization requiring OSTP to develop consistent
policies for the management and disposal of federal scientific
collections and ensure development of an online clearinghouse for
information on federal scientific collections. The Smithsonian is a
natural leader among federal agencies in this effort, along with the
U.S. Department of Agriculture which has significantcollections of its
own. I am interested in hearing from the panel what means are being
taken to preserve these artifacts and digitize them so that they can be
studied and viewed for generations to come.
Finally, the way the Smithsonian is funded is somewhat unique since
it receives around $800 million annually in federal appropriations in
addition to its many sources of private funds. But as everyone knows,
we've been in a reduced budget environment which the Smithsonian has
not escaped. The American people also have slimmer checkbooks, and as
such, may not be donating in the amounts that they have in the past. I
would be very interested in hearing how the Smithsonian is prioritizing
their research and what challenges they have faced during the last few
years of budget cutting.
Again, I want to thank Chairman Bucshon for calling this hearing,
and the witnesses as well for being here. I look forward to your
testimony and a productive discussion.And with that I yield back.
Chairman Bucshon. Thank you very much.
If there are Members who wish to submit additional opening
statements, your statements will be added to the record at this
point.
Chairman Bucshon. At this time I would like to introduce
our witnesses. Our first witness today is Dr. G. Wayne Clough,
and he currently is the 12th Secretary of the Smithsonian
Institution. Since he began as Secretary in July 2008, Dr.
Clough has overseen several major openings at the Smithsonian,
including the reopening of the National Museum of American
History, the David H. Koch Hall of Human Origins and Sant Ocean
Hall at the National Museum of Natural History. Before his
appointment to the Smithsonian, Dr. Clough was President of the
Georgia Institute of Technology for 14 years. He received his
bachelor's and master's degree in civil engineering from
Georgia Tech and a doctorate in civil engineering from the
University of California at Berkeley. Dr. Clough will be
retiring later this year as the Secretary of the Smithsonian. I
would like to take this opportunity to thank you for your hard
work these past six years and wish you well in future
endeavors.
Our second witness today is Dr. Eva Pell. As Under
Secretary for Science at the Smithsonian Institution, Dr. Pell
directly overseas the operations of several museums, including
the National Museum Of Natural History, the National Air and
Space Museum, the National Zoo and its Conservation and
Research Center in Front Royal, Virginia, and the Smithsonian
Astrophysical Observatory in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Do you
have time for all that?
Dr. Pell was a Professor in the Department of Plant
Pathology at Penn State University for more than 35 years. In
her role as Senior Vice President for Research at the
university, Dr. Pell spearheaded the development of cross
disciplinary institutes for life sciences, materials, energy,
and environment, social sciences, cyber science, and the arts
and humanities. Dr. Pell earned her BS in biology from the City
College of the City of New York and a Ph.D. in plant biology
from Rutgers. Thank you.
Our third witness today is Dr. Kirk Johnson, who is
currently the Sant Director of the National Museum of Natural
History and was appointed to this position in October of 2012.
In his previous position as Chief Curator at the Denver Museum
of Nature and Science, Dr. Johnson oversaw a 70-person Research
and Collections Division. From 2001 to 2006 Dr. Johnson was the
Chair of the museum's Department of Earth Sciences. Between
1991 and 1995 he was one of the two scientists who led the
development of Prehistoric Journey, the museum's permanent
exhibition about the history of life on Earth. From 1989 to
1990 he was a postdoctoral research associate in the Department
of Botany at the University of Adelaide in Australia. He was a
marine geologist with the U.S. Geological Survey in California
from 1982 to 1983 and has been a research associate at the
Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture in Seattle since
1991.
Thanks again to all our witnesses for being here this
afternoon. As our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is
limited to five minutes each, after which the Members of the
Committee will have five minutes each to ask questions.
I now recognize Secretary Clough for five minutes to
present his testimony. Welcome, sir.

TESTIMONY OF DR. G. WAYNE CLOUGH,

SECRETARY, SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION

Dr. Clough. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for this
opportunity to testify.
I was last here in 2010 and at that time we were in the
early stages of implementing our new strategic plan. Since
then, we have made considerable progress towards all of our
goals and much of this relates to our science museums and our
research centers.
Many of you just saw compelling evidence of that progress
if you were able to visit with our staff members here. I am
extremely proud of our 500 scientists at the Smithsonian and
what they do to help us understand our world, our universe, and
enable us to create a sustainable future for future
generations. The scientists you just met demonstrate the
passion all of our employees at the Smithsonian have, and that
is why for the past four years we have been named as one of the
best places to work in the federal government.
The Smithsonian, as was mentioned, is a public-private
partnership. Roughly 60 percent of our funding comes from
federal appropriations and 40 percent from other sources. We
have worked hard over the past five years to enhance our
private funding and use it in a way that best complements the
federal funding that we receive. With our strategic plan as a
guide, we have attracted increased support from donors and
funding agencies to make progress we would not have imagined a
decade ago.
Last year, 31 million visits were made to our museums, the
best attendance we have had in a decade. For the millions who
could not visit, we are doing more than ever to reach them
through our traveling exhibition service, our 184 affiliate
museums, and digital technology. More than 140 million unique
visitors used our websites last year. We are now delivering
education materials geared to state standards to all 50 States.
This is a passion of mine because I am an educator. I was
raised in a family of modest means in a small rural town of
Douglas, Georgia. I didn't experience the Smithsonian until I
went to college. Our strategic plan documents our commitment to
ensure people in any part of our Nation can access our
resources, and we are working hard to deliver on that promise.
As noted, we were founded in 1846, and the Smithsonian is
the world's largest museum and research complex with 19 museums
and galleries, the National Zoo, nine research centers, and 20
libraries and archives. As noted, we have 137 million objects
in our collections and 127 million of these are scientific
objects, some of which you have seen here. We are active in
more than 130 countries through our research and education
efforts. Last year, we had more than 3.8 million social media
followers on Facebook and Twitter. The Smithsonian Channel now
reaches 30 million people and families and households, up from
6 million five years ago.
Under our strategic plan our activities are organized to
focus on four grand challenges, two of which are focused on
science. The first is understanding and sustaining a biodiverse
planet. The second is unlocking the mysteries of our universe.
The plan also calls, one, for greater emphasis on cross
disciplinary research and collaboration and cooperation with
other science-based federal agencies, universities, nonprofits,
and industry; two, increase science-based educational
offerings; and three, improved attention to care of
collections.
Our collaborative and cross disciplinary approach is
exemplified by something we call the Forest Global Earth
Observatory, a network of more than 50 sites around the world
where long-term standardized observations of forest changes are
made. The data are organized and stored digitally so all
scientists around the world and teachers and students can use
the information. More than 20 countries, nine U.S.
universities, and the U.S. Forest Service participate with us
in this effort.
And thanks to a generous donor, we have recently launched
the Tennenbaum Marine Observatories Network, which will perform
a similar monitoring task to the forest effort in our coastal
waters. As the partnership expands, many other universities and
science agencies will join our initiative. Our scientific
research forms the basis for educational resources offered in
digital online lesson plans. We also offer direct assistance to
school districts through the Smithsonian Science Education
Center. For 28 years, the center's innovative STEM program has
been improving the K-12 science education in our nation, and in
2011, it won a highly competitive i3 innovation grant from the
U.S. Department of Education to work with school districts in
New Mexico, Texas, and North Carolina serving approximately
90,000 students, most of whom fall in the Title I
classification. Assessments of this work have shown it to be
extremely successful and more will come from this work since we
are expanding it to workforce education.
As I look back over the past five years, I am proud that
our scientific efforts have made a difference and we are
positioned to do even more. As an educator, I am also proud of
the fact we have increased participation of interns and
fellows. Last year, we had more than 1,300 interns and 700
fellows working at the Smithsonian. And though we don't offer
degrees, we help educate the scientific workforce of the
future. Of course we also continue in what we do best, and that
is inspire young people to learn more about science and our
world.
You may have heard of high school junior Jack Andraka from
Maryland who devised an inexpensive and quick test for
pancreatic cancer after his uncle died of that disease. For
that, in 2012 we presented him with our American Ingenuity
Award for youth achievement. As a young boy, he was inspired by
coming to the National History Museum. That is the power of
science, to change the world with ideas and make it a better
place and that is what we do best at Smithsonian.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Clough follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.022

Chairman Bucshon. Thank you very much.
I have subscribed to Smithsonian Magazine, by the way, for
many, many years. I would recommend it to everyone. It is a
great magazine.
Dr. Clough. Thank you.
Chairman Bucshon. Now, I recognize Under Secretary Pell for
five minutes for her testimony.

TESTIMONY OF DR. EVA PELL,

UNDER SECRETARY FOR SCIENCE,

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION

Dr. Pell. Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
To most people, the Smithsonian conjures a public place on
the National Mall. We are a remarkable tourist destination, but
behind that is a world-class research infrastructure making a
difference in the lives of Americans.
The Smithsonian conducts scientific research through a
blend of remarkable collections, field sites and observatories
on Earth and in space. These assets allow our scientists and
collaborators to address significant questions from
understanding the origin of the universe to explaining losses
in biological diversity around the globe.
To demonstrate the rich depth and breadth of Smithsonian
science through collections research, exploration, and
educational outreach, I would like to take you on a journey, a
journey of flight. We are cleared for takeoff from the Hill, so
let's take a short hop down the Mall. We land at our National
Air and Space Museum where our future pilots, engineers, and
astronauts look at the museum's impressive collections
encompassing 60,000 objects ranging in size from rockets to
space helmets to microchips. These youngsters attend lectures,
family events, and educational programs that often feature
pioneers in aviation and space, including pilots, astronauts,
and scientists. Each day, explainers bring the science of
flight alive in the How Things Fly Gallery.
We continue our journey now and explore the real dangers
that airplanes face. You met our scientist Dr. Carla Dove, who
is instrumental in keeping you and millions of pilots and
passengers safe in flight on both commercial and military
flights. Dr. Dove is an ornithologist and a forensic expert who
identifies the birds that can cause airplane crashes like that
of the commercial flight in the Hudson River in January 2009.
Carla runs the Smithsonian's feather identification lab at
the National Museum of Natural History. The aviation industry
relies on Carla and her lab to identify the birds involved in
thousands of collisions with planes every year. The Smithsonian
has interagency agreements with the Federal Aviation
Administration, the U.S. Air Force, and the Navy. Carla's
identifications help scientists and engineers take action to
avoid a crash through activities like altering an airplane's
flight path or implementing bird habitat management schemes at
airports. Carla receives more than 8,000 samples per year,
called ``snarge,'' to identify birds via feather identification
or DNA analysis. We can help because of our unique
comprehensive collection and the specialized training of our
staff. Thanks to Carla, we are safe to continue our
metaphorical flight.
Now, we are going to go and visit some continents: Asia,
Africa, and South America. The question is, when we go home,
how do we know we are going to be alone? What if a virus, a
rodent, or an insect is hitchhiking a ride on our plane? We or
others we come into contact with may end up getting sick when
we get home.
The diseases can be caused by pathogens that are carried by
animals and insects causing zoonotic diseases that are spread
between animals and humans. You have heard of SARS, malaria,
and West Nile virus infection. In fact, about 75 percent of
recently emerging infectious diseases affecting humans
originally infected animals. Because of extensive international
air travel, these diseases can travel undetected very quickly,
posing serious public health and economic threats.
To respond to these diseases, the Smithsonian is a partner
with USAID on the PREDICT project, charged with predicting and
preventing such problems. Our scientists help build pathology
skills so that scientists in the developing world can help
identify the cause of animal deaths, both wildlife and
agricultural, often an important indicator of disease threats
that could jump to humans.
In November of last year, scientists in the Middle East
found a disease caused Middle East Respiratory Syndrome in
camels in Qatar. The SARS-like coronavirus, which emerged last
year, has killed 40 percent of the 170 people to whom this
virus was transmitted from camels. Pinpointing camels as the
disease required a range of tests, including DNA sampling and
antibody testing. The Smithsonian was able to help by providing
a baseline comparison for these samples through use of our
collections, which include 30 years of banked serum from more
than 100 species that we have at the National Zoo. The Qatari
Health Counsel, armed with this information, was able to issue
warnings for vulnerable populations to avoid close animal
contact. Our scientists and colleagues have nipped this problem
in the bud before it walked onto a plane.
Our brief journey has come to an end. We can land safely
now. But the possibilities for future exploration for you and
your constituents are endless at the Smithsonian. Please come
visit our collections, our field sites, and our observatories.
Meet more of our dedicated scientists, and I can promise you an
incredible journey you will not forget. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Pell follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.039

Chairman Bucshon. Thank you very much. I was interested in
the word snarge. It is one of those words that kind of sounds
like what it is, kind of, you know--I now recognize Dr. Johnson
for five minutes to present his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF DR. KIRK JOHNSON, DIRECTOR,

NATIONAL MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

Dr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am going to talk today about the research, the
collections, and the public impact of just one of the
Smithsonian museums, the National Museum of Natural History.
This is the largest of the museums. Not only is it the largest
Smithsonian Museum, but it is also the largest natural history
museum in the world by far. At the Natural History Museum, we
really do only three things. We do basic scientific research,
we guard and use the Nation's science collections, and we
inspire and educate our public who knows they learn best when
they are having a social and fun time with their families.
We have more than 7 million visitors each year at the
National Museum of Natural History, which is an amazing number.
It is the most-visited museum in the world. And 84 percent of
our visitors come from out of town, which means they are unique
visitors, which means every year we get a different 84 percent
of 7 million which means in a decade we might see as many as 60
million people in that one building on the National Mall. That
makes us the premier science education space in the world and
it means that something like 20 percent of the American
population will walk into that building every decade. So it is
a phenomenal asset for communicating about the natural world.
We also have more than 90 percent of the Smithsonian's
collections with 127 million objects, specimens, and artifacts.
And this is where we keep the objects that we treasure about
the world and study those objects. We have 11,000 scientists
who visit us each year to study those objects here in our
facility in Suitland, Maryland. We are the home to the iconic
Hope Diamond, and we are the real Jurassic Park.
With more than 200 scientists, we have the largest museum
science staff in the world, and these are scientists who have
three primary areas of expertise: the study of Earth and
similar planets, the study of the diversity of life on Earth,
and the study of human diversity and cultural change. They
publish more than 600 scientific books and papers every year
often describing new species and making discoveries about
plants, animals, and organisms around the world.
Also embedded in the Natural History Museum, we have
scientists from the U.S. Department of Agriculture, from the
U.S. Geological Survey, from the Department of Defense, and
from NOAA's National Marine Fisheries Service. They are there
because our collections allow them to do the work they need to
do, things like preventing our troops from getting malaria,
things like preventing invasive pests from crossing our
borders, and understanding the vulnerabilities of our fishery
stocks.
Today, we had a number of scientists here. I will just
mention two of them. Dr. Tim McCoy is the Chair of the Mineral
Science Department. He studies meteorites. And if you ask him
why he studies meteorites he will say, well, I want to
understand the formation of the solar system, which seems a
little bit ethereal to a lot of us. It is a very important
topic but you have to think back in February, just a year ago
in Russia when the Chelyabinsk meteorite exploded over Russia,
there was a meteorite the size of a bus traveling at five miles
a second that, depending on how it came in, could cause a
tremendous amount of damage. We know that a six-mile-diameter
asteroid is probably what caused the extinction of dinosaurs
and most life on Earth 66 million years ago. So these things
are real and they are in our time frame and we need to
understand them, and that happens at a place where we have the
world's collections of meteorites.
You saw the work of Dr. Kris Helgen, who is a mammalogist,
who at a very young age has discovered dozens of new species of
previously undescribed mammals by looking at collections and
visiting natural habitats around the world.
These experts represent a dedicated staff but they are also
the inspiration for what we present to the public as our
various exhibits.
In this last year, we partnered with the National Human
Genome Research Institute at the National Institutes of Health
to put together an exhibit called Genome: Unlocking Life's
Code. This is in celebration of the 60th anniversary of Watson
and Crick's discovery of the double helix structure of DNA and
the 10th anniversary of the discovery of the decoding of the
human genome. And this is one of these very rapidly evolving
fields in science and medicine where we are all real interested
in what is going to happen, and a really good place to get
started learning about it is to come down and see the exhibit
on the Mall.
In December we opened a 10,000 square-foot exhibit called
Q?rius, and this is a place where we have turned the museum
inside out and made our collections, our scientists, and our
scientific equipment available to primarily teenagers because
we know that people will study things if they are very
interested in them. And we find that museums are a great way to
catalyze people's curiosity.
We will be opening in a few years a complete renovation of
the Nation's Fossil Halls, which originally opened in 1911 as
the Hall Of Extinct Monsters. In the last century we have
learned so much about the history of the Earth and the story of
dinosaurs that we are going to be renovating that entire space.
And later this spring we will be bringing to Washington, D.C.,
a complete real Tyrannosaurus rex in partnership with the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers and the Museum of the Rockies. It will
be the first real Tyrannosaurus rex in the Nation, the Nation's
T-rex in Washington, D.C., and we will use that to launch our
renovation, which will open in 2019.
So as you can see, the Natural History Museum is a
curiously successful blend of three very different things: very
serious science, our treasured objects, and a deeply engaged
public that is learning while it is having fun. Thank you very
much.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Johnson follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.048

Chairman Bucshon. Thank you for your testimony. I have also
watched movies about you guys such as ``Night at the Museum.''
I would like to remind the Members that the Committee rules
limit questioning to five minutes. At this point I will
recognize myself for five minutes for questioning. To all
witnesses, with regard to scientific research, what does the
Smithsonian Institution bring to the table that cannot be
achieved by other federal agencies like the National Science
Foundation or NASA? Can you describe things that might be
unique to the Smithsonian?
Dr. Clough. I will get started. The agencies obviously have
different missions, and I served on the National Science Board
and was a researcher with NSF funding for many years. We don't
fund other groups. We do work with other groups and our
collections is one way we would be different from the others.
We have the largest scientific collection in the world as Kirk
described, and it works a little bit like a national lab the
way I see it because it serves as a tremendous research base
for all the other scientists to come in and use the collection.
We are the caretakers in that way but we use it for our own
research as well.
And the interesting thing is collections have become far
more important to us in our research endeavors because of
genomics and some of the new scientific instruments and tools
that we have. So this is sort of a new day if you will for our
collection. So our collection is one of those things.
A second way is I mentioned the Forest Global Earth
Observatory and the new marine observatories, which Dr. Pell
really has made happen. Those are long-term projects. The
Smithsonian is very good at collaborating, bringing together
teams, and then carrying out work that you can sustain for long
periods of time.
We are trusted around the world. I mentioned ForestGEO has
over 20 countries involved in it. These are countries that want
to share information with us. They trust us as a source of
reliable information and they trust us with the data. So I
think that the ability to do long-term research, the
collections, and the unique capabilities of our scientists are
some of the things. My colleagues might want to comment
otherwise.
Chairman Bucshon. Dr. Pell?
Dr. Pell. Well, I would just build on what Wayne talked
about because coming from a university where I worked most of
my career, you are very much confined as a faculty researcher
by the term of your grant. Having the federal appropriation
that allows us to establish programs and know will be there in
five years, in ten years, in 50 years in 100 years is a huge
difference. And as a result, many faculty send their graduate
students here and post-docs come here for that experience to
work in an environment that has that kind of longevity.
Dr. Johnson. And I will just agree with what both of my
colleagues said, but just add the fact that we do very basic
research on what is on the planet--the life, the rocks, the
minerals--and that is a very baseline sort of research that
underpins so much more of the innovative and applied research
that is out there.
Chairman Bucshon. And, Dr. Pell, a question about big data.
Obviously, we are talking about digitalizing everything and we
talk about that a lot. Specifically, how is the Smithsonian
handling the issues of data access, data management, storage,
duration, cost control? Because obviously--and Dr. Clough can
answer this, too--that is advancing quickly. And how is the
Smithsonian trying to address that?
Dr. Pell. That is a huge question and I want Kirk to weigh
in as well because we have 137 million objects and we have a
mandate to make what we have available to the world. And the
best way to do that is through digitization, and so we are on a
march to digitize our collections and we are also very much
interested in open access at every opportunity that we have.
This past year, we had three presidential fellows who came for
the very purpose of trying to help us figure out how to do our
digitization more rapidly than we had been doing it and we have
been taking advantage of crowdsourcing.
And an example I find very intriguing is, as a plant
biologist myself, biologists go out in the field and they have
field notebooks and they write all this information down, and
what you really want to be able to do ultimately is to access
those digitally, but you would also love to be able to search
them digitally, which is different than just making PDF images
of things. And we have started this transcription program for
field notebooks and put it out on the web and said anybody
interested in--you can bring it up online but it needs to get--
it is handwritten and it needs to get digitized. It is
remarkable. Am I remembering 1,100 people? Is that the right
number of people--from all over have been inputting these data
and we have been verifying it and we see ourselves doing more
and more of that.
Dr. Clough. I would make one other quick comment. We do
deal with the big data and we have a big data challenge. The
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory is awash in data because
they are actively observing the heavens from multiple points of
view and retrieving enormous amounts of data. And these we
think of as images but it is actually digital information.
The genomics initiatives we have underway are going to
generate an additional wave of data. So with Dr. Pell's help,
we have been having discussions with Oak Ridge National
Laboratory, Department of Energy. They are very interested in
what we are doing and obviously they have greater capacity in
terms of handling big data than we do and we look to partner
with them in the future. They did say they thought we had very
interesting problems and I thought that was a compliment.
Chairman Bucshon. It is. I now recognize the Ranking
Member, Mr. Lipinski, for five minutes.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you. I want to go back to something I
talked about in my opening statement is STEM education and
informal science education. I know a lot of my interest in
science came in part from visits to great museums in Chicago
like the Museum of Science and Industry and going to Brookfield
Zoo. And in fact research has shown that as much as 80 percent
of science learning occurs in informal environments like these.
I want to ask Dr. Johnson, putting on your hat as a former
chief curator and vice president of the Denver Museum of Nature
and Science, can you talk about the challenges faced by museums
and science centers across the Nation in terms of availability
of funding for developing and maintaining exhibits and
educational opportunities for youth and the public in the
communities that they serve, and also talk about how the
Smithsonian can be helpful in that regard.
Dr. Johnson. That is a very interesting topic. We do know
that something like 95 million people a year go to science and
technology centers, and it is a very pleasant way to learn very
important things. There has been a trend in the last several
decades for there to be fewer and fewer scientists at science
centers, and as a result, the content isn't necessarily always
there. So one of the things the Smithsonian can and is doing is
helping to supply science-based content to the museums around
the country because it turns out that it is difficult at a
certain scale to maintain collections and scientists and still
run a viable standalone science center. And what we have seen
in many cities across the Nation in the last few decades is the
decrease of the health of science in collections at natural
history museums and the growth of science centers, which don't
have to bear the costs of maintaining collections and
scientific researchers.
So this is where being the mothership of the museums allows
us to share our resources quite well. We have a product called
the Encyclopedia of Life, which is a website that we are
building to host literally a page for every species on the
planet. And we presently are at 1.34 million pages towards a
target of 1.9. So ultimately, I think that the popularity of
museums remains high. Funding is challenging, but most of the
museums in the country and local markets where the markets
realize the value to the education of their youth and families
and it is very much my goal as a director of this museum to use
the Smithsonian's Natural History Museum to improve the health
of natural history museums and science centers across the
country. And we are in contact with the Association of Science
and Technology Centers to think about how we can bring science
back into science centers and support this national endeavor.
Dr. Clough. I will comment on that. This is a very
interesting question because at one time you could think of a
formal track and an informal track and they did their separate
things. I believe that the informal track has shrunk because of
the need to meet state standards and so forth, and as a result,
there is a gap there for us to fill and that the Smithsonian
and other science centers are moving much more closely into the
formal education sphere. And we can do that effectively through
programs like digital badging where we can give youngsters
credentials for completing exercises and proving competency if
you will. And so we have about 100 different digital badges now
that we offer in different programs that help teachers. We have
2,000 lesson plans available for free to teachers.
Now, in addition to that sort of digital approach, we have
a boots-on-the-ground approach in the Smithsonian Science
Education Center. I mentioned we are working in three States
primarily with Title I students where we work with principals
and we work with teachers. We have 600 teachers a year to help
them get comfortable in teaching science. We give them
curriculum materials. We help the students learn, and we work
with the communities to support their schools and to transition
through leadership changes with superintendents. So we believe
we need to look at it not just from the point of view digital
delivery but also boots-on-the-ground and hard-core being in
that space. We are just starting up a big program in Denver in
the same way.
Mr. Lipinski. In the little time I have left I wanted to go
a little more into the issue of the provision in 2010 COMPETES
reauthorization that required OSTP to develop consistent
policies for the management and disposal of federal scientific
collections and develop an online clearinghouse for information
on federal scientific collections. You talked a little bit
about this already, but how are you working to achieve this and
what kind of collaborations do you have with federal agencies
with large collections? You talked about general questions with
big data and where to store this, but can you provide further
comments on how this process is coming along?
Dr. Pell. Well, I would want to mention that we co-chair
with the USDA the interagency working group on scientific
collections because I think across the government we are
recognized as probably having the largest collection, so we are
working with them on all of the standards. And Scott Miller is
sitting behind me and is the Deputy Under Secretary for
Collections and he is the co-chair of that committee. I would
also say that we work very closely every day with a number of
the agencies that have large collections. USDA, Park Service,
and Department of Interior all have collections and staff that
live at the National Museum of Natural History, so there is a
very close collaboration on a daily basis as well.
Mr. Lipinski. All right. I see my time is up. I will yield
back. Thank you.
Chairman Bucshon. Thank you very much.
I now recognize Mr. Massie, five minutes.
Mr. Massie. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I see some nice it looks like 3-D models up there that come
from some of the artifacts that were scanned I presume. One
question that I have is do you allow public use of all of your
3-D models? Can people who have a 3-D printer go and get these
models and what sort of efforts do you have to promote those 3-
D models if so?
Dr. Clough. Well, we think 3-D models have a great future,
3-D imaging and 3-D files if you will, because it gives people
access to our collections in ways they never had before. It may
not be exactly the real thing but it sure looks like the real
thing in many cases. So we have developed a three-dimensional
imaging group and we think it is the leading group in the
world. We just had an international conference where hundreds
of people came to the conference. We rolled out, in essence,
our first collection of images that are fully 3-D ranging all
the way from a ship, the Gunboat Philadelphia in American
history, down to a bee to show the possible--as well as--I
guess the big one was the--we had a galaxy collapsing also that
we imaged. But the idea was to illustrate the range of things
we can do. That is accessible on our website. It is 20 objects.
You can download the files themselves. You can manipulate them
when you are there. You can look at them in different colors.
And what we learned from that exercise was many scholars are
astounded because they can see things on objects they have
never seen before. These can be downloaded by a teacher in
schools in your community if they have access to a 3D printer.
Some of these printers get to be very cheap now. They can print
out the objects themselves. If they don't have access to a
printer, there are internet sites now where you send these
files to a company and they will print it out for you.
Mr. Massie. All right. Are there any----
Dr. Clough. So we are making this available for free.
Mr. Massie. Are there any restrictions on the use of
those----
Dr. Clough. No.
Mr. Massie. --data?
Dr. Clough. None whatsoever.
Mr. Massie. So they can show up in a movie and be used
there as well?
Dr. Clough. Presumably. We have to be a little careful.
Mr. Massie. Okay.
Dr. Clough. I will say that, as I showed several Members of
the Committee, we had this conference and they had
demonstration technology there, one piece of which was they
would take an image of anything within this cage, which
happened to be, in one instance, me. And so I was imaged and
the next day they presented me with a seven-inch-high model of
myself, which my wife says is weird.
Mr. Massie. Yes. I have got another question while we are
talking about archiving into shapes. You know, it used to be
popular to go out and shoot rare animals and stuff them. Is
there any sort of contemporary version of that where we are
cataloging DNA of existing species, for instance?
Dr. Johnson. Yes. One of the things we have realized is
that every organism has an amazing amount of information in its
genetic code, so every single organism is a unique example of
life on the planet. And the best way to preserve that is to
freeze it at very cold temperatures. And we have built in
Suitland, Maryland, a frozen repository with 5 million slots.
We use both nitrogen and deep cold freezers to preserve tissue
samples of objects that we have the body of the object in the
museum. So we have both the actual physical entity and the
frozen tissue from which we can extract genetic information and
genomic information. So we are realizing that a museum of the
21st century preserves both the body and the genetic
components.
Mr. Massie. Along those lines, I think in other countries
there is an effort to archive seeds sort of to preserve at
least the genetic diversity that we have among our agricultural
crops and the opportunities to grow that. And those are always
at risk because these things propagate on their own through
pollen and through the wind. Do we have any sort of seed
archive at the Smithsonian?
Dr. Johnson. Yes. We do not have a seed bank. We do keep a
number of animal gametes at the Smithsonian Conservation
Biology Institute so the fertile parts of rare and endangered
species that we are breeding right now, we keep their gametes
frozen. So that is effectively the seed of the animal if you
will. And we are breeding things like cheetahs and black-footed
ferrets and maned wolves. So rare and endangered animals, we
will preserve their reproductive output.
Mr. Massie. Great. I just have one other question on
climate change. What percent of your budget is devoted to
studying climate change or archiving that in sort of the
contemporary debate right now over whether man is having an
effect on that and to what degree?
Dr. Clough. I don't think we know the percentage as you
describe it. The Smithsonian does a lot of research that
relates to climate change. It is not directly focused on that.
For example, we study bird migration patterns at the National
Zoo. We know that bird migration patterns are changing because
the climate is changing, but we have studied bird migration
patterns and birds for other reasons than just that. There are
many areas where we are actually doing work that relates to and
illustrates climate change. We look at the acidification of
oceans because we study reefs, and acidification of oceans
affects reefs and it has something to do with the chemicals of
the greenhouse gases that are in the atmosphere. So we do a lot
of work that touches on climate change but is not necessarily
directed at the singular issue by itself.
Mr. Massie. Thank you very much. My time is expired.
Chairman Bucshon. I now recognize Ms. Kelly for her
questions.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you for being
here.
Under your leadership, Dr. Clough, the Smithsonian named
Claudine Brown as its first Director of Education, now the
Assistant Secretary for Education and Access. We have all heard
the latest statistics from the Program for International
Student Assessment finding that American students are lagging
further and further behind their international counterparts in
math and science, scoring average to below average in the
subjects. Unfortunately, these scores are even lower on average
for minority students in communities with limited access to the
kinds of advanced technology found in many higher achieving
school districts and classrooms. Can you talk more about your
efforts to broaden participation? And beyond counting the
number of students your programs touch, how do you measure the
impact on the students who go through these programs?
Dr. Clough. That is an excellent question. Dr. Brown has
been essential to the work that we have been doing. We didn't
have that position before. And many of our museums, as Kirk
described, have wonderful education programs but we wanted to
coordinate them and use them in some capacity so more people
can access the broadness and pick and choose what they need.
What we have learned from teachers, for example, is they don't
want our lesson plans per se. They would prefer us to provide
them with a framework in which they can fill in and paint the
palette, if you will, for their local communities, and so we
have tried to work with them on that kind of concept.
I think what we have tried to do is to take the multiple
approach of there are places where boots on the ground are
essential and we can help teachers teach science better. But
many teachers, as you know, are not necessarily credentialed in
science, and so we try to help teachers get over that hump of
being afraid of the subject that they have to teach. They have
no choice but to teach it. So we have worked at this now for 20
years and we have gotten very good at it.
Claudine's group also is working very closely with our
affiliate museums to give them options for access to our
materials. For example, in the sciences we have about 50 of our
affiliates--and the Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture
in Seattle, Washington just signed up, as a matter of fact, as
one of our affiliates--that are science museums, or research
centers. So recently, we got a grant from the Gates Foundation
and we created an option for our students to go to the
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory and use their telescope
and talk to our scientists and to their educators and learn
about the universe by actually talking to experts. So active
learning, we think, is a real key to what to do.
We are also very grateful to the Gates Foundation for
having given us a $30 million grant for an endowment called
Reaching New Audiences. It is a competitive grant process, and
all of our museums apply and they have to come up with really
good ideas to reach audiences we traditionally have not reached
very well. And that is now in its third year. We have now given
out $5 million. It is an endowment that we spend to reach new
audiences and we are really learning a lot about that. And
educators from NSF and others now are joining us in these
efforts. It is a collaborative effort and it is exciting what
we are seeing.
Ms. Kelly. Wow, that is fantastic. Also you mentioned in
your testimony that the Smithsonian Science Education Center
launched its new Workforce Development Initiative. And I am
just curious, why is that under the scope of the Smithsonian to
concentrate on workforce issues and how does that fit with your
mission?
Dr. Clough. Well, there has been an interesting thing
because I came out of the university world and I was used to a
little more traditional age group in terms of the group you are
targeting for education. The Smithsonian, we like to say,
starts with 2-year-olds and goes to 92-year-olds. So we have a
lot of experience in educating people who are nontraditional
learners, who are lifelong learners, who are curiosity-based
liners, and adult learners. And we like to work with families,
if we can because that is also very helpful as well. But we are
learning from the Department of Labor, and from the Department
of Commerce. We work closely with the Patent Trademark Office
in the Department of Commerce--there is a big gap in terms of
workforce training. We won't do all of that but there are
places where our digital badging program will be perfect for
some of the material that we teach to late-grade students and
others to help people get literacy and understand what they
need for scientific literacy to do their work.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Bucshon. Thank you very much.
I now recognize Mr. Hultgren, five minutes.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all so
much for being here. Thank you for your great work.
I do think it is so important for us as a Committee and as
Members of Congress to be having this conversation, and I
believe so strongly in our museums. We had a very interesting
hearing last week about STEM education and specifically how do
we inspire young people to get engaged in science and
technology and engineering and mathematics, a very good hearing
but so much more work that we need to do.
One of the things that really does bring us together as
Members of the House and Senate, Republicans and Democrats, is
a need in our Nation to be recommitted to STEM education. And I
see museums as a key part of that. So thank you for your work.
I also want to say I thank you for your recognition of the
young man Jack Andraka who invented the pancreatic cancer test
strip. I got to meet him at Ideas Week in Chicago a year ago,
so impressive, so energetic. But that is what it is all about
is getting young people excited and seeing that there is no
barriers really at that age to have a passion and pursue it.
And that is what is so exciting to me. So thank you. Thank you
for your work. This is so important for us to discuss this so
that we can prioritize with limited resources, prioritize
funding and also make sure that we are not wasting and doing
duplicative type programs.
I do want to focus a little bit on something that does
concern me a little bit or I have heard some concern for some
of my local museums. When the Administration decided to
reorganize how STEM education was handled at the federal level,
there were many in the stakeholder community who seemed taken
by surprise with the proposal that they were not consulted
about.
Dr. Clough, I wonder, the President's Fiscal Year 2014
budget included an additional $25 million for the Smithsonian
to become the lead agency for informed--to inform STEM
education. Many in the informal education community that I have
been in touch with in Illinois are concerned about this,
especially since your organization cannot make external grants.
I wondered what role you played in developing this new role for
the Smithsonian, how you have responded to concerns from the
STEM education community, and what I can take back to my local
institutions?
Dr. Clough. We did not have any role in formulating the
plan. We heard about it rather late in the process, unlike
most. Basically, when we got our passback we learned that there
was an effort to do this. Obviously, we had concerns ourselves
when we first heard about it because many of the agencies that
were going to lose some of their capacity, we work with them.
And in some cases they fund us. And so, in the Air and Space
Museum we work with NASA in space education and HIH and so
forth. So we wanted to talk to our friends and try to
understand what we could do, and if the plan were to go
through, we wanted to make it one where we helped them in any
way.
We felt, for example, if we were going to go through with
this, that maybe two or three NASA educators will come to the
museum and in essence be surrogates for NASA in our programs so
they could help make sure we were doing the right thing on
their behalf. I think what we learned out of this and the whole
effort eventually moved on, but we had a number of meetings
that were very useful. It was an odd sort of process and it
happened rather quickly, but it really brought all of us
together in the STEM education field and we started talking and
we found out places where we were doing things that others
weren't doing and places where others were doing things we
weren't doing and we created some really remarkable new
collaborations out of that.
For example, I mentioned digital badging. It happened to be
something that we have been very aggressive about with funding
from the MacArthur foundation, and so we were able to share
what we were doing in digital badging and now we have little
groups coming together to talk about digital badging where we
are sharing our insights about that. And so in a way it had
this odd sort of positive benefit at the end of the day.
Now, as far as the other museums are concerned, obviously,
we are the Nation's museum and we try to make a point about
that. That is why we have 184 affiliate museums. So we have
museums all over the country, many of which happen to be
science museums. And we share everything we have. Our goal is,
as soon as we do something, share it. As I mentioned with
Colorful Cosmos was an unusual case where we did issue a sub-
awards. We used the Gates Foundation money that I mentioned
earlier and we provided that to the regional museums that
didn't have a lot of money. We would award them $2,500 so they
could advertise it thoroughly through their local schools and
get as many young people as possible engaged in this great
opportunity to work with our scientists at SAO. So we try to
work very collaboratively with everyone wherever we go.
Mr. Hultgren. Let me follow up on this real quick. My
understanding is you can't make external grants specifically
with your resources that you have been given. How is the
institution able to partner with private sector organizations?
You have talked to about a little bit, I guess, with the Gates
but also just--if you can further on that a little bit more of
any other STEM education-related research or programs that you
see moving forward again that could provide hope and
encouragement? Maybe that has already been presented to a lot
of these institutions, but I have heard some concern I know
from some great institutions in the Chicago area.
Dr. Clough. A good example of that was the innovation grant
from the Department of Education. It is very competitive to get
in the game and we were, because of our experience, chosen to
go forward with that effort. The Department of Education gave
us $25 million but we had to raise $8 million privately. And
the idea is to engage the corporate community in the project so
they get, if you will, skin in the game in their schools and so
we leverage federal dollars with private dollars to make this
work.
I mentioned we are in Denver and it partly started when
Kirk was still out in Denver and we visited out there. We have
four affiliates in the Denver area of our museum. We worked
very collaboratively with those four museums. The Science and
Nature Museum is one of those. That effort is being entirely
funded by the corporate community because they love what we are
doing in our laser program, the one I mentioned, and they are
more than willing to fund us to do this. And so in that case it
happens to be almost a totally privately funded effort but we
are doing it in total collaboration with the local museums. In
fact, the head of the Denver Museum is our champion in Denver
to get that done.
Mr. Hultgren. My time is past expired. Thank you very much.
I appreciate it and yield back, Chairman.
Chairman Bucshon. Thank you very much.
I recognize Mr. Collins, five minutes.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, I love your museums. I used to come down here in
another life and I would always come down the night before and
pick one of your museums to go to. So I am going to ask you a
tough question so I want to set the stage. I love museums. I
love what you do. I am a collector of a number of things. And
so here is my question. When I was the county executive of Erie
County, New York, largest upstate county. If you know our
history, 1901 Pan Am Exposition, one of the wealthiest cities
in the United States at the turn of the last century, now the
third-poorest in the United States, but because of that
history, we have one of the most magnificent science museums,
one of the first in the country. We have a wonderful historical
society. We have got one of the greatest rare books collections
anywhere in the world. And, Dr. Johnson, we are home to the
Penn Dixie paleontology site. I don't know if you visit us but
that is well known.
So here is my issue. As county executive, we provided
millions of dollars of funding to each of these institutions,
and I remember a tour of the science museum and they display
about two percent of what they have. When I went into one room,
honest to God, they had 1,000 spears, from hundreds of years
ago and 10,000 arrowheads. And I am pragmatic to a fault. I
know I am. It is dollars and cents. But in this day, as Dr.
Johnson said, funding for these museums is difficult,
especially at the community level. What is your opinion of
deaccessions and if I have got 10,000 arrowheads and I got to
store them, selling 8,000 of them and--you know, you could
raise big--I am not talking about selling the Hope Diamond
although I would wonder what that might bring. It might dent
our national debt.
But could you just, you know, for a local museum and local
people, no one ever wants to give anything back, but let's face
it, many of them have so much stuff they have got to pay and--
just kind of interested in your opinion, not at your level but
more at the local level?
Dr. Johnson. Yes. I think one of the important things to
think about collections are many things and many of them formed
in the late 1800s or early 1900s and we have got a lot of
legacy collections out there. Museums that are well run do a
fair amount of collections planning and collections
improvement, and improvement includes both adding things to the
collection but also removing things from the collections that
are no longer useful or needed. It is a tricky business, and in
some cases, things like rare and endangered species or Native
American artifacts, it is very difficult to ethically dispose
of them. So you might think this is no longer needed but what
is the right step to deaccession it and then remove it to a
different place ethically? Often, we find it takes more money
to deaccession something than is available. So it is not a
simple solution. There have been many museums who thought they
could get out of the business of being museums and find that it
actually costs more to get out of the business than it does to
stay in the business.
So it is a challenge but there has been a growing trend and
we are one of the leaders in the trend of careful collections
planning with the intent of collections improvement because
collections must be used to be housed in the collections arena.
And we have done a lot of good work with that here because it
is not just the condition of the collection; it is what their
intellectual value is. Is it something that we need to keep? Is
there a reason for society to keep these objects in the public
trust? So a very hot topic in museology right now.
Dr. Pell. I will just add to that. You are talking about
arrowheads, which are pretty small. Well, we have some very
large things in our collection, too. We have aircraft, many of
them, and storing them is a huge challenge for us. And General
Dailey, who is the Director of the Air and Space Museum is very
carefully and from time to time deaccessioning some of our
aircraft to other aircraft museums around the country. So there
are times when it is appropriate to deaccession, especially if
we know that we can then make that artifact more available to
more people.
Dr. Clough. I would just add one more thing to this. The
opportune time to really make decisions about some of these
things is when you are doing some major overhaul to a
collection center. And we have military history uniforms at the
Smithsonian in the American History Museum, and recently, we
were fortunate to really go after that collection center and
update it and upgrade it. And it turned out we had many
duplicates of those uniforms and there was no reason for us to
have those. And as you know, there are many military museums
around the country. And so we deaccession by giving them to
other museums that had a case for those objects.
Mr. Collins. Well, I appreciate that. I can tell you when I
mentioned that at a board meeting, there was a hush in the room
that is even hard to describe when I thought of doing it, not
to give it to another museum but to sell it for money to help
fund the operations. It didn't go over real well. But, in this
day and age you have got to consider things. And as you said,
whether it is uniforms or other objects, there is a value there
and so forth.
Well, again, my time is expired but thank you for letting
us enjoy your exhibits today, and again, I am a big fan of
yours and thank you for all you do.
Dr. Johnson. Thank you.
Chairman Bucshon. Well, thank you very much to all the
witnesses. It has been fascinating testimony. Thanks for
bringing the scientists, for bringing all of your objects from
the Smithsonian. We have a nice military museum, by the way, in
Vincennes, Indiana, and a private guy would appreciate a few
planes if you are getting rid of any of them. This is a guy who
actually started a collection when he was in high school and
now he is probably in his late 60s; over the years he has
collected--and he of course travels the country meeting all
kinds of people and people give him planes because they know
him. It is fascinating.
The record will remain open for two weeks for additional
comments and written questions from the Members. At this point
the witnesses are excused and the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:30 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. G. Wayne Clough
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.049

Responses by Dr. Eva J. Pell
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.050

Responses by Dr. Kirk Johnson
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 86899.051

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Submitted statement of Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson, Ranking
Member, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Good afternoon, I would like to thank the Chairman for holding
today's hearing to explore the scientific research the Smithsonian is
undertaking.
The Smithsonian was established from a bequest of more than
$500,000 from a British scientist who never set foot on American soil.
While he never wrote about his motivation of giving the money to the
US, some speculate that he was inspired by the United States'
experiment with democracy, as well as his own philanthropic ideals. He
gave this gift to found an institution for the ``increase and diffusion
of knowledge.'' From that initial gift over 160 years ago, this country
has continued to fund the Smithsonian which has become as much of a
national treasure as any other monument on the National Mall.
It is easy to see how kids can be inspired to run home and look for
fossils in their backyards or try to identity the constellations in the
night sky after walking through the halls of any one of the
Smithsonian's museums. We only have to look at the latest student
assessment statistics to understand that our students are falling
further behind their international counterparts in science and math.
American competitiveness depends on our students' ability to meet the
science and technology needs of the not so distant future. The
Smithsonian's role in informal education is one that very much gives
students a hands-on experience for those subjects they learn in their
classrooms, enhancing their overall learning experience. Making STEM
education a positive learning experience is very important, and making
more STEM education programs accessible in communities that are
underrepresented in the STEM career fields is essential for our
nation's competitiveness.
I am eager to hear the status of the Smithsonian's role as the lead
agency on informal education and outreach as outlined in the
Administration's fiscal year 2014 proposed STEM education
reorganization.
In addition to the Smithsonian's administration of STEM programs,
it leads large-scale, worldwide research and curates and manages
scientific collections used not only by Smithsonian scientists but also
federal agencies. I congratulate Dr. Clough and Dr. Pell on their work,
and wish them well as they move on to future endeavors. I look forward
to a smooth transition in leadership and continuation of the important
research and education work done at the Smithsonian.
Again, I thank the witnesses for being here today and look forward
to their testimony. I yield the balance of my time.


