- EXAMINING LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS TO REDUCE REGULATORY BURDENS ON MAIN STREET JOB CREATORS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS
TO REDUCE REGULATORY BURDENS ON
MAIN STREET JOB CREATORS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
AND CONSUMER CREDIT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 21, 2015

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 114-55

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
99-753 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2016

_________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Chairman

PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina,  MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
Vice Chairman                        Member
PETER T. KING, New York              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BRAD SHERMAN, California
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
BILL POSEY, Florida                  WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
Pennsylvania                     DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        AL GREEN, Texas
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
ROBERT HURT, Virginia                ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio                  JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee       JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
MARLIN A. STUTZMAN, Indiana          TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        BILL FOSTER, Illinois
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              PATRICK MURPHY, Florida
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina     JOHN K. DELANEY, Maryland
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
KEITH J. ROTHFUS, Pennsylvania       DENNY HECK, Washington
LUKE MESSER, Indiana                 JUAN VARGAS, California
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
FRANK GUINTA, New Hampshire
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas
BRUCE POLIQUIN, Maine
MIA LOVE, Utah
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas
TOM EMMER, Minnesota

Shannon McGahn, Staff Director
James H. Clinger, Chief Counsel
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit

RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas, Chairman

STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico, Vice      WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri, Ranking
Chairman                             Member
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
BILL POSEY, Florida                  RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
Pennsylvania                     CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
MARLIN A. STUTZMAN, Indiana          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina     JOHN K. DELANEY, Maryland
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  DENNY HECK, Washington
KEITH J. ROTHFUS, Pennsylvania       KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
FRANK GUINTA, New Hampshire          JUAN VARGAS, California
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas
MIA LOVE, Utah
TOM EMMER, Minnesota

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
October 21, 2015.............................................     1
Appendix:
October 21, 2015.............................................    41

WITNESSES
Wednesday, October 21, 2015

Ireland, Oliver, Partner, Morrison & Foerster LLP................     6
Kupiec, Paul H., Resident Scholar, American Enterprise Institute.     4
Stanley, Marcus, Policy Director, Americans for Financial Reform
(AFR)..........................................................     7

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Ireland, Oliver..............................................    42
Kupiec, Paul H...............................................    50
Stanley, Marcus..............................................    58

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Neugebauer, Hon. Randy; and Tipton, Hon. Scott:
Written statement of the Credit Union National Association...    65
Written statement of the National Association of Federal
Credit Unions..............................................    69
Tipton, Hon. Scott:
Letter from the American Bankers Association, dated July 6,
2015.......................................................    71
Written statement of the Independent Community Bankers of
America....................................................    72

EXAMINING LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS
TO REDUCE REGULATORY BURDENS ON
MAIN STREET JOB CREATORS

----------

Wednesday, October 21, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions
and Consumer Credit,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Randy Neugebauer
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Neugebauer, Pearce, Lucas,
Posey, Luetkemeyer, Stutzman, Mulvaney, Pittenger, Barr,
Rothfus, Guinta, Tipton, Williams, Love, Emmer; Clay, Meeks,
Hinojosa, Scott, Maloney, Sherman, Delaney, Heck, Sinema, and
Vargas.
Ex officio present: Representatives Hensarling and Waters.
Also present: Representatives Hultgren, Stivers, Messer,
and Green.
Chairman Neugebauer. The Subcommittee on Financial
Institutions and Consumer Credit will come to order. Without
objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a recess of the
subcommittee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Examining Legislative
Proposals to Reduce Regulatory Burdens on Main Street Job
Creators.''
Before I begin, I would like to thank the witnesses for
traveling to 2128 Rayburn, and making yourselves available for
our questions. I also ask unanimous consent that any members of
the full Financial Services Committee who are not members of
the subcommittee be allowed to participate in today's hearing.
Without objection, it is so ordered.
I now recognize myself for 3 minutes to give an opening
statement.
Good morning. Today, we continue the subcommittee's focus
on providing regulatory relief for Main Street job creators.
Throughout this Congress, we have seen examples and heard
testimony about how regulatory impediments prohibit job
creation, cause consolidation of community financial
institutions, and decrease the choices for our consumers.
Some of the proposals we have already considered have
received bipartisan support. Many of the bills before this
subcommittee today are no different. For example,
Representative Stivers introduced H.R. 2121, the SAFE
Transitional Licensing Act, which will ensure that workers who
originate mortgages at depository institutions are able to move
to nondepository institutions with a minimal amount of work
disruption. This bill has very broad bipartisan support on the
committee and in the House.
H.R. 2473, introduced by Ranking Member Clay and I, will
ensure that small credit unions are able to more easily access
the secondary mortgage market to ensure their members get
competitive prices and robust credit availability. This bill is
especially important in light of the Federal Housing Finance
Agency's (FHFA's) proposed rule changing the membership
requirements of the Federal Home Loan Banks.
While not yet bipartisan, H.R. 3340, from Representative
Emmer, is another important bill to be considered today. It
would provide much needed congressional control over the budget
of the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC). While I
may not always agree with FSOC, it is perfectly positioned to
help coordinate multi-agency regulatory issues. I have become
increasingly disappointed that FSOC has failed to provide that
coordination and has instead become dominated by the Treasury
and the Federal Reserve.
Some will argue that this bill will undercut FSOC's work,
but that is really not the case. H.R. 3340 preserves the
funding stream for FSOC in the Office of Financial Research
(OFR), but requires congressional approval on how they spend
the money.
Several other great bills are before our committee today to
demonstrate the hard work of several of our members, and I look
forward to hearing from our witnesses about how these bills
will work from a mechanical standpoint, and how they will also
help us achieve the policy objective of reducing regulatory
burdens for our job creators.
I now recognize the ranking member of the subcommittee for
as much time as he may consume.
Mr. Clay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to each of the witnesses for your insight and
for your testimony today.
Much of our work in this subcommittee has been dedicated to
finding common ground on regulatory relief. We have been
partially successful in doing so, and today's hearing includes
a number of proposals that provide real relief for Main Street,
including H.R. 2473, as the chairman mentioned, a proposal that
we have cosponsored.
I would caution my colleagues against proposals that have
failed to attract bipartisan support and that undermine the
implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act, like H.R. 2896 and H.R.
3340, or like H.R. 2287, which seeks to pressure the National
Credit Union Association (NCUA) into shrinking its budget just
as credit unions become more complex. Regulatory relief is a
worthy objective, but it should always be balanced against
broader considerations, such as ensuring the safety and
soundness of our financial system, protecting the independence
of our financial regulators, and supporting the implementation
of Dodd-Frank.
Thank you again to each of today's witnesses. And I yield
back the remainder of my time.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
And now, the Chair recognizes the gentleman from Colorado,
Mr. Tipton, for 2 minutes.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank
the ranking member for holding this hearing.
Reducing the regulatory burden for Main Street job creators
like small banks and credit unions is certainly an important
topic and should continue to be a consistent bipartisan goal of
this committee. I would like to thank our witnesses for taking
the time to appear before the committee today as well.
I ask for unanimous consent to enter into the record
letters from the American Bankers Association, the Independent
Community Bankers of America, the Credit Union National
Association, and the National Association of Federal Credit
Unions supporting the Taking Account of Institutions with Low
Operational Risk (TAILOR) Act.
Chairman Neugebauer. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Tipton. H.R. 2896, the Taking Account of Institutions
with Low Operational Risk, or the TAILOR Act, which I
introduced with Representative Barr, is a legislative relief
effort designed to give financial regulators the ability to
appropriately tailor regulations to fit a bank or credit
union's business model and risk profile.
Banks and credit unions are currently regulated under a
one-size-fits-all approach, regardless of the size or risk
profile. This means that regulations designed and intended for
big banks are also applied to small community and independent
banks or credit unions imposing compliance regimens and costs
that many of them find unbearable. This legislation has the
support of 37 cosponsors and over 55 State bank and credit
union associations.
Additionally, several regulatory agencies recognize that
banks and credit unions which engage in traditional banking
activities should have their regulatory burden eased. That is
exactly what this legislation is intended to do. FDIC Chairman
Thomas Hoenig noted that for the vast majority of commercial
banks that stick to traditional banking activities, and conduct
their activities in a safe and sound manner, with sufficient
capital reserves, the regulatory burden should be eased.
Tailoring regulations to account for the business model,
risk profile, and cumulative impact ensures a strong regulatory
model that minimizes burdensome regulations. Research has also
shown that one-size-fits-all regulations have made it harder
for community banks' customers to obtain loans, as well as
making banking and credit services more expensive for small
businesses, those living in rural communities like the Third
District of Colorado which I represent, and millions of
American consumers and businesses that are more challenging to
reach or more expensive for larger banks to service.
This legislation will reverse that trend and help small
banks and credit unions focus on their communities again so
that Main Street can access the credit it needs for sustainable
economic growth.
Thank you, and I yield back my time.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
I will now introduce our panel. Dr. Paul Kupiec serves as a
resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute. Dr.
Kupiec's work focuses on the study of systemic risk and the
management of and regulations of banks and financial markets.
Mr. Oliver Ireland serves as a partner in the law firm of
Morrison & Foerster. Mr. Ireland's practice focuses on retail,
financial services, and bank regulatory issues.
And Mr. Marcus Stanley serves as policy director at
Americans for Financial Reform. Dr. Stanley's work focuses on
all aspects of financial regulations with a focus on Dodd-Frank
law.
Each of you will be recognized for 5 minutes to give an
oral presentation of your testimony. And without objection,
each of your written statements will be made a part of the
record.
Dr. Kupiec, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PAUL H. KUPIEC, RESIDENT SCHOLAR, AMERICAN
ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE

Mr. Kupiec. Chairman Neugebauer, Ranking Member Clay, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for
convening this hearing. It is an honor for me to testify here
today.
My testimony will consider the merits of seven separate
bills that are currently under consideration. In my opinion,
none of these bills will magnify financial sector risks, nor
will any of these bills dilute the Dodd-Frank Act's requirement
for heightened supervision and regulation of systemically
important financial institutions (SIFIs).
Many of these bills propose commonsense improvements to
existing legislation. For example, the SAFE Transitional
Licensing Act of 2015 creates a 120-day grace period during
which a licensed mortgage loan originator may continue
originating loans while changing jobs and applying for a new
license.
The National Credit Union Administration Budget
Transparency Act will approve accountability and management of
the NCUA by requiring public disclosure and soliciting comments
as part of the annual budgeting process.
The Community Bank Capital Clarification Act amends Section
171 of the Dodd-Frank Act so that all bank holding companies
with less than $15 billion in consolidated assets will be
exempt from the Dodd-Frank Act mandatory holding company
leverage and risk-based capital regulations. Bank holding
companies below the $15 billion threshold as of December 2009
were exempted in the Dodd-Frank Act because they were not seen
as a threat to financial stability. I do not see why similarly
sized institutions would pose a threat today.
The Preserving Capital Access and Mortgage Liquidity Act of
2015 allows credit unions under a billion dollars to join the
Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) System without meeting the FHFA's
proposed mortgage threshold rules. This amendment would merely
put the FHLB membership requirements for credit unions on par
with those of small banks.
The Financial Stability Oversight Council Reform Act places
the Office of Financial Research under the normal congressional
appropriations and oversight process. The OFR should have been
subject to these procedures from the beginning.
Two proposed bills are more involved and require a bit more
explanation. The TAILOR Act of 2015 requires bank regulatory
agencies to modify their supervision and regulation practices
so that they are appropriate for the risk profile of smaller
institutions. There is a legitimate concern in Congress that
the Dodd-Frank Act includes new heightened standards for
supervision and regulation that were intended for larger
institutions but instead are being applied to all regulated
depository institutions.
The TAILOR Act requires regulators to modify their one-
size-fits-all approach to regulation and reduce regulations and
processes that are burdening smaller institutions with
unnecessary and unproductive compliance costs. Regulators must
explicitly recognize the need to tailor regulations and
supervisory processes and reflect this tailoring in their
examination manuals and notices of proposal rulemaking.
The final bill I will discuss, H.R. 2209, requires the
banking agencies to amend their Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR)
rule to give low-risk, highly liquid, State and municipal bond
obligations treatment that is consistent with their liquidity
characteristics. The LCR requires large banks and bank holding
companies to hold a sufficient quantity of highly liquid assets
(HQLA) to enable them to survive a hypothetical month-long bank
run. The LCR has specific requirements that determine which
bank assets count as HQLA. The final LCR rule does not
recognize State or municipal bonds as HQLA, so they have no
value toward satisfying the LCR requirement.
Many public comment letters recommended that investment
grade liquid, State, and municipal securities be included in
HQLA. The reasons for counting State and muni securities in
HQLA include the fact that many of these bonds are at least as
liquid as the corporate bonds that are eligible for HQLA
treatment, many have higher ratings and better liquidity than
some of the foreign bonds that are also eligible for Level 1
and Level 2 assets in the HQLA, and many asset-specific
characteristics for the Level 2 and Level B requirements are
met by many State and municipal bonds.
There is concern that the exclusion of State and municipal
bonds from the definition of HQLA will damage muni market
liquidity as banks will no longer favor holding these issues.
In May 2015, the Federal Reserve Board proposed amending its
LCR rule to recognize State and municipal bonds as Level 2
assets, which would count as HQLA.
H.R. 2209 will require the Federal banking agencies to
revise the final LCR rule to include qualifying State and
municipal bonds as Level 2A assets in the definition of HQLA.
This change is appropriate and consistent with the public
interest. I would go further and recommend that State and
municipal bonds that satisfy the characteristics required by
Level 2B assets should also be recognized in HQLA.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Kupiec can be found on page
50 of the appendix.]
Chairman Neugebauer. Thank you.
Mr. Ireland, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF OLIVER IRELAND, PARTNER, MORRISON & FOERSTER LLP

Mr. Ireland. Thank you, Chairman Neugebauer, Ranking Member
Clay, and members of the subcommittee. I am pleased to be here
today. My name is Oliver Ireland. I am a partner in the
financial services practice at Morrison & Foerster here in town
and previously was an Associate General Counsel with the
Federal Reserve Board. I was with the Federal Reserve System
for 26 years before joining private practice. I currently have
more than 40 years experience dealing with bank regulatory
issues.
Today, the subcommittee is considering seven different
proposals that cover a broad range of issues. My testimony will
touch on each of them. I look forward to questions and to
drilling down on details at the subcommittee's pleasure.
The TAILOR Act, H.R. 2896, would address the problem of
regulatory burdens on smaller institutions due to requirements
designed for larger and more complex institutions. Many of the
provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act tried to differentiate between
larger and smaller institutions, some of them in the statute,
some of them in the regulations, but there is nevertheless a
trickle-down effect on smaller institutions.
Smaller institutions remain subject to some very complex
rules, including things such as the Volcker Rule, and while in
practice it shouldn't apply to any of their activities, they
still have to understand the Rule in order to be sure that it
doesn't. So I think the TAILOR Act is another step to try to
address regulatory burden on smaller institutions. I think it
is an important step.
H.R. 2987, the Community Bank Clarification Act, would
expand the grandfather for capital instruments for under-$15
billion institutions. This is a technical change to the current
statute. Drafting legislation, particularly in a response to a
crisis such as the recent financial crisis, and creating the
Dodd-Frank Act is hard work. There are bound to be technical
issues. This is one of the technical issues, it is a cleanup,
and I can't see why there should be any controversy with
respect to that provision.
H.R. 2473, Preserving Capital Access and Mortgage
Liquidity, expands credit unions' access to Federal Home Loan
Bank membership and Federal Home Loan Bank borrowing and should
promote credit union lending to smaller businesses, smaller
farms, and community development organizations, and I think
that is also desirable.
H.R. 2121 is the SAFE Transitional Licensing Act and deals
with mortgage originator licensing under the SAFE Act and
facilitates the movement of mortgage originators, individuals,
from depository institutions to nondepository institutions and
between States. I understand that there is perhaps a subsequent
discussion draft of that bill, and there may be technical
issues that need to be worked out, but I think the thrust of
the proposal is good and will improve competition among
mortgage originators, and competition improves quality.
H.R. 2287 deals with budgetary transparency for the NCUA. I
understand that bank regulators don't necessarily like to have
their budgets scrutinized. I lived as a bank regulator for a
long time, and I think at least the bank regulatory budget
ought to be something that people are aware of and understand
the purposes of and understand what is going on, and I am for
budgetary transparency.
H.R. 2209 deals with municipal obligations under the
Liquidity Coverage Ratio. I think that the failure to include
municipal obligations as high-quality liquid assets in the
current rules will adversely affect the liquidity of those
obligations and will almost inevitably adversely affect the
pricing of those obligations, making it more difficult and more
expensive for States and municipalities to raise funding going
forward. And as my colleague Dr. Kupiec pointed out, the risks
of expanding high-quality liquid assets to pick up these assets
are minimal.
The Financial Stability Oversight Council Reform Act again
is budgetary transparency and budgetary accountability for the
Office of Financial Research. I think the people of the United
States have a right to know how their money is being spent and
oversight over that money, unless there are serious issues that
the political process will impair those functions, which I
don't see here.
Thank you. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ireland can be found on page
42 of the appendix.]
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
Now, Mr. Stanley, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARCUS STANLEY, POLICY DIRECTOR, AMERICANS FOR
FINANCIAL REFORM (AFR)

Mr. Stanley. Thank you. Chairman Neugebauer, Ranking Member
Clay, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify before you today.
AFR opposes H.R. 2287, H.R. 2896, and H.R. 3340. We also
have some concerns regarding H.R. 2209. We have no views on the
other bills under consideration today.
The TAILOR Act would mandate that Federal banking
regulators tailor regulations to the risk profile of regulated
institutions. We view the specific requirements in this
legislation as unnecessary, as regulators are already scaling
rules to the business model of affected institutions.
We also view several of the provisions in this bill as
potentially harmful. H.R. 2896 requires Federal financial
regulators to limit the regulatory impact costs and burdens to
regulated institutions. This broad and vague mandate
prioritizes reducing the cost of regulation over the offsetting
benefits gained for consumers and the general public. It would
apply to all regulated entities and is not limited to community
banks.
While the requirements in H.R. 2896 sound reasonable in the
abstract, their practical effect would be to layer additional
requirements on an already lengthy and cumbersome rulemaking
process and to create numerous litigation opportunities for the
financial industry to challenge regulation in court based on
the extremely broad and vague mandates in this legislation.
H.R. 3340 would eliminate the independent funding for the
Financial Stability Oversight Council and its research arm, the
Office of Financial Research, and also require that the OFR
provide an advance comment period prior to issuing any report.
The FSOC and the OFR were created as a direct response to
the grave weaknesses in the financial regulatory system that
were revealed in the 2008 financial crisis. The inability to
provide unified and coherent oversight of nonbank financial
institutions, as well as the financial system as a whole,
contributed directly to the financial crisis of 2008 and its
disastrous impact on the U.S. and world economy.
Political independence is crucial to the work of the FSOC
and the OFR. While there are many checks and balances built
into the process of FSOC designation, including multiple appeal
opportunities and the ability to challenge FSOC designation in
court, the potential micromanagement of financial risk
assessment through the congressional appropriations process
should not be one of them.
The importance of impartial risk assessment is the reason
why all of our major bank regulators, including the FDIC, the
OCC, the Federal Reserve, and the CFPB, are independently
funded outside of the congressional appropriations process.
The bill's requirement that the OFR solicit public comment
prior to issuing reports on financial risk would also limit the
independence of the agency and its ability to objectively
assess risk, free of outside pressures.
H.R. 2287 would require the National Credit Union
Administration to make drafts of their agency budget publicly
available for comment and to respond to or incorporate such
public comments in their final agency budget. We believe the
budgetary requirement in H.R. 2287 is inappropriate for a
public regulatory entity. The NCUA has the crucial role of
safeguarding the taxpayer guarantee of publicly insured credit
union deposits. It requires independence from those it
regulates.
While credit unions certainly did not cause the 2008
crisis, it is still important to remember that significant
public action was required during that period to rescue the
credit union system. This included the seizure and closure of
several large credit unions and the issuance of over $30
billion in government-guaranteed bonds to stabilize the system.
H.R. 2209 would mandate that banking regulators classify
investment grade municipal debt obligations as liquid assets
under the Liquidity Coverage Ratio. AFR shares concerns
regarding the treatment of municipal debt in the LCR rule and
raised similar concerns in our comment to regulators. However,
we believe that given existing regulatory efforts to address
this issue, and the apparently quite limited impact of the LCR
rule on the municipal debt market, it is more appropriate to
leave this issue to regulatory action rather than act through
statute.
In relation to the FSOC, which is related to the H.R. 3340
bill being discussed today, I would also like to mention
another piece of legislation, H.R. 1550, that while not
included in today's legislation, may also be marked up by the
committee soon. This legislation would at least double the time
it takes for the Council to designate a large financial firm
from the current 2 years to at least 4 years, and it could
create a situation where a large financial firm that is skilled
at manipulating the process could delay increased regulatory
oversight almost indefinitely.
FSOC designation is already a multiyear process that
includes some 10 major steps and multiple opportunities for
appeal. Given the importance of the FSOC, Congress should
reject legislation like H.R. 1550 that would bog down
operations even further.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stanley can be found on page
58 of the appendix.]
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions.
I want to go to H.R. 2209, the municipal securities as
high-quality liquid assets. It was mentioned that in the
current rule that high-quality investment grade municipals
would not be HQLA. And so I think one of the questions that
comes from that is--and I will start with you, Dr. Kupiec--what
are the consequences to these municipals and to States if these
investment grade municipals are not allowed to be high-quality
liquid assets?
Mr. Kupiec. Thank you. Any rule that limits a large set of
financial institutions' ability to hold these kind of
instruments cannot be a good thing for the State muni bond
markets. It has to increase the rates they pay on new issues.
The liquidity rules singling out types of instruments that
can't be used to satisfy a liquidity requirement is like a
feedback loop. If you can't buy the bonds, banks aren't going
to buy the bonds, and the liquidity in the bond market will go
down. There will be ramifications.
The bill under consideration--all it asks for is that if
the bonds actually satisfy the specifications in the rule that
would make them eligible for Level 2A or 2B status, they ought
to be recognized. The rule is very explicit about the liquidity
criteria. So if the bonds meet the liquidity criteria, why
aren't we recognizing them? It seems to me a fairly
straightforward way to improve the Liquidity Coverage Ratio.
Chairman Neugebauer. Mr. Ireland, you said in your
testimony that the demand for these securities generated by the
designation would create liquidity and result in lower cost of
funding. Can you also elaborate, then, on how this designation
can increase the demand by the banks for these municipal
securities?
Mr. Ireland. I think a key feature is looking at the market
liquidity and banks' investment incentives under the Liquidity
Coverage Ratio in conjunction with other rules. For example,
the leverage ratio in the capital rules, and particularly the
supplemental leverage ratio for larger institutions, to the
extent that it is binding, tends to discourage institutions
from holding lower-yielding high-quality bond assets because it
places the same capital charge on those assets as it places on
higher-yielding loan assets, for example.
So as you are looking at your balance sheet, the larger
banks are discouraged, essentially, from holding municipal
securities because of some of the capital rules, and they will
have an incentive, however, to hold securities that satisfy the
Liquidity Coverage Ratio rules, and things that are similar but
aren't listed in the Liquidity Coverage Ratio rules will suffer
significantly. And I think you are going to start to see a
cliff effect at the line between those eligible high-quality
liquid assets and things that aren't. And so you are making the
market through the rules, and if you leave the munis out of the
rules, I think it is inevitable, as Dr. Kupiec has said, going
to cost municipalities and States money and their funding.
Chairman Neugebauer. It appeared to me that there were
really kind of two losers, and that one is the States and
municipalities, but also the banks. In this very-low-interest
rate environment, a few basis points makes a big difference.
And obviously, the municipals have two advantages to them, one
a little bit higher yield, and the other is the tax
consequences of not being taxable also enhance that yield a
little bit.
Mr. Ireland. I think it adversely affects everybody
concerned.
Chairman Neugebauer. Mr. Stanley, you mentioned in your
testimony that there were some important safeguards in H.R.
2209 that you were complimentary of, so would you elaborate a
little bit on those?
Mr. Stanley. Yes. Dr. Kupiec mentioned those safeguards,
that the legislation does specify that in order to be eligible
muni bonds would have to satisfy the rules for liquidity,
marketability, and being investment grade. And I thought it was
good that that was specified in the statute.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman. I don't really
have enough time for another question, so I am going to
recognize the gentleman from Missouri, the ranking member of
the subcommittee, Mr. Clay, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Clay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Stanley, could you describe the regulatory capture
concerns that are created by a process where credit unions are
shaping their regulators' budget?
Mr. Stanley. Yes. The concern is that the regulated
entities, in this case credit unions, would have an incentive
to take risks with insured deposits, and the NCUA, of course,
is in a supervisory role to ensure that they don't do that. So
there are differing interests there. And if regulated entities
could effectively punish their regulator for stringent
supervision, for preventing them from taking risks that might
profit the credit union but risk those insured deposits, then
they could use the budget process to do that.
Mr. Clay. So H.R. 2287, if adopted, sets a dangerous
precedent for other prudential regulators?
Mr. Stanley. Absolutely. These are not self-regulatory
bodies. They are public regulatory bodies protecting the public
interest and protecting potential taxpayer exposure on insured
deposits, and it is very important to keep that line clear.
Mr. Clay. What lessons did we learn from the financial
crisis concerning the dangers of captive regulators and
excessive industry influence on the budgets of prudential
regulators?
Mr. Stanley. I think there were many, many lessons.
Regulators clearly ignored a massive buildup of systemic risk
throughout the financial system. There appears to have been
this kind of bidding process between different regulators where
agencies like the Office of Thrift Supervision let it be known
that they were more lenient as regulators in order to get the
budgetary advantages of supervising particular entities.
And in retrospect, the failures of risk management and the
failures of regulators to spot these risks building up in the
system were just egregious, and there is a lot in Dodd-Frank
instructing and requiring regulators to take stronger action,
and we need to not roll that back.
Mr. Clay. Is there any reason to believe that the credit
union industry won't seek the same kinds of reductions in the
NCUA supervisory resources that they sought from 2001 to 2009
when the NCUA held predecisional budget hearings?
Mr. Stanley. Yes, that is a great example. I was speaking
more broadly about the financial crisis, but in the specific
case of credit unions, the NCUA actually had fewer supervisors
in 2009 than they did in the year 2000, despite the growth of
the financial sector, and we had a major crash of the credit
union system in 2009 and 2010 which required large-scale public
intervention. So that is a lesson we need to learn from.
Mr. Clay. All right. At this point, Mr. Chairman, I have no
further questions and I yield back.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
I recognize the gentleman from New Mexico, the vice
chairman of the subcommittee, Mr. Pearce, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pearce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate each of you and your testimony.
Now, one of the things that we have been wrestling with in
our State is that the Dodd-Frank regulations were intended for
the large institutions but they bleed down to the smaller ones
because it's impossible in the mindset of regulators to have
two different mindsets when you walk in, so they are going to
hold to the tighter regulations.
Mr. Kupiec, are you familiar with any of the effects that
this is having on financial institutions in the smaller rural
States, ones without the big megabanks?
Mr. Kupiec. I am familiar with the general process you
described, having worked for a bank regulatory agency for many
years. I am not particularly familiar with anything that is
going on in any particular institution.
Mr. Pearce. Thank you.
Mr. Kupiec. The process, though, is kind of very natural.
Within the bank supervisory community, the supervisors who are
in charge of the largest institutions are generally thought to
be sort of the best and the brightest. They are the top of the
class, the ones who get promoted, the ones who move up in the
agencies. And this sort of creates this standard that all the
other examiners want to do exactly what the guys in the big
institutions and women in the big institutions are doing.
There is this very natural process where the regulations
imposed on the--the most complicated regulations are the ones
that everybody wants to use because it sort of promotes the
examiner's career path. So there is a real sort of social force
here that makes the more complex regulations feed down into the
smaller institutions. It is pervasive in the way the
examination process works.
Mr. Pearce. If you have been inside the room doing the
process, then maybe I would like to hear your observation on
Mr. Stanley's assertion that tailored rules will limit the
regulatory compliance impact, cause liability, other budgets,
and it will mandate the prioritization of the cost of
regulations to financial institutions over the offsetting
benefits to the consumers.
Because I see that playing out exactly the opposite way.
There is nobody from a big institution in New York who is going
to come out and give a loan for a mobile home in my district,
and 50 percent of the houses in my district are mobile homes.
And so, there are people like Mr. Stanley who would say, no,
they all have to come by the same rule, and it is not really
unfair to the small people. Banks are closing at an alarming
rate in the smaller States, in the smaller rural communities,
and there is nobody coming from Washington, D.C., to give small
business loans and to lend money for trailer houses.
So I would like your observations on his comments that that
would somehow disenfranchise the consumers out there. It looks
like putting them under the bigger regulatory standards of the
big institutions is actually what is disenfranchising the
consumers. Would you like to comment?
Mr. Kupiec. I would say a good example of this is the rules
that were promulgated by the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau (CFPB) on the mortgage underwriting standards, where
small bankers in small towns have to adopt what were
essentially the same practices that the largest banks would use
to document all kinds of processes when, in fact, in a small
town those things may not be the right way to underwrite
mortgages, that they took basically a computer-driven
underwriting standard that would apply in the largest shops and
forced those standards to be reflected in the smaller banks. So
that is exactly the kind of problem that these rules cause, and
it does force smaller banks out of the business.
Mr. Pearce. But you as a former regulator confirm that your
observation is that the people who percolate to the top in the
regulatory field are going to be the ones who come from the big
institutions, and they have that bias towards everyone
following the same rule, and so you are confirming that.
Mr. Stanley, I would love to hear your observation as to
why we in the small community shouldn't be screaming at the
process which is eliminating our access to capital. The poor
people in New Mexico are not going to be able to get a loan off
of Wall Street, believe me. When you succeed, and people with
your viewpoint succeed in shutting us down, we have nothing
else. So I would appreciate your observations.
Mr. Stanley. Let me say, first of all, to take the case of
the CFPB, the CFPB did provide extensive exemptions for small
banks and banks in rural communities from those underwriting
provisions, the qualified mortgage provisions that Dr. Kupiec
refers to. And I would also say, if our concern is, say, banks
under a billion dollars, which make up a very substantial
portion of community banks and are, I think, the community
banks where we have the economic issues, let's limit these
bills to banks under a billion dollars; let's put size
limitations on these bills.
Mr. Pearce. Mr. Chairman, before I yield back, and I
appreciate that, but those safeguards that were put into the
bill you hear are being routinely ignored because the bias
inside the agency says so.
Again, I yield back. And I appreciate your response, sir.
Chairman Neugebauer. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Hinojosa, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Hinojosa. Thank you, Chairman Neugebauer and Ranking
Member Clay, for holding this hearing.
And thank you to those distinguished panel members for your
appearance and testimony here today.
Small businesses and Main Street are the lifeblood of our
economy. We should be doing everything we can to ensure that
Main Street America is able to prosper.
Sadly, however, this Congress is going down a path
fundamentally hurtful to Main Street. While this committee
examines legislative proposals aimed at helping Main Street,
the House today considers H.R. 692, the Pay China First Act.
This H.R. 692 is nothing but default by another name. Moreover,
adding insult to injury, H.R. 692 mandates that we pay
foreigners instead of American servicemembers and veterans.
Rather than acting responsibly, this Congress prefers to
play Russian roulette with our economy and the lives of
millions of Americans. Raising the debt ceiling does not
increase the deficit nor authorize new spending. It merely pays
the bills this Congress has already authorized. Raising the
debt ceiling is the only responsible thing to do, in my
opinion.
My first question goes to Paul Kupiec. H.R. 2209 would
consider muni bonds that are liquid and readily marketable, as
well as investment grade to be treated as Level 2A liquid
assets. The banking regulators appear to have been unable to
fairly or effectively differentiate between municipal
securities.
So by skirting the regulatory process, is Congress
essentially picking winners and losers between financial asset
holdings for banks and financial institutions?
Mr. Kupiec. Thank you very much for the question.
I don't think that Congress is necessarily stepping in to
pick winners and losers. What I think they are doing is
stepping in to encourage the bank regulators to actually pay
attention to this problem.
As I mentioned, in May the Federal Reserve Board introduced
a notice of proposed rulemaking to allow munis to be considered
as Level 2B assets, even though they passed the final rule the
prior October and didn't permit muni assets in. So, the Federal
Reserve Board has started to rethink the rule and change the
rule. And what the committee has merely said was, this is a
good idea, speed it up, but if they qualify as Level 2A assets,
why aren't you counting them as 2A assets then?
Mr. Hinojosa. Let me ask you then, of the more than 90,000
municipal insurers--that includes States, cities, schools, and
hospitals--which municipalities do you think would qualify as
liquid, readily marketable, and investment grade? Give me a few
examples.
Mr. Kupiec. I couldn't give you names right off, but I am
sure that you want me to say it is the larger municipalities
and States, and I would have to agree, that is probably the
case.
Mr. Hinojosa. Those in small communities like mine and that
of the former speaker, I think that we are very concerned that
the small ones would be hurt.
Let me ask you this last point. NCUA, did they voluntarily
between 2001 and 2009 lead to a substantial reduction in the
NCUA budget during that period and leave the agency
insufficiently resourced to respond to the credit union
failures during that 2008 financial crisis?
Mr. Kupiec. I am not versed in what happened internally in
the NCUA over that time, but I would say that all of the
financial regulators were unable to respond to the crisis. So I
don't think it was particularly a unique situation in NCUA, and
I am not sure just allowing budgets to be produced without any
public accountability or with public knowledge fixes the
problem.
Mr. Hinojosa. Mr. Oliver Ireland, the TAILOR Act would
require the Federal regulators to engage in additional--is my
time up? I yield back.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
The gentleman from Missouri, the chairman of our Housing
and Insurance Committee, Mr. Luetkemeyer, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to start out with talking about H.R. 2987, the
Community Bank Capital Clarification Act, and I think basically
it is kind of a unique piece of legislation, because I think it
addresses a unique problem here from the standpoint that within
Dodd-Frank, there is a problem that has arisen with regard to
trust-preferred securities that are used as Tier 1 capital or
count toward it.
Dodd-Frank stuck in there a date of any bank holding
company that is $15 billion or more at that point in time goes
into a separate set of rules and those under don't. And what
happens if the institution gets rid of its Tier 1 trust-
preferred securities is they get to fall back, and there is no
provision for that to allow to happen, so they are kind of
stuck in limbo here, is my understanding.
And so, Mr. Ireland, I want to ask you if my interpretation
of that is correct, and what kind of institutions are going to
benefit from this bill?
Mr. Ireland. First of all, I think your interpretation is
correct. I think it is basically a drafting glitch in the
original Dodd-Frank Act. And an institution that downsized
since 2009, the 2009 grandfather date in the bill, and was
above $15 billion in the holding company before that and became
below $15 billion afterwards because perhaps they sold off some
of their units or for other reasons, they are now a smaller
institution, but they don't get the same treatment as other
smaller institutions. And I just don't see the logic to that
difference.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Mr. Stanley, is there any meaningful
advantage to examine the bank's capital adequacy at a date back
in time like this?
Mr. Stanley. Excuse me, I didn't quite hear the question.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Is there a meaningful advantage to
examining a bank's capital adequacy going back in time to a
historic date like this?
Mr. Stanley. We don't have views on this legislation and we
don't have an objection to it, I don't think.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. You realize then it is a glitch, and we
need to fix the problem so that those banks which are
inadvertently caught in this trap can get this thing fixed?
Mr. Stanley. I think that $15 billion line is one example
of many, many places in Dodd-Frank where there was an attempt
to restrict the impact of these new rules and regulations to
larger banks. And if you have a bank that is now legitimately a
smaller bank, I think that it makes sense not to apply it.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I appreciate your support. Thank you.
I know that the gentleman from Colorado has a great bill I
think here, the TAILOR Act, and I don't want to steal his
thunder, but I do have one comment about this bill because I
think it is extremely important that, in my judgment, what he
is trying to do here is within 3 years, have the agencies
revisit the rules that they have implemented since the passage
of Dodd-Frank. And to me, this is just common sense.
Any time you do anything in the business world, you are
constantly reviewing to make sure that the decisions you made
are accurate, the decisions you made actually work. In this
situation, what we are trying to do is take a commonsense
approach to these rules and have the regulators go back and
take a look at them. Maybe they need to be strengthened. Maybe
they need to be weakened because they are too tough. But we
won't know unless we review them and find out the impact,
because none of these rules were created with an impact
statement, with any sort of cost-benefit analysis, they were
all just thrown out there in this bill. And it has been 5
years, so let's stop and think about this.
So I know, Mr. Kupiec and Mr. Ireland, both of you had some
very positive statements to say about the TAILOR Act. I wonder
if you would like to, Dr. Kupiec, make a couple more judgments
on it?
Mr. Kupiec. I just think it is a good idea to move forward,
to put the regulatory agencies on notice that you do expect the
rules to reflect the risk profile. And I can't see why this
isn't a good idea.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. It is interesting, because I think the
regulators, when they go in and examine, they are going to
require that the banks review their loan files, their loan
documents, on a regular basis, so why shouldn't the regulars go
back and look at the rules on a regular basis? It makes sense
to me.
Your opinion, Mr. Ireland?
Mr. Ireland. This is an old problem. We have had this for
decades that the regulatory system focuses on the larger bank
problems, the burdens trickle down to the smaller banks, and
the regulators, trying to solve the bigger problem, don't
adequately adjust for the impact on smaller banks. There are
numerous examples of legislation trying to fix the problem, but
it is still here and we haven't fixed it. And I think
everything Congress does to draw attention to it is beneficial
to small banks, small businesses, and the customers they serve.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you. And I yield back the balance of
my time, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
And now, the Chair recognizes the gentleman from Georgia,
Mr. Scott, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
These seven legislative proposals that we are considering
today serve, in my opinion, as a positive step to help reduce
many of the regulatory burdens. But I am particularly
supportive of H.R. 2287, which would require the National
Credit Union Administration Board to submit a detailed draft of
their budget to the Federal Register for comment and hold
public hearings.
Now, I think it was about a month or so ago that NCUA Chair
Debbie Matz appeared before this committee and gave us some
very interesting testimony. But the record will reflect that
her testimony revealed a very severe need for our particular
legislation, because our legislation would simply have the NCUA
be held accountable for its budget and would allow the credit
unions that they represent to take a more active role in its
budget decisions.
And I believe that our bill, with Representative Mulvaney
providing the leadership, will do just that. It is very
necessary, from her testimony, to really show how crucial it is
to do this so that we can build a more positive relationship
between the NCUA and the credit unions that it represents.
And so I wanted to make that clear, Mr. Chairman, because
this is one time that a hearing has produced a great need for
legislation, and this committee has, under the leadership of
Representative Mulvaney, provided just that leadership, and I
am proud to work with him on it.
Mr. Ireland, I am concerned about smaller banking
institutions and the larger banking institutions. Could you
explain more about the stratification that smaller banking
institutions experience regarding trying to implement risk-
based models compared to our larger banking institutions?
Mr. Ireland. Sure. The problem, and we have seen this now,
we have seen constant consolidation in the banking world. Banks
keep getting bigger over time. One of the things driving this
is the regulatory cost of being a bank and doing compliance.
And if you are a smaller bank, you have to understand the
regulations you have to comply with and you have to put in
place compliance programs, and that is even if the rules, like
the Volcker Rule, are designed for much larger banks, you are
still not completely exempt. And then you have to spread the
cost of that regulatory compliance effort over a much smaller
base, and so it drives up the cost to the smaller banks and
makes it less economic for them to operate.
A $500 million bank can't proprietary trade under the
Volcker Rule. How can a $500 million bank tell whether or not
it is proprietary trading, since it doesn't have the money to
sit down and read that 800-page Federal Register notice and
sort out the 2,500 or 3,000 footnotes in it? So the burden on
smaller banks is disproportionate to the burden on larger
banks.
Mr. Scott. And there is another bill that I think is also
very important, and that is Representative Stivers' H.R. 2121
concerning the difficulties that loan originators face when
moving to another State or seeking a license. Could you give me
some examples of those difficulties, Mr. Ireland or Mr. Kupiec
or Mr. Stanley, any of you?
Mr. Ireland. I would be happy to address that. One of the
problems is that you have to become licensed as a loan
originator if you are not in a bank. You have to be registered
if you are in a bank. So if you are in a bank, if you work for
a bank as a mortgage loan officer and you want to move to a
nonbank, you have to become licensed, and there is going to be
a delay in that process. And what this bill would do is provide
a 120-day transition period so you can work while you get the
license as you move to the nonbank provider, and the same kind
of things work in moving from one State to another.
Fostering mobility among individual loan originators,
people who work in the business, fosters competition and is
going to make the system work better. And so I think this kind
of thing makes a lot of sense. There are in this bill and in
the other bills some details that may need to be worked out,
but I think moving in this direction is something that the
committee wants to do.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Ireland.
Chairman Neugebauer. I now recognize the gentleman from
South Carolina, Mr. Mulvaney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mulvaney. I thank the chairman and the ranking member.
I also thank Mr. Scott for his input on H.R. 2287, which I want
to review very briefly. I wish Mr. Hinojosa was still here. He
had asked a question earlier about the NCUA budget from 2001
through 2009, and I think he implied in his question that the
budget had gone down to the point where the NCUA was not able
to deal with the financial crisis.
I am looking at the numbers from 2002 through 2009, and
they didn't go down, and I haven't heard anybody here claim
that they were unable to deal with the financial crisis. In
fact, everything I have heard about the credit unions is they
weren't really part of the financial crisis to begin with, that
they may have faced some challenges that came with the larger
overall declining economy, but certainly they were not at the
epicenter of the difficulties.
I wish that he was here to hear that because I think that
concern--and the reason he raised it, by the way, for those of
you who follow H.R. 2287, is that the NCUA is now claiming that
if we have to go back to the system we had between 2001 and
2009, they won't have enough money, that additional insight and
oversight by the folks who pay the bills will effectively drive
the regulator out of business.
That is simply not the case with the historical numbers
from the period of time when they used to do that. They used to
have that type of oversight, from 2001 to 2009, and when Chair
Matz came in, she stopped that process. So just to set the
record straight, we don't have a problem historically. There is
no correlation between oversight and participation and the NCUA
not being able to do its job.
Now with that, there is another complaint, Mr. Ireland,
that Chair Matz is making now, which is that if you go back to
the old system it will cause the agency to--will jeopardize the
agency's policy independence. How would you respond to that,
sir?
Mr. Ireland. I don't think transparency without control
jeopardizes their independence. So if what you are saying is
you are going to make your budget public, you are going to
solicit comments on your budget, and you are going to respond
to your budget, that puts you through a discipline to justify
what you are doing. It doesn't cede control of the budget to
somebody else. It doesn't mandate reductions in the budget. I
think that adds discipline to the budgetary process, and I
think the NCUA and, quite frankly, the rest of the bank
regulators in their bank supervisory activities can only
benefit from that kind of discipline.
Mr. Mulvaney. And again for people who are not familiar
with the issue, the money to run the NCUA right now comes from
the credit unions. Since credit unions are owned by their
members, it is actually the members' money that is going to
fund the oversight. And without the participation of the credit
unions, there is actually nobody there watching after the
members' money. Not us and not them. It is sort of the reason
we have introduced H.R. 2287.
I do want to point out for the record that Chair Matz has
offered to have a public hearing. She just announced it this
past Friday. But I understand she will not be publishing the
budget before that hearing. Even though she said she would
welcome questions about the budget, she is not going to publish
it.
By the way, when she was here last time, she promised us
that would be on the website, and I don't know how you
reconcile those two things. If it is not available before the
meeting, I am not sure what the meeting is. I also understand
that at least one board member was not made aware of that
meeting. And that is the type of atmosphere that I think is
unhealthy when we have Federal regulation.
Mr. Stanley, I will press you on one issue, because you
have checked in on the other side of this issue, which is you
think the NCUA should be outside of what you call--should be
free from politics, I think were your words. If I am misstating
that, please let me know, but that is what I have in your
testimony, that it should be free from politics.
Let me ask you a question. Let's put FSOC and NCUA aside.
What other Federal agencies would you like to see free from
politics?
Mr. Stanley. I am not sure it was free from politics
exactly, but I think the issue is that the entities that an
agency regulates are only a small portion of the entire public
interest. They are just one aspect of our economy and of our
public. And there is often--there is a broader public interest.
For example, the NCUA has oversight over insured deposits, and
there may be exposure to the U.S. Treasury if there are
sufficient losses on those insured deposits. So, there is a
public interest that is different there.
Mr. Mulvaney. I am not disagreeing with you, but how would
more transparency and participation in the budget process put
that in jeopardy?
Mr. Stanley. I think there is already extensive
transparency in the NCUA budget. They put up a very extensive
justification of their budget and all the details of their
budget numbers on their website. I think what this bill seems
to call for is the involvement of regulated entities.
Mr. Mulvaney. It is not available to the folks before this
meeting next week. How can you say that?
Mr. Stanley. I think that when they finalize their budget,
it is available. People can see what that budget is and what
that justification is, and certainly they can raise an issue. I
think the issue is bringing regulated entities into the process
of setting the budget in advance.
Mr. Mulvaney. Fair enough. We are a regulated entity. We
represent the taxpayers, and we bring the taxpayers into the
process of looking at their regulators' budgets every single
day. It seems to have worked for the last 240 years. Not well
all the time, but it does seem to work.
With that, I will yield back the balance of my time. Thank
you.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair recognizes the ranking member of the full
Financial Services Committee, the gentlewoman from California,
Ms. Waters, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much.
I would like to pose a question to Mr. Stanley.
Mr. Stanley, H.R. 3340 would eliminate the independence of
the Financial Stability Oversight Council and the Office of
Financial Research by subjecting their budgets to the
appropriations process. In your opinion, what would be the
effect of this legislation? What are the benefits of having an
independent counsel to monitor systemic risk as well as an
independent research office to support that mission?
Mr. Stanley. I think this kind of relates to the previous
question that was asked. I think we have all seen in
Washington, D.C., that there can be a narrow interest with
money at stake that can hire lobbyists to influence the process
and have an untoward influence on the process. And those narrow
insider interests can come to dominate processes like financial
regulation.
I think the benefit of having some independence for these
financial regulatory agencies is that they can make their own
calls on the risks to the broader public, the potential risks
to the broader financial system and the public, including risks
to people who maybe are not the insiders here in Washington,
D.C., who don't have the ability to hire lobbyists to monitor
all these issues constantly. And these regulators need the
independence to make the right call for the public interest
even if it could cost a regulated entity some money over the
short term.
And we saw in the lead-up to the financial crisis the price
we pay when that doesn't happen, including for entities like
credit unions. Five of the major corporate credit unions
failed, and there was $30 billion in U.S. Government bonds put
out to support them.
So I think FSOC independence is very important to make
those calls.
Ms. Waters. Would you agree, Mr. Stanley, that FSOC is an
extremely important part of Dodd-Frank reforms? It is in Title
I. And you have just alluded to the management of risk. Would
you agree that this agency should be absolutely independent and
not be interfered with again by special interests or politics,
that if we are to deal with the subprime meltdown and the
crisis that was created, that we absolutely need to have FSOC
being able to identify a risk and to deal with it?
Mr. Stanley. Yes. I do think the FSOC is one of the
absolutely central elements of Dodd-Frank, because when you
look at so many of the entities that were involved in the
financial crisis, they were not traditionally regulated
commercial banks. They were investment banks who were following
a capital markets model who at that time were not regulated as
commercial banks. They were insurance companies like AIG.
And as our financial sector morphs and evolves, free of the
limits that were once put on it by Glass-Steagall, you get a
lot of lending and financial activities taken over by nonbanks,
and it is crucial to be able to monitor that process and spot
emerging risks. Regulators fell far, far behind in that
process, and we can't let it happen again.
Ms. Waters. Thank you.
And I would also like to ask another quick question. H.R.
3340 would also require the OFR to first solicit public comment
before issuing a proposed report, rule, or regulation. Are you
aware of any agency that is required to first seek public
comment on the substance of a report they haven't yet
published? What would be the effect of imposing this
requirement on the OFR? Is there any harm in allowing the OFR
to first publish a proposed report prior to seeking comment?
Mr. Stanley. I am not familiar with any requirement that
reports be somehow pre-cleared with interested parties before
even putting that report out to the public. A report is not a
regulation. A report is something that is an attempt to inform
the public and inform the public debate. And if people disagree
with that report, they are perfectly free to contend with it
after it is out there in the public and produce new information
and data. And we have seen that happen with OFR. And I think to
some degree the idea that you are going to preclear these
reports would impoverish the public debate. It is almost an
attempt to allow that it could result in censorship of
information before it reaches the public, and I think that is a
problem.
Ms. Waters. I thank you very much.
And I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentlewoman.
The gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Pittenger, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I thank each of you for being with us today.
I would like to thank Congressman Emmer for his role on the
FSOC reform bill, particularly as it relates to the budget
process or lack thereof and the need for greater transparency
and accountability.
Dr. Kupiec, do you believe that there is any limitation at
all in the funding opportunities for FSOC and OFR?
Mr. Kupiec. Limitation. So in terms of the--
Mr. Pittenger. Could they, for example, double their
budgets every year if they wanted to?
Mr. Kupiec. I think they have a revenue stream, so I am not
sure of the size of their budget relative to their revenue
stream at the moment.
But in terms of the FSOC and the OFR, this notion that they
are independent is insane, as far as I can tell, because the
Secretary of the Treasury is the head of the FSOC. And the head
of the OFR has an office in the Treasury and meets with the
Secretary of the Treasury all the time. I don't know how that
would be considered independent in any world that I am aware
of.
So this whole notion that they are completely independent
of politics and their budget must be completely independent of
politics doesn't make any sense to me. They are part of the
political system, very much so, and the notion that their
budget should be outside the regular government appropriations
is strange to me.
My understanding is the proposed bill would not affect the
way that financial institutions have to fund the OFR, but it
would affect how much of those resources the OFR were allowed
to spend, it would be subject to the normal congressional
process. And I don't see why they have any particular role or
are absolved from politics in any way at all and shouldn't be
subject to the congressional budgetary process and oversight.
Mr. Pittenger. How about disclosures? Do they disclose less
information than comparable entities like the Fed?
Mr. Kupiec. I am mostly familiar with OFR studies that they
put out and comment on them, and many of them have been very
political in nature. And I think part of the reaction in this
bill is, in fact, that before an OFR study becomes final, that
people should be able to weigh in and claim foul if they think
the OFR is producing political research instead of
dispassionate research. And I think that is my opinion about
the reaction to this, and it is exactly because the OFR and the
FSOC are not independent agencies.
Mr. Pittenger. Mr. Ireland, would you like to comment?
Mr. Ireland. I think on the report issue, there was an
example where the OFR put out a report on asset managers, and
the SEC subsequently went to the lengths to solicit public
comment on it. You only got public comments through the SEC,
and there were valuable comments submitted. I think there were
a lot of misunderstandings in that report and perhaps some
factual errors.
I would also point out that the members of the FSOC all
have their own budgets. We are not talking about the FSOC
members having their budgets cut or the actual regulators
having their budgets cut. We are talking about transparency and
the appropriation process for a research arm that supports
essentially the Secretary of the Treasury. And Federal Reserve
Chair Yellen has her own research people who can research FSOC
issues and do research FSOC issues.
So you are not really impairing the operation of FSOC. You
are dealing with part of the Treasury, and putting part of the
Treasury in the appropriations process like most of the rest of
the Treasury.
Mr. Pittenger. How about openness as it relates to public
notice of meetings? Are they required to give any public
notice?
Mr. Ireland. Their meetings are generally not public, and
there is substantial litigation by one of the entities that has
been designated as systemically important based on the
reasonableness of the process that we have gone through, and I
think some transparency into that process would be beneficial
for all concerned going forward.
Mr. Pittenger. Mr. Kupiec, do you have any comments?
Mr. Kupiec. I agree with Mr. Ireland. The FSOC meetings,
there is a closed portion and sometimes an open portion that is
available for the public. I am not aware if the law requires
them to be announced ahead of time or not. I am not that
familiar with the details of that part of it.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you very much. My time has expired.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
Now, the gentleman from New York, Mr. Meeks, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, we often speak of providing regulatory relief
for small banks, and I think if we are serious about it we
should start by making quick fixes wherever possible where we
can offer some immediate relief. So I introduced H.R. 2987
along with Representative Maloney, Representative King, and
Representative Luetkemeyer, to provide a technical correction
to Section 171 of Dodd-Frank to allow small banks with less
than $15 billion in assets to be able to continue to use their
trust-preferred status as part of their Tier 1 capital.
The intent of this section of Dodd-Frank was to make sure
that the large banks have high-quality capital while providing
an exemption for smaller banks with assets under $15 billion.
But I believe it was a mistake to set in law a fixed date of
December 31, 2009, as a permanent judgment date for determining
which banks had less than $15 billion in assets to qualify
regardless of what happened to the size of the institutions in
the future.
This is inconsistent with other legislation that uses asset
thresholds like the CFPB's $10 billion threshold or the SIFIs
$50 billion threshold. All these thresholds are based on the
size of the institution today. It is also unfair to
institutions that are currently as small as $6 billion today
but are still regulated like large banks with over $15 billion.
This bill would allow banks that have assets of less than
$15 billion today to be treated fairly and therefore be
eligible for the exemption that was meant to be available for
such small institutions. And in this bill we make sure that the
intent of Dodd-Frank is entirely preserved, so if the bank's
assets go back to above $15 billion, then they lose that
exemption. So this bill would provide relief for institutions
that go below $15 billion for as long as they remain below that
level.
This is a simple fix, Mr. Chairman, and is also logical,
and these banks need the relief, and they need relief now.
Mr. Chairman, I hope we can have this included in our next
markup and approve this legislation as soon as possible. And I
am pleased that this is one of the pieces of legislation that
we were able to do in a completely bipartisan manner. We have
over 40 cosponsors, about half and half: 50 percent
Republicans; and 50 percent Democrats. And I want to thank my
colleagues on both sides of the aisle for their hard work on
this legislation.
Lastly, I believe that high-quality municipal bonds, some
of which are more liquid and less risky than highly rated
corporate bonds, should be included in the definition of Level
2A high-quality liquid assets in the LCR. This is critically
important for cities like my little City--New York, a little,
small City on the coast--and is another important improvement
that we need to approve.
So in the time I have left, I will just ask to the
witnesses whether or not you think that banks should be
regulated today based on the size of their assets back in 2009,
or do any of the witnesses believe that banks under $15 billion
pose a systemic risk to the financial services industry?
Gentlemen?
Mr. Kupiec. I agree with your statements. It makes a whole
lot of sense that the $15 billion is changed not to reflect a
given date in the past.
Mr. Meeks. Mr. Ireland?
Mr. Ireland. I would agree. I think that the $15 billion
should be an ongoing number, and if you are below $15 billion,
you get the benefits, and if you are above $15 billion, you
don't. And I am hard-pressed to think of a $15 billion
institution as systemic.
Mr. Meeks. Mr. Stanley?
Mr. Stanley. We don't have a position on this bill. We do
feel there were a lot of problems in the trust-preferred
securities market, and it is positive that regulators took
action. But it is possible that certain banks are caught up
inappropriately in that. We haven't examined the issue closely
enough.
Mr. Meeks. We want you to research it and come back and
give the same answer as Mr. Ireland and Mr. Kupiec.
I yield back the balance of my time, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
The gentleman from Colorado, Mr. Tipton, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I would like to
thank our panel again for taking time to be here.
One of the primary concerns I hear out of my district from
small, locally-owned banks and credit unions is the cost of
compliance.
Dr. Kupiec, you mentioned in your testimony the tendency
for banking regulators to apply best practice supervision on
supervised institutions. If you would speak to, how does this
impact those institutions. And as well, the TAILOR Act will
require regulators to examine potential unintended impacts of
examination manuals or other regulatory directives, and that
works in conflict with tailoring the regulatory actions. Will
this alleviate some of that impact?
Mr. Kupiec. Yes. Thank you.
The tendency for a large bank, the examination and
regulation of the largest banks, is really to adopt a very
data-intensive approach where you have large databases and comb
through the data and use models and apply all kinds of fancy
statistical techniques which may or way not work. But we have a
tendency to like to do that in the largest institutions, to
create very complex regulations.
And this permeates down through the examination team of
examiners. If you want to move up in the world, you want to be
a big bank examiner, not a small bank examiner. And what is the
best way to do that? You try to learn what the big bank
examiners are doing, and you try to impose it on the banks you
are examining so that you get experience in the field, you get
recognized.
I think it is a natural problem with the system. And then
it starts imposing more and more data requirements, more and
more data processing, the need for more and more vendor models,
all kinds of things for small banks that probably really aren't
necessary and don't have a benefit.
So that is my experience working in a bank examination
agency.
Mr. Tipton. Essentially, Mr. Stanley had asserted that
there were exemptions that were created for small banks. You
are stating that is not really the reality. We are seeing the
unintended consequences of regulations that are impacting small
banks, and just having regulations that the TAILOR Act would
require that are going to be sculpted for those institutions
would make good common sense?
Mr. Kupiec. I think what Mr. Stanley says is technically
correct. There are lots of places in the law that differentiate
between the size of the institutions. However, there is never a
clean break between a certain size and another size. It depends
on the business practices and what kinds of loans they are
making and what kind of area it is. There are all kinds of
considerations.
And I think the TAILOR Act speaks more to a duty and
requirement of the regulators to pay attention to these
differences, whereas the very sharp limits in the current law
are really not up to the task of differentiating between risk
profile and the best public interest of what is really
required.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you.
One of the frustrations that we hear--I have had the
opportunity to be able to serve on a small local bank and used
to be able to make what were called ``character loans,''
knowing the people that you actually work with. And I would
like to be able to give you one example from my district.
I have a small business in Vail, Colorado. It is a ski and
bike rental shop. I have had it for over 20 years. This
gentleman applied to refinance his primary residency, but based
on a 2-year average of his 2013-2014 tax returns, he didn't
qualify. His 2015 profit, however, P&L statement, showed that
his net income was in excess of the 2014 tax return, but it
could only be used to be able to support the 2-year average
unless he paid thousands of dollars to be able to have an
accountant review his 2015 financials. In the end, he had to be
able to pay off a couple of auto loans that he had to his
detriment in order to be able to qualify.
This signals to me the loss of that relational banking that
I think is so important in our community banks. Mr. Ireland,
will tailoring regulations to community banks and credit
unions--would this model enable these institutions to increase
consumer and commercial access to credit?
Mr. Ireland. It should. I think that is the intent, and if
the regulators respond appropriately to it, they should lessen
the burdens on smaller institutions, and character loans should
come back. We saw this problem in the 1990s in response to the
thrift crisis, that character loans dried up. We are seeing it
again. The regulators try to do things risk-based, but risk-
based often means we are going to increase the scrutiny on the
bigger guys, we are not going to reduce the scrutiny on the
smaller guys.
And the scrutiny trickles down. It just does. We tell banks
to look sort of one layer up in the regulatory tiers in doing
their own planning just to be safe, because that is what the
examiners tend to do. That is the standards they tend to hold
them to.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you. My time has expired.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
The gentlewoman from New York, Mrs. Maloney, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. I want to thank you for holding this hearing
on these important bills. And I have two that I am particularly
concerned about.
I would like to ask Paul Kupiec about H.R. 2209, which Mr.
Messer and I introduced earlier this year, that would level the
playing field for our cities and States by requiring the
banking regulators to treat certain municipal bonds as liquid
assets, just like corporate bonds. And as a former city council
member, I know the importance of muni bonds to allow States and
cities to finance infrastructure and schools, and to pave
roads.
Unfortunately, in the banking regulators liquidity rule,
which requires bank to hold a minimum amount of liquid assets,
the regulators chose to allow corporate bonds to qualify as
liquid assets but completely excluded municipal bonds, even
municipal bonds that are just as liquid as corporate bonds. And
this makes no sense and threatens to raise borrowing costs for
municipalities across this country.
The Fed has already recognized this error and is amending
its rule to allow certain muni bonds to count as liquid assets,
but the OCC is still refusing to amend its rule and insists on
favoring corporations over municipalities.
So I would like to specifically ask you, Mr. Kupiec, if you
considered two identical bonds, same size, same maturity, same
everything, both bonds are liquid enough to satisfy all of the
liquidity criteria in the OCC's rule, but one bond was issued
by a corporation, and one was issued by a local government, and
under the OCC's rule the corporate bond would be considered a
high-quality liquid asset, but the muni bond would not, even
though they had the exact same liquidity, do you think that is
a fair outcome?
Mr. Kupiec. No, I support the law.
There is another issue here that the Fed is considering
Level 2B treatment, which is pretty limiting. You are only
allowed to count 50 percent of the market value of the bond and
only up to 15 percent of your total LCR requirement.
So the Fed's proposal, which they haven't put out any final
information on, they just put out a notice of proposed
rulemaking, would still limit muni treatment for those that
satisfy at least Level 2B criteria to Level 2B. But there are
many muni bonds and State bonds that satisfy Level 2A criteria,
and the bill under consideration would require the regulators
to recognize those liquidity characteristics. I do not.
I think the LCR rule has a lot of issues with it. It is
causing a lot of difficulties in a lot of places, including
large banks not wanting to take deposits anymore. So I think
that it certainly is a rule that merits some attention from
Congress, and I think this is a good idea.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you.
I would like to ask Mr. Ireland if you would comment on the
Community Bank Capital Clarification Act, which I have
cosponsored with Mr. Meeks in several Congresses. In Dodd-Frank
we allowed community banks with less than $15 billion in assets
to keep counting certain securities they had already issued as
capital. For some reason, Dodd-Frank said that in order to
qualify for this relief, you had to be less than $15 billion in
assets on December 31, 2009, even though we didn't pass Dodd-
Frank until 6 months later in 2010. And I can tell you that was
not intentional. We did not update that date to reflect it
then.
So this bill simply states that for banks that were only
briefly above $15 billion in assets on December 31, 2009, but
have fallen below that threshold and continue to be below that
threshold, that they should be treated like other banks below
that threshold as community banks.
I would like to ask you if you think there is any reason
why we shouldn't treat banks that are currently under $15
billion, and will continue under $15 billion, as community
banks for capital purposes?
Mr. Ireland. I can't identify any.
Mrs. Maloney. Pardon me?
Mr. Ireland. I can't identify any reason why you wouldn't
adopt this provision.
Mrs. Maloney. Why we would adopt it?
Mr. Ireland. Why you wouldn't adopt it.
Mrs. Maloney. Why we wouldn't. I agree. I think it is just
common sense.
Mr. Ireland. It is just common sense. I can't see why you
wouldn't do this.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you. Thank you for that statement. And
we have many Members of Congress who feel very, very much the
same way.
I would like to follow up, Mr. Kupiec, with you. The OCC
has been able to distinguish between liquid corporate bonds and
illiquid corporate bonds. Do you think it would be possible to
distinguish between liquid and illiquid municipal bonds as well
to be able to distinguish as the Fed has proposed? In other
words, why don't we treat the municipal bonds fairly?
Mr. Kupiec. My understanding is that the public comments on
the rule have done analysis and identified many State municipal
bonds that are more liquid than the corporate bonds that are
given Level 2B treatment now. So the answer is that you can
distinguish, and I think they should include them.
Mrs. Maloney. My time has expired, and I thank you for your
wisdom and your comments and your support for these bills.
Thank you.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentlewoman.
The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Williams, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thanks to all our witnesses for being here today.
I am a small business owner in Texas. I am a car dealer.
And you can imagine what I think of the CFPB and how they are
issuing laws and so forth. But also it is quite evident that
they have largely ignored congressional intent.
As a member of this subcommittee, I am proud to have
cosponsored many of the proposals we are discussing today,
including H.R. 2121, H.R. 2897, and H.R. 3340. All of these
proposals will help reduce the regulatory burdens facing so
many families and small businesses in America today, and again
speaking of Main Street.
I want to take a second to focus on H.R. 3340, sponsored by
my good friend, Congressman Emmer. His proposal, which
ultimately brings the budgets for the Financial Stability
Oversight Council and the Office of Financial Research under
appropriations, will no doubt provide for greater transparency
where it is sorely needed. My first question to you, Mr.
Kupiec, is the following: Has the FSOC been transparent through
the process of designating MetLife, Prudential, General
Electric Capital, and American International Group as nonbank
SIFIs?
Mr. Kupiec. No, I don't think they have been.
Mr. Williams. Mr. Ireland, what do you think about that?
Mr. Ireland. I would agree with Dr. Kupiec. I don't think
they have been transparent either.
Mr. Williams. Mr. Stanley?
Mr. Stanley. They provided a public justification of their
decision that was fairly extensive, and I believe the FSOC
process provides extensive transparency to the companies that
are being designated. A lot of that information and that
process is not made public because there can be trade secrets
involved.
Mr. Williams. Next question to you, Mr. Kupiec and Mr.
Ireland, how has the nontransparent designation process for
nonbank SIFIs been harmful to consumers and taxpayers?
Mr. Kupiec. I think any process where you can impose new
sweeping regulations with no justifiable cause creates two
problems. It could create the impression that the government
has decided that these nonbank SIFIs are truly too-big-to-fail
and they will get special assistance should they get into
trouble. The people who passed Dodd-Frank say, no, that would
never happen. I disagree. I think it creates a class of
institutions that are identified as being different and more
important than the other institutions, which isn't a good idea.
And the other thing is the extra regulations involved are
costly and problematic. MetLife has spent huge resources trying
to defend itself against this case. The FSOC has the unlimited
resources of all the agencies on board, including the New York
Federal Reserve and the Federal Reserve Board and their staff
of economists, to create arguments and ideas, and MetLife has
to defend itself against that. It is tremendously expensive.
Mr. Williams. Mr. Ireland, can you add something to that?
Mr. Ireland. Yes, let me add one other point here. By being
designated a SIFI, you become regulated by the Federal Reserve
Board, which is a bank regulator and understands the bank
regulatory model. And whether that model is appropriate for GE,
a large, diversified company, or an insurance company, of which
there have been a number of designations, is really debatable.
The expertise and the usefulness of that model for that
purpose, I think is questionable, and I think that FSOC would
have been better served to think more carefully about the tools
it has and the classes of people it designated rather than
going through the sort of ad hoc designation process that they
have used.
So I think greater transparency in the overall process
would be better for the designation process and provide more
certainty to market participants and give them more confidence
in going forward in the economy.
Mr. Williams. A final question to again Mr. Kupiec and Mr.
Ireland, have these SIFI designations made the American economy
safer?
Mr. Kupiec. Definitely not. One of the unfortunate aspects
of SIFI designation is we are designating nonbank SIFIs before
there are any rules or regulations that have been written to
suggest how they are going to be regulated. What is the
regulation that is actually needed by their SIFI designation?
We are designating them first, and there is no standard for
regulation that has been put out yet.
Another issue that is significant is that in Section 600 in
the Dodd-Frank Act, there is a power that gives the Federal
Reserve Board the right to draft prompt corrective action rules
for the components of designated SIFIs. So the Federal Reserve
Board, right now there is--prompt corrective action applies to
banks. There is no prompt corrective action per se by any
Federal regulator for an insurance company, or for a broker-
dealer. The SEC has rights there. But one of the sections of
the Dodd-Frank Act gives the Federal Reserve Board the power to
draft prompt corrective action rules over these nonbank SIFIs
it regulates.
So it comes back to Ollie's point of what expertise does
the Federal Reserve Board have in exercising prompt corrective
action rules and judgments over things that it really hasn't
regulated over time?
Chairman Neugebauer. The time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. Williams. Thank you for your testimony.
I yield back.
Chairman Neugebauer. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from California, Mr. Sherman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We have a lot of bills under discussion today, and most of
them are pretty good. The first is the Community Bank Capital
Clarification Act, and I think that the importance of this
bill, its fairness, could be illustrated by the fact that if
you had two $14 billion institutions even 10, 20 years from
now, they just happened to be at $14 billion apiece, and one of
them would have one rule, but the other would have a different
rule because back in 2009 it was $16 billion.
Obviously, we ought to treat identical banks identically,
and if the bank is below the threshold it ought to be below the
threshold. The idea that you would have a mark--I don't know
what the mark would be on the forehead of the bank--because it
was over the threshold decades ago would treat identical
institutions in a nonidentical manner.
I have cosponsored the National Credit Union Administration
Budget Transparency Act because I think it does make sense for
an organization to publish its budget and to hear from folks
who comment on it. There is some concern that all of the
comments will be to tell the NCUA to do less regulation. People
who raise that fear have never met anyone from the ICBA, but I
am confident that the ICBA will have comments about the Credit
Union Administration's budget.
I think the witnesses have already talked about the
importance of allowing mortgage professionals to move from one
job to another and to bring their skills. It is the unskilled
mortgage professionals that can get us into trouble, and that
is why I think Mr. Stivers has a good bill, the Safe
Transitional Licensing Act of 2015.
Let's see, a fourth bill is Preserving Capital Access and
Mortgage Liquidity. The FHFA says we need to fix this problem,
we need to extend parity for credit unions under a billion
dollars in assets, and I look forward to cosponsoring that
bill.
And I would go on at length about H.R. 2209, Mr. Messer's
bill to require the Federal banking agencies to treat certain
municipal obligations as Level 2A liquid assets, but the
gentlelady from New York did such an excellent job of
explaining the importance of that bill that I don't have to.
I will ask the witnesses whether they have any comments on
those four bills, and if not, I may shock my colleagues and
yield back my time before I have gone over time.
Mr. Kupiec. I have one comment on H.R. 2209. I would also
recommend that the committee consider Level 2A and 2B
treatment, that the ones that qualify for 2A as the bill is
written should be allowed as 2A. I don't understand why you
wouldn't also want things that qualify as Level 2B assets to be
recognized as Level 2B assets. If they meet the standard, why
not recognize them?
Mr. Sherman. Maybe that is something we will do in this
bill. Maybe it is something we will do later. I look forward to
working with the author on that and deciding whether we try to
get it all done in one bill or not.
And seeing no further comments from our distinguished
witnesses, I yield back with over a minute left.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
And now, the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Barr, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
With respect to H.R. 3340, Mr. Emmer's Financial Stability
Oversight Council Reform Act, of which I am a cosponsor, and I
appreciate the leadership of Mr. Emmer on this important
transparency measure, my question to the witnesses is in
response to Mr. Stanley's argument for the need for political
independence. I believe Mr. Stanley's phrase was the reason why
FSOC's funding is not subject to the appropriations process or
congressional review of how these fees are used is the need for
political independence.
Of course in the Declaration of Independence, Thomas
Jefferson talked about the fact that governments are instituted
among men deriving their just powers from the consent of the
government. And I think Mr. Jefferson as a Founder of our
country would be troubled to find that so many of the
regulatory agencies in our country are not instituted among the
American people based on the consent of the governed, but
instead on this principle of the need for political
independence. That, to me, resembles more the institutions that
we saw in the Soviet Union instead of a democratic society
where governing entities are subject to the consent of the
people.
I would be interested to hear from the witnesses about Mr.
Stanley's argument for the need for political independence and
why more transparency is not a good idea.
Dr. Kupiec?
Mr. Kupiec. Yes. First of all, I am not going to comment on
your comparison of the FSOC to a Soviet-style agency. I will
leave that one alone.
The FSOC is not an independent agency. It is chaired by the
Secretary of the Treasury, who is--I think he works for the
President, last time I checked. The head of the OFR has an
office in the Treasury, meets with the Secretary of the
Treasury by his own volition all the time in regular meetings.
It is essentially functioning as a research arm of the
Treasury. I do not see this as an independent agency the way it
is run, so I think this argument of independence holds no
water.
And I share your concern about this notion that some of the
banking agencies' budgets should be completely off limits from
public scrutiny because they have to be independent. I think
they work for the public. The public has a right to know things
about the budget and what things cost, and I think that is all
part of the process.
Mr. Barr. Mr. Ireland?
Mr. Ireland. I agree with Dr. Kupiec. I would add that the
Secretary of the Treasury is not just the Chairman of FSOC. The
Secretary of the Treasury's vote is required for many of FSOC's
actions. The Secretary of the Treasury is a head of an
Executive Branch agency and is subject to removal by the
President for policy disagreement. So the idea that FSOC is
some sort of wholly independent agency, I just don't think is
true.
And I would agree with the thrust of your comments. I think
there may be places--I came out of the Federal Reserve and
would be a little bit concerned about lack of budgetary
independence for monetary policy because I think there is some
potential abuses there. But I don't think that same argument
applies, for example, to the Federal Reserve's bank supervisory
functions or the other bank supervisory functions. It is nice
for them to be independently funded, but for them to justify
why they are spending their money or maybe they should be
spending more money on other things that would be evident to
the public process, I think is probably in the public interest.
Mr. Barr. Mr. Stanley, why is it that the American people
shouldn't expect accountability to them through their elected
Representatives in Congress?
Mr. Stanley. If I could just defend myself against the
charge of Soviet tyranny, I do believe that the American people
should expect accountability, and I do believe--I may not have
expressed myself as well as I could have in my written
testimony--because I do believe that everything we do here in
Washington, D.C., does have a political component to it and
appropriately does have a political component to it.
But the question is, how do we design our political
institutions so that the public interest is respected as
opposed to a narrow special interest? And in the world of
financial regulation there is enormous amounts of money at
stake and there are narrow special interests with a lot of
money at stake. So we try to insulate, to provide some
insulation from those--
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Mr. Stanley.
Since my time is expiring, if the witnesses could also
speak to Mr. Stanley's argument with the TAILOR Act as to his
assertion that the existing regulations already tailor, and
what about the inadequacy of those existing tailoring efforts
by the regulators?
Dr. Kupiec?
Chairman Neugebauer. I am going to have to ask the
gentleman to ask the witnesses to respond--
Mr. Barr. My time has expired. I'm sorry. We won't be able
to get to that question.
Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Neugebauer. I now yield to the gentleman from
Minnesota, Mr. Emmer, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Emmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I especially thank the panel for being here today.
I am sure that most of us on this committee can agree that
financial regulators play an important role. I expect that most
of us will also agree that financial regulations are best
administered when there is the appropriate and necessary
balance between Congress, the industry, and regulators. As one
of you has testified, ``Significant disruptions to our banking
system almost always trigger legislation designed to address
the problems that led to those events as they are perceived at
the time. Later on, with the benefit of hindsight, it often
becomes apparent that our bank regulatory system has become
unnecessarily complex and constraining, whether due to the
remedial legislation or to the normal evolution of banking
services and markets.''
In fact, as elected Representatives, we should not only be
doing anything within our constitutional authority to address
any issues that can trigger serious disruptions to our banking
system, but we should also be doing everything in our power to
prevent bailouts with taxpayer dollars.
The Financial Stability Oversight Council, also known as
the FSOC, and the Office of Financial Research, more commonly
known as the OFR, were created by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street
Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The question for our
hearing today is how we can improve the function and the
ability of the FSOC and the OFR to achieve their statutory
mission by enacting reform that recognizes the importance of
congressional oversight to enhance transparency and
accountability of these government-created entities to allow
for better stakeholder participation.
If we agree that this committee should be working with both
the financial services industry and regulators to prevent
future crises and bailouts, and most importantly, to better
protect consumers and taxpayers, we should also be able to
agree that minor changes at the FSOC and the OFR will not only
enhance their ability to perform, but would create a more open
environment where the benefits and the costs of FSOC's actions
can be examined and debated in the open.
H.R. 3340, the FSOC Reform Act, reaffirms the
constitutional principle of checks and balances. Congress has
and should have responsibility for oversight of government-
created institutions to ensure that the regulation these
institutions put in place actually help and not harm Americans.
FSOC and OFR are no exception. I believe the FSOC Reform
Act will provide am important and necessary check and balance,
and with appropriate congressional oversight and enhanced
transparency, the FSOC and the OFR will be better able to
perform for our financial industry and for our consumers.
And with that, I would ask Dr. Kupiec, it is a very simple
bill, can you tell me, going to this argument about
independence--which, by the way, we are dealing with an
organization that we have just heard testimony, you have the
Secretary of the Treasury who sits on it, sits on the FSB. You
literally have every one of these heads of these agencies, the
10 voting members are appointed by the President, and I expect
they are card-carrying Democrats. So I don't know how you take
the political aspect out of this institution.
Dr. Kupiec, if the OFR is still going to be able to collect
the assessments, how would this impact, if we are not talking
about budgetary constraints, we are just talking about an
appropriations process, how would this impact, if at all, the
independence, the so-called independence of this agency to do
its job?
Mr. Kupiec. I think the independence argument is kind of a
bogus argument. I think what the bill would do would be to put
the OFR budget under oversight and supervision where it
belongs. The Congress would have a say. I do not think, since
the OFR budget funds the FSOC, the notion is somehow this would
squeeze the FSOC's budget. I very much doubt that. And for one
reason, the FSOC is staffed in large part by staff of places
like the Federal Reserve Board and the New York Fed who can
second people there and pay them Federal Reserve Board salaries
and Federal Reserve Board benefits.
So the FSOC is not going to be starved for talent by this.
It is merely the process that government agencies should be put
under. Congress should appropriate their budgets. My
understanding is that the assessments would still accumulate.
It is just that Congress would decide how much of those they
can spend and for what reasons through a process, a give-and-
take process. So I don't really see a big problem with it. I
think it is a big step forward.
Mr. Emmer. Thank you.
My time has expired. I yield back.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
Now the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Rothfus, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rothfus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
conversation we are having about regulatory relief for our
local Main Street institutions.
I would like to turn a little focus, Mr. Ireland, if I
could--when you appeared before this committee in June, we had
the opportunity to discuss a piece of bipartisan legislation
that I had introduced, H.R. 1660, the Federal Savings
Association Charter Flexibility Act. As you may recall, the
bill permits a Federal savings association to elect to operate
subject to supervision by the Office of the Comptroller of the
Currency with the same rights and duties of a national bank.
You spoke favorably about the bill, stating that it would
save time and money, streamline our regulatory system, and
would appropriately balance caution and restraint with the
ability to innovate and to provide financial services to
consumers and businesses. Am I correct in understanding that
you still hold those views?
Mr. Ireland. You are correct.
Mr. Rothfus. Thank you.
Today, I would like to continue that discussion about
thrifts and mutual institutions and talk about the regulatory
burdens that these institutions face and their ability to grow
to meet the needs of their local communities. On a basic level,
can you please describe how mutual banks differ from other
types of financial institutions and how they are going to raise
capital?
Mr. Ireland. Mutual organizations derive their funding from
their customers and build their capital base through retained
earnings, and stock organizations obtain their capital by
issuing securities into the markets. The growth of capital in a
mutual organization is a much slower process, and to adjust to
significant capital changes, for example, as have been flowing
out of Basel III, is more difficult for a mutual organization.
In addition, I think that many of the capital rules are
designed to deal with problems as they were observed in stock
companies--and this particularly goes to the capital
instruments issue that I think you are referring to--and how
those rules affect mutuals, I think is a separate question.
And the assumptions you make about the market effect of
Tier 1 capital, Tier 1 common equity capital, in a stock
company simply may not apply to a mutual. You may not have the
same kinds of concerns in the mutual that you have in the stock
company. And I think tailoring capital rules to mutuals is
something that ought to be done and the regulators ought to
look at that very, very seriously.
Mr. Rothfus. I am glad you raised that, because I have
introduced another commonsense bipartisan piece of legislation,
H.R. 1661, the Mutual Bank Capital Opportunity Act of 2015,
which would provide mutual institutions with the option of
issuing a mutual capital certificate to raise additional
capital without sacrificing their structure. By statute, the
certificates would qualify as Tier 1 common equity capital and
share many of the same qualities as preferred stock. Do you
have any comments about this proposal?
Mr. Ireland. I would support that proposal. I think that
there could be details that need to be worked out as you go
forward, but I think that something needs to be done to
accommodate the mutual organizations. Otherwise, ratcheting up
Tier 1 capital may simply strangle them and put them out of
business.
Mr. Rothfus. Dr. Kupiec, at a recent roundtable discussion
in Pittsburgh, one of my local community bankers stated that
the current regulatory environment is ``as harsh as it has ever
been. Harsher.'' Another local banker described the Federal
regulatory environment as, ``death by a thousand cuts,'' and
pleaded that community institutions--and he emphatically said
this--need help now.
In this Congress, the committee has already marked up a
long list of bills that would help fix this, and we are
considering more good bills today. In your opinion, what is the
one proposal that Congress could pass tomorrow that would make
the most difference?
Mr. Kupiec. Of these seven?
Mr. Rothfus. Or any of the bills that we have done to date,
these seven.
Mr. Kupiec. I wouldn't have all of them off the top of my
head, right? So--
Mr. Rothfus. Would you agree with the assessment that the
environment is harsh?
Mr. Kupiec. Yes, I would, and I think the bills asking for
relief, or requiring relief, are fully appropriate.
Mr. Rothfus. And do you see the same kind of urgency for
regulatory reform that this community institution would have
been telling me about?
Mr. Kupiec. I think they are telling you the truth.
Mr. Rothfus. Mr. Ireland, do you have any idea on what one
proposal that Congress could pass tomorrow that would make the
most difference for community institutions?
Mr. Ireland. I don't have the time to list them all. I
can't get it down to one. I think you have very serious
problems right now.
Mr. Rothfus. I yield back.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
The gentleman from New Hampshire, Mr. Guinta, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Guinta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would also like to thank the panel for the discussion
today of these legislative initiatives.
I have two areas of focus, one very quickly on H.R. 2987
for Mr. Ireland. Can you specifically state how many
institutions H.R. 2987 will benefit at present?
Mr. Ireland. I haven't had the time to go back and examine
the historic call report or reports--it is not call reports, it
is the holding company reports that you would have to look at--
to identify those. I understand that there are at least two of
them. And I don't think the number is what really matters. I
think the statute is just drafted wrong, and you want to fix
that glitch in the statute. That is not the way you ought to
draft grandfathers.
They have grandfathered the instruments. They don't want
new trust-preferred issued. But the institutions that have
issued them, whether they are above or below $15 billion is a
completely separate issue and doesn't promote in any way
evasion of the purposes of the capital rules.
Mr. Guinta. Okay. Thank you.
I want to move on to a different issue now, on H.R. 2287.
The NCUA operates independent of the congressional
appropriations process. Their annual operating budget is used
to carry out a list of duties, such as examination and
supervisory authority. However, a substantial portion of the
NCUA operating budget is funded by a fee from federally-insured
credit unions across the Nation. This fee is based upon the
prior year asset balance and rates that are set internally by
the board.
Our Federal agencies, I think, need to be transparent. They
need to be accountable. I don't see much problem with that. I
also took a look at the budgeting over the last decade, and it
appears for the most part that the budget has gone up.
I took a look at the testimony earlier this year, on July
24th, I think it was, by Chair Matz, and I want to talk about
that testimony a little bit. And I want to talk to Mr. Stanley
about this.
Back on that date, she testified, and I believe the
gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Scott, was asking the questions,
and she made a statement, and the statement was this: ``I don't
believe that the credit unions necessarily represent the
members, and if they did, they wouldn't be asking us to cut our
budget because I think the members would like us to protect
their life savings and would like us to have the resources that
we need to do that adequately.''
That was her statement. I, in full disclosure, am a member
of a credit union. I wonder if I could first ask you one
question. Do you know a woman by the name of Barbara
Cunningham?
Mr. Stanley. I do not.
Mr. Guinta. Do you think Chair Matz knows Barbara
Cunningham?
Mr. Stanley. I couldn't say, but possibly not.
Mr. Guinta. I will tell you who Barbara Cunningham is. I
know her. She is the loan officer at St. Mary's Bank, which is
the oldest credit union in the Nation, that helped my wife and
I get into our home. I trust her. I don't trust a faceless
bureaucracy in Washington.
So I have significant problems with that one statement that
Chair Matz made, because it suggests that the bureaucracy in
Washington cares more about me than the person who lives in my
community, who works with me to try to find a way to get a
mortgage for a home for my wife and my two children. That is
the fundamental problem I have with this notion that Washington
knows better than people back home.
I served as a State representative, I served as a mayor, I
served as a city alderman. I have known the people that I do
business with for years, and I have a relationship with them.
That is the fundamental obligation and responsibility that I
think people feel when they, as customers, go into a credit
union and have that direct relationship.
So when your statement earlier suggested that the
transparency is not necessary, I find that hard to believe
would be problematic in order for NCUA to do their job. I think
they can do their job, they can show the public how they are
spending their money, and the consumer also can have a
relationship, and a good one, with their credit union.
So, unfortunately, my time has expired, and I can't get
your response, but I will send you a written letter and ask for
your response, because I do want to give you the opportunity to
respond.
And I yield back.
Mr. Stanley. Absolutely. Thank you.
Mr. Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
And now, I recognize the gentleman from Indiana, the
chairman of the Republican Policy Committee, Mr. Messer, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Messer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to join the chorus of support for H.R. 2209. I thank
Mrs. Maloney for her work on this legislation. I want to thank
both Chairman Neugebauer and Chairman Hensarling for their
willingness to bring this bill forward. Others have talked
about it, so I won't repeat the statements made by others, but
the bill is aimed at this remarkable situation that we have
where Federal banking regulators have excluded all American
municipal bonds from being treated as high-quality liquid
assets under the LCR rule, creating the remarkable situation
where not only corporate bonds, but certain foreign
subsovereign bonds qualify for liquid assets when American
municipal bonds don't qualify.
By the way, I should apologize for my voice. I was part of
the 12th man at the Colts-Patriots game this week. We are proud
of our Colts, and obviously disappointed in the outcome.
That approach, as others have testified, doesn't make any
sense. These are great assets. They are among the safest
investments in the world. They are often not traded because
people want to keep them once they invest in them, but they are
highly liquid in the sense that in times of financial crisis,
folks can flip them, if needed, as others have also testified,
by discouraging these bonds from being treated in the way that
reflects their true value. It drives up the cost of borrowing,
which doesn't make any sense.
I want to direct my question to Mr. Kupiec and potentially
Mr. Ireland, not to go over what others have said, but maybe to
make sure we get it on the record. Do you see any reason why
these assets should be discounted or why the Fed, for example,
should--because, as you know, the Fed has come up with this
rather Byzantine way of looking at it--do you see any reason
why those assets should be discounted or should they be treated
as face value?
Mr. Kupiec. No. I think if you set a specific criteria that
the liquidity of the asset has to meet to qualify as a Level 1,
Level 2A, or 2B asset, if they meet those requirements, they
ought to be counted.
And I would differ a little bit. The Federal Reserve is the
only agency that has actually made a movement towards including
some municipal bonds, so I think they are ahead of the rest of
the regulatory agencies in at least realizing the problem.
But I think the bill points in the right direction. If they
qualify, if they have all the characteristics of a Level 2A
asset, why aren't you counting them as a Level 2A asset? And I
would add, if another segment of them qualifies as Level 2B,
then count them as Level 2B.
Mr. Messer. I appreciate that advice and I will actually
try to work with the committee and Mrs. Maloney to see if we
can include that.
I will get back to Mr. Ireland in just a second. I want to
just follow up with Mr. Kupiec very quickly. Could you comment
just for a second about the problem with the Fed, the OCC, and
the FDIC having different approaches to these kinds of bonds?
Mr. Kupiec. The Federal Reserve rule would apply to any
Federal Reserve bank that they supervise and holding companies.
And so it would apply at the holding company level, whereas the
OCC would apply at the bank level. So you might have a
situation where if the rules don't all agree, the bank might
have to have a different set of liquid assets than would count
at the holding company level, which would just be unnecessarily
complex.
So I think it is better that the rules all agree, which is
why this bill is also important. It tells all the agencies to
come with this solution, and I think it is the right one.
Mr. Messer. Mr. Ireland, do you have anything else to add?
Mr. Ireland. I would agree with Dr. Kupiec. If the assets
meet the tests for liquidity and quality, they ought to get
treated in the appropriate category. And it makes absolutely no
sense and will just distort markets and cause all kinds of
problems to have different rules for different institutions.
You need a consistent rule here, and picking and choosing by
issuer as opposed to character of the asset, I think is
inappropriate.
Mr. Messer. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
The gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Stivers, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Stivers. I thank the chairman for allowing me to sit in
on this panel. I am not on this subcommittee, so I appreciate
the opportunity to be here.
I appreciate the witnesses for sticking with us for a long
time and a lot of questioning. I think the bills today are a
lot of commonsense bills. Something Dr. Kupiec just said really
made me think, as we were talking about H.R. 2209.
Dr. Kupiec, why do we have one set of accounting
principles?
Mr. Kupiec. So we can compare across companies, if they are
comparable.
Mr. Stivers. Inside a company and across companies and
compare apples to apples. Is that an appropriate way of saying
it?
Mr. Kupiec. Sure. You want every yardstick to have the same
length, yes.
Mr. Stivers. So shouldn't that also apply here when you are
talking about across companies and inside companies with regard
to assets, and if something meets the characteristics of a
certain type of asset, shouldn't it be included in the asset
and shouldn't we have consistency so that we can compare inside
a bank holding company at the bank level and across companies?
Mr. Kupiec. I think it makes a lot of sense to have one
rule, yes.
Mr. Stivers. So that is the kind of commonsense stuff we
have here. One of my bills that two of you have talked about,
and I think it is possible that Mr. Stanley does not have a
position on it because he didn't mention it, is H.R. 2121, the
SAFE Transitional Licensing. I think Mr. Ireland did a great
job of explaining it to one of the other Members of Congress
who asked a question. I appreciate that.
We are continuing to work with interested parties, and we
have a new discussion draft that I think even makes the bill
better. Instead of just a straight 120-day period, the new bill
basically says the application or the transitional authority--
and we make it an authority, not a license so that the
regulators actually can clamp down on folks if they need to--
but it is good until the application is approved, denied, or
withdrawn, or in the event that it is incomplete, the limit is
120 days if the application is incomplete.
We also create the ability for the regulators to deal with
bad actors. We make sure that we allow the regulators to
require a background check if they want one. There is already
something that says if you have been convicted of a felony, if
you have been subject to a cease-and-desist order, or you have
been denied or revoked or suspended for your license, this
process wouldn't apply. And I think Mr. Ireland talked about it
pretty well.
But, Dr. Kupiec, do you want to talk about why we need the
ability for folks in labor markets to move from employer to
employer or State to State, if they need to, and how that is
good for consumers?
Mr. Kupiec. I think, historically, one of the features of
the mortgage business in the United States has been its ability
to sort of expand quickly when it needs to and contract quickly
when it needs to. Mortgage banking is--the business is
volatile. And this may or may not be a good thing, but
sometimes real estate is more in fashion than others, and these
people need to change jobs and move States. And my
understanding of the law is, in order to be under this 120-day
grace period or however you may improve that in the new bill,
that you actually have to be on the national registry.
Mr. Stivers. That is correct.
Mr. Kupiec. And consumers would have access to your
information on that registry while you were waiting for your
new license.
So to the extent that the information is for consumer
protection, my sense of this is that the consumers would have
access to that underwriter's originator's information on the
national registry.
Mr. Stivers. Exactly.
Mr. Ireland, do you want to talk a little bit about how
this is an unintended consequence of a two-tiered system. So we
had a tiered system for State-regulated folks who had to have a
license, and then the other folks who are at a bank who didn't
need to have a license. And so when you want to change between
them, you have to get licensed, but it was kind of an
unintended consequence that people then, if they want to change
from a bank entity, a federally-regulated entity to a State-
regulated entity, wouldn't be able to work for a number of
months. That is pretty hard for most people to feed their
family on, and it is clearly an unintended consequence.
Mr. Ireland. Oh, I think so. I think it makes it very hard
to move from a bank to a nonbank, and provides a very great
deterrent in that regard and cuts down on competition between
banks and nonbanks. And I think this is in the interests of the
originators. I think it is also in the interests of the
efficiency of the market.
Mr. Stivers. And the consumers.
Mr. Ireland. And the consumers.
Mr. Stivers. Mr. Stanley, you didn't have a position on
this bill. Do you like what you hear?
Mr. Stanley. I like what I heard in the last 5 minutes, but
since I have 200 members in my organization, freelancing on
endorsements is tough.
Mr. Stivers. I didn't ask you to endorse anything. I asked
you if you liked what you heard.
Thank you. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
The gentleman from Indiana, Mr. Stutzman, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Stutzman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I appreciate the
witnesses being here today. I apologize for being late and
catching up here on a couple of things.
But I want to talk a little bit about--I don't know if you
all talked about the municipal bonds already, but if you have,
I will move over to H.R. 2473, the Preserving Capital Access
and Mortgage Liquidity Act of 2015. Can some of you talk a
little bit about why H.R. 2473 is necessary and related to the
community financial institution definitions, if any of you
could be able to discuss that a little bit?
Mr. Kupiec. I think the issue is that the Federal Housing
Finance Agency has issued rules about how large the mortgage
activity has to be in an institution before you can gain
Federal Home Loan Bank membership and be able to use Federal
Home Loan Bank loans pledging collateral. And I think this
bill, there is a carve-out, I believe, for small banks under a
billion dollars, and I think the new rulemaking by the Federal
Housing Finance Agency would not allow credit unions to have
the same access to the Federal Home Loan Bank as small banks.
And I think my impression is this rule just kind of levels that
playing field, so that if a small bank had access to the
Federal Home Loan Bank, then a credit union would have access
too if they are under a billion dollars.
Mr. Stutzman. Do you think there is a sound policy reason
for not including credit unions in that definition?
Mr. Kupiec. No, I think credit unions are appropriately, if
they do mortgage business and they have mortgage collateral, I
think the Home Loan Bank, that is their mission, to provide
liquidity. And in a lot of places, credit unions are becoming
more and more important. We heard earlier that they gave some
of the members their mortgages, and I think small credit unions
would benefit from accessing the consumers as well.
Mr. Stutzman. Mr. Ireland or Mr. Stanley, would you like to
comment on that?
Mr. Ireland. I would just like to point out that I think
the effect of this legislation goes beyond mortgage loans. I
think it goes to small business loans and agricultural loans
and community development loans as well and those activities of
credit unions. And I think it is strongly in the interests of
the credit unions and the communities that they serve that they
have access to the additional source of funding through the
Home Loan Banks.
Mr. Stanley. I have no comment.
Mr. Stutzman. All right. Thank you.
Could any of you mention or discuss a little bit about the
possibility that the lack of exemption for small credit unions
increases the possibility that current members in good standing
will risk having their membership involuntarily terminated?
Mr. Kupiec. I think if you had a credit union, and it was a
member of the Home Loan Bank and it had loans from the Home
Loan Bank, and for some reason during the year its business
activity, its membership didn't want the loans or the mortgage
loans that would meet the limit, they would--I think they have
2 years, it actually has to be an average over 2 years--but if
the membership stopped providing a service, even though the
Federal Home Loan Bank lending may have been an important part
of funding the credit union, they could face being cut out of
the Home Loan Bank access.
Mr. Stutzman. Has the cap on asset size for community
financial institutions been increased before?
Mr. Kupiec. In my preparation, I looked back at the old
laws, and there is a 1999 amendment to the Federal Home Loan
Bank law that for the community investment institutions, there
was a $500 million cap and it was indexed to inflation. And so
there is that limit, but I think the limit that this particular
bill is trying to address is one that is being imposed by a
proposed Federal Housing Finance Agency regulation and not a
Federal Home Loan Bank legal rule.
Mr. Stutzman. Do you think Congress is the best place to
address this issue?
Mr. Ireland. I think this is a necessary change to the
statute. Aside from the Federal Housing Finance Agency's
actions, I think if you look at the statute, this looks like it
makes sense.
Mr. Stutzman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
And I would like to thank our witnesses for their testimony
today.
Without objection, I would like to submit the following
statements for the record: the Credit Union National
Association; and the National Association of Federal Credit
Unions. Without objection, it is so ordered.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
With that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:15 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

October 21, 2015

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
