- EXAMINING THE SEC'S AGENDA, OPERATIONS, AND FY 2017 BUDGET REQUEST

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE SEC'S AGENDA,
OPERATIONS, AND FY 2017
BUDGET REQUEST

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 18, 2015

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 114-62

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
99-781 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Chairman

PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina,  MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
Vice Chairman                        Member
PETER T. KING, New York              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BRAD SHERMAN, California
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
BILL POSEY, Florida                  WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
Pennsylvania                     DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        AL GREEN, Texas
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
ROBERT HURT, Virginia                ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio                  JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee       JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
MARLIN A. STUTZMAN, Indiana          TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        BILL FOSTER, Illinois
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              PATRICK MURPHY, Florida
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina     JOHN K. DELANEY, Maryland
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
KEITH J. ROTHFUS, Pennsylvania       DENNY HECK, Washington
LUKE MESSER, Indiana                 JUAN VARGAS, California
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
FRANK GUINTA, New Hampshire
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas
BRUCE POLIQUIN, Maine
MIA LOVE, Utah
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas
TOM EMMER, Minnesota

Shannon McGahn, Staff Director
James H. Clinger, Chief Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
November 18, 2015............................................     1
Appendix:
November 18, 2015............................................    63

WITNESSES
Wednesday, November 18, 2015

White, Hon. Mary Jo, Chair, U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission.....................................................     5

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
White, Hon. Mary Jo..........................................    64

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

White, Hon. Mary Jo:
Responses to questions for the record submitted by
Representative Duffy.......................................    77
Responses to questions for the record submitted by
Representative Ellison.....................................    83
Responses to questions for the record submitted by
Representative Garrett.....................................    95
Responses to questions for the record submitted by
Representative Hultgren....................................   109
Responses to questions for the record submitted by
Representative Hurt........................................   113
Responses to questions for the record submitted by
Representative Luetkemeyer.................................   121
Responses to questions for the record submitted by
Representative Perlmutter..................................   124
Responses to questions for the record submitted by
Representative Neugebauer..................................   125
Responses to questions for the record submitted by
Representative Poliquin....................................   127
Responses to questions for the record submitted by
Representative Tipton......................................   131
Responses to questions for the record submitted by
Representative Royce.......................................   132
Responses to questions for the record submitted by
Representative Wagner......................................   133

EXAMINING THE SEC'S AGENDA,
OPERATIONS, AND FY 2017
BUDGET REQUEST

----------

Wednesday, November 18, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jeb Hensarling
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Hensarling, Royce,
Garrett, Neugebauer, Pearce, Posey, Fitzpatrick, Westmoreland,
Luetkemeyer, Huizenga, Duffy, Hurt, Stivers, Fincher, Stutzman,
Mulvaney, Hultgren, Pittenger, Wagner, Rothfus, Messer,
Schweikert, Guinta, Tipton, Williams, Poliquin, Love, Hill;
Waters, Maloney, Velazquez, Sherman, Capuano, Clay, Lynch,
Scott, Green, Cleaver, Ellison, Himes, Sewell, Murphy, Delaney,
Sinema, Beatty, Heck, and Vargas.
Chairman Hensarling. The Financial Services Committee will
come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Examining the SEC's Agenda,
Operations, and FY 2017 Budget Request.''
I now recognize myself for 3 minutes to give an opening
statement.
This morning, we welcome back U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission Chair Mary Jo White. This committee is committed to
conducting vigorous oversight of the SEC because the SEC's
three-part mission is an important one as Americans continue to
struggle through an economy that is underperforming.
It is on their behalf that this committee acts to ensure
that the SEC protects investors; maintains fair, orderly, and
efficient markets; and promotes capital formation--all key
ingredients to growing a healthy economy with opportunity for
all.
Vigorous oversight is also needed to ensure that the SEC is
a good steward of its resources, both its time and its budget--
a budget that has increased dramatically by more than 64
percent over the last 10 years, while the monitors to my left,
right, and in front of me show the rapidly rising red ink of
our national debt.
Since Chair White's last appearance before our committee,
we have seen both good news and bad news. First, the good news.
The SEC finally completed the bipartisan JOBS Act rulemakings
to implement the reg A+ and crowdfunding titles. This is
noteworthy and commendable.
Further, the SEC has now asserted its jurisdiction to
hopefully stop the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC)
from regulating asset managers like banks. This, too, is
commendable.
Regrettably, there is more to discuss that is not so
commendable. On a three to two partisan vote, a pay ratio rule
was pushed through which may appease left-wing activists, but
does nothing to protect investors or facilitate capital
formation for small and medium-sized businesses; and does
nothing to help struggling families get ahead.
It is another example of the SEC squandering precious
resources on rulemaking that, again, does nothing to protect
investors or facilitate capital formation.
Additionally, as much as left-wing activists may wish to
drag the SEC into political advocacy, the Citizens United
decision does not involve or implicate Federal securities laws.
A political disclosure rulemaking is not within the SEC's
core competency or, more importantly, it is not within its
mission. It would simply create more opportunities for abuse
and politicized enforcement, as we have seen with the IRS
scandal, and further damage the SEC's credibility.
The SEC should instead redouble efforts to simplify the
disclosure regime and renew its commitment to the materiality
doctrine articulated by the Supreme Court in 1976.
Instead of modernizing our proxy system, the Chair's recent
action to cut off staff guidance to public companies in the
middle of this past proxy season was ill-advised. And the
universal proxy ballot proposal favors special interests and
short-termism rather than benefiting the vast majority of
public company shareholders.
Finally, the SEC does have an opportunity to act and stop
the Labor Department from making financial advice and
retirement planning less available and more expensive for
Americans with low and moderate incomes. This, we hope, they
will successfully do.
Real investor protection comes from innovative capital
markets that are vigorously policed for force, fraud, and
deception. They allow capital formation to flourish, and give
investors the freedom to make informed investment decisions
free from government interference and control.
I now yield 3 minutes to the ranking member for an opening
statement.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome back to the committee, Chair White. Today, we
gather to discuss the SEC's work to oversee our capital
markets. This work, however, is hampered by harmful Republican
cuts to your budget request, which will make it harder for you
to police these markets. Please know that Democrats are
committed to full funding for the SEC because the Commission
provides the first line of protection for investors.
It has been 8 months since you were last here and more than
5 years since Dodd-Frank was enacted. But the SEC still has yet
to propose a uniform fiduciary standard. I am pleased to learn
that certainly while the Department of Labor is doing its part
to create a rule that works, that you are working toward this
end, and that there should be something in the reasonable
future dealing with this issue.
Regarding the inadequate level of advisor exams, I join
industry associations, advocates and members of this committee
in calling for a modest fee on advisors and I am concerned
about any costly third-party exams which your staff may be
working on.
I am also concerned--well, as we have discussed, I am
deeply concerned about the continued seemingly reflected
granting of waivers of bad actor disqualifications. These
waivers allow some of the worst actors in our financial system
to continue business as usual. And I look forward to your
explanation of exactly how these decisions are made. In recent
times, I have learned that they are made quite differently than
I thought.
Lastly, I received your letter concerning a bill we
considered last week related to business development companies.
While this isn't quite the bill I would have offered, we did
craft a compromise that I believe addressed most of your
earlier concerns with the legislation.
I also offered an amendment with Ms. Velazquez to address
your new concerns with BDCs owning investment advisors. We
disagree relative to the modest increase in leverage, but I
urge you to help us craft language to further improve this bill
before it moves to the House Floor.
Thank you, and I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Garrett, chairman of our Capital Markets Subcommittee, for 2
minutes.
Mr. Garrett. I thank the chairman. And I thank Chair White.
It is good to see you again.
I may be echoing some of the comments that Chairman
Hensarling has raised. And I do that because, frankly, the last
time that you were here before the committee, I noted my
concerns back then over the large number of 3-2 votes that the
Commission has taken over the last several years, as well as
the general perception that the SEC is becoming basically
increasingly politicized.
Since that time, really little has happened to relieve any
of those concerns of myself or the Chair or that others have
raised. In fact, in the last 6 months, the SEC has prioritized
and completed the very partisan and politicized pay ratio rule
and is right now in the process, as you know, of developing a
universal proxy ballot rule. In essence, these are two
priorities that may appease the special interests, but they
really do very little to make our capital markets more
competitive.
So, while I am pleased that the SEC has at last finalized
the crowdfunding provisions of the JOBS Act, I would note that
this was also done along a partisan vote, 3 years after the
congressional deadline.
At the same time, the SEC's ongoing failure to develop what
I might call a capital formation agenda remains one of the most
serious deficiencies. It seems that the only time that the SEC
actually modernizes its securities laws, to the benefit of the
growing numbers of businesses, is when we here in Congress tell
you to.
Now, tomorrow, the SEC will host for the 34th year in a
row, the Annual Government Business Forum on Small Business
Capital Formation. That is good.
As in previous years, I expect this forum to produce a
number of valuable ideas that will help small enterprises get
capital and grow.
But as in previous years, I also expect that the majority
of these recommendations will be basically ignored by the SEC.
Finally, the SEC clearly has an important mission and role
within our sector, the financial sector, but right now, it is
up to the agency to get its priorities in order.
And so, I look forward from hearing from you today on how
the SEC can refocus on this threefold mission for the benefit
of Americans's capital market.
And I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentlemen yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from New York, Mrs.
Maloney, ranking member of our Capital Markets Subcommittee,
for 2 minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. I thank the chairman for holding this
important hearing, and I welcome Chair White.
Quite a bit has happened since Chair White last appeared
before this committee in March. For starters, the SEC has
finalized several rules, such as the CEO pay ratio rule, and
two JOBS Act rules.
Perhaps most importantly, the extreme volatility in the
markets on August 24th was the first real-world test for many
of the market safeguards that the SEC put in place after the
flash crash of 2010.
In particular, the automatic trading pauses for stocks that
experience extreme volatility, known as the limit-up, limit-
down rules, were triggered nearly 1,300 times on August 24th.
And a lot of the stocks that were halted that day were
exchange-traded stocks, rather than stocks of individual
companies.
Many stocks that were temporarily halted had trouble
opening up again, because when they opened back up for trading,
their prices rose too quickly--which triggered another
automatic pause.
However, despite this widespread disruption, the market-
wide circuit breaks, which would have halted trading on the
entire market for 15 minutes, were not triggered on August
24th.
So, I will be very interested in hearing Chair White's
perspective on how these new safeguards performed. Did they
work as intended? Or are there problems with the safeguards
that need to be fixed?
Thank you. I yield back, and I look forward to your
testimony.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentlelady yields back.
Today, we welcome the testimony of the Honorable Mary Jo
White, Chair of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
Chair White has previously testified before this committee,
as we all know, so I believe she needs no further introduction.
Without objection, Chair White, your written statement will
be made a part of the record, and you are now recognized for 5
minutes to give an oral presentation of your testimony.
Thank you.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MARY JO WHITE, CHAIR, U.S.
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION

Ms. White. Thank you.
Chairman Hensarling, Ranking Member Waters, and members of
the committee, first, thank you for inviting me to testify
about the recent activities and current initiatives of the U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission.
Since I last testified before this committee in March, the
SEC has advanced significant rulemakings, continued to bring
strong enforcement actions against wrongdoers, and made
significant progress on our initiatives involving the asset
management industry, equity market structure, and disclosure
effectiveness.
The Commission has adapted or proposed 17 substantive
rulemakings in the past 8 months, including rules required by
the Dodd-Frank and JOBS Acts, and these efforts have included
final or proposed rules addressing: over-the-counter
derivatives; new means for small businesses to access capital,
including the final rules--as the chairman mentioned--both for
updating and expanding Regulation A, and for allowing
securities-based crowdfunding offerings; enhanced oversight of
high frequency traders, and our supervision of investment
advisors and mutual funds; amendments to the SEC rules
governing its administrative proceedings; executive
compensation disclosures; and removing references to credit
ratings from our rules.
The Commission also approved a proposal by the National
Securities Exchanges and FINRA for a 2-year pilot program that
would widen tick sizes for stocks of some smaller companies.
Our enforcement program also continued to deliver very
strong results, with the Commission bringing 807 enforcement
actions, and obtaining monetary remedies of approximately $4.2
billion in Fiscal Year 2015.
Of the 807 enforcement actions filed, a record 507 were
independent actions for violations of the Federal securities
laws.
More important, though, than the numbers, these actions
addressed meaningful issues for investors and the markets,
spanned the securities industry, and included a number of
first-ever kinds of actions.
Significantly, approximately two-thirds of our substantive
actions in Fiscal Year 2015 included charges against
individuals. The Commission also continued to seek admissions,
including the first-ever admissions settlement with an auditing
firm, and to pursue complex cases with criminal authorities,
including a recent action charging dozens of defendants with a
global scheme to profit from hacked, non-public information
about corporate earnings announcements.
Going forward, we plan to continue to focus on completing
our mandatory rulemakings, while pursuing other initiatives
that are critical to our mission, including those relating to
asset manager oversight, equity market structure, and
disclosure effectiveness.
This afternoon, for example, the Commission is expected to
consider new rules to enhance the transparency of equity
alternative trading systems. We will also continue to
strengthen our enforcement and examination programs, striving
for high impact efforts that protect investors and preserve
market integrity. And we will continue developing a number of
ongoing initiatives designed to facilitate capital formation,
particularly for small businesses.
The agency's Fiscal Year 2017 budget request to the Office
of Management and Budget reflects these priorities, focusing on
the execution of our core programs and operations by seeking to
hire individuals with the skill sets necessary to enhance the
agency's oversight of increasing complex securities markets,
striving to build the significant new oversight programs
assigned to the SEC in recent years, and continuing to enhance
our technology, including our ability to analyze and assess
large volumes of data.
As we continue to place a high priority on allocating our
resources efficiently and effectively, I was very pleased that
the Commission recently received an unmodified audit report,
the agency's best ever audit opinion from the GAO, with no
material weaknesses or significant deficiencies identified in
Fiscal Year 2015.
We plan to build on these improvements and continue to
enhance the execution of our mission.
The Commission's extensive work to protect investors,
preserve market integrity, and promote capital formation is not
limited to the initiatives I have just summarized today or in
my written testimony. But I have tried, by example, both here
and again in the written testimony, to convey the breadth and
importance of the Commission's ongoing efforts, and provide a
sense of our progress in the last few months.
Thank you for your support for the agency's mission, and
for inviting me to be here today. Your continued support will
allow us to better protect investors and facilitate capital
formation, and more effectively oversee the markets and
entities we regulate.
I will be happy to answer any of your questions.
[The prepared statement of Chair White can be found on page
64 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hensarling. Thank you, Chair White.
The Chair now yields himself 5 minutes for questions.
Chair White, it was reported that you announced at a
conference recently that the SEC is ``full out focused on
developing its own fiduciary rule.'' I alluded to it in my
opening statement.
You were last here in March, and we have spoken about these
matters both publicly and privately, but is it my understanding
that the SEC staff has not yet performed an updated analysis of
the potential impact of a uniform fiduciary standard on retail
investors.
Is that correct?
Ms. White. The answer is there is not another 2011 study
that has been done. As we proceed with this, the staff's
recommendations, which are very much in process, actively in
progress--
Chairman Hensarling. Is there any work being done to update
the 2011 study?
Ms. White. Part of the rulemaking, as it advances, will be
very deep economic analysis by our economists at the SEC, to
judge impacts, as well as all relevant baselines, and its--
Chairman Hensarling. Will that analysis be complete before
the proposal of any uniform fiduciary standard?
Ms. White. Certainly, there will be economic analysis that
is complete before there is any proposal. There is always
additional economic analysis, as there should be, before you
proceed with any adoption. But certainly, that will be part of
the proposal process.
Chairman Hensarling. But not necessarily the complete
analysis that the staff is--
Ms. White. Not necessarily, but it really depends on how it
is assessed as we go through that process, including with our
economists.
Chairman Hensarling. Will this analysis be shared with this
committee and made public prior to the proposal of any uniform
fiduciary standard?
Ms. White. Typically, unless there is a paper produced
separately, which happens from time to time from our DERA
folks, it is part of the proposal and made public in that way.
Chairman Hensarling. We would encourage you to do that.
Chair White, I don't know if you share the concerns that
many share on this committee in looking at the experience of a
similar proposal in the U.K, but the public sources that I have
been able to access show that when they imposed a similar
fiduciary rule, 310,000 clients stopped being served by their
brokers because their wealth was insufficient to advise
profitably, and 60,000 investors were not accepted as new
clients for the same reason.
And in the year before the Commission ban went into effect,
the number of advisors serving retail accounts plunged by 23
percent. Does the experience in the U.K. concern you?
Ms. White. I am familiar with several U.K. analyses.
Clearly, a concern of this rulemaking is what impact does it
have on the ability of retail investors to get reasonably
priced, reliable advice.
And as I think I have said before, part of this rulemaking
process will be very much devoted to what impact it will have
on precisely that.
Chairman Hensarling. I would hope that the SEC would look
very closely at the U.K. experience, and also look at--I hope
you have received similar testimony that we have received, that
the best interest contract exemption is, frankly, unworkable
and not an exemption at all, meaning that the U.K. experience
is most parallel.
Switching subjects to bond market illiquidity, again, you
last appeared before us in March. At that time, you
acknowledged the concern about bond market illiquidity, and
again, we have spoken about these matters publicly and
privately. Since you testified that at that point, you did not
see a link between the Volcker Rule, capital requirements, and
reduced bond liquidity, it has been 8 months.
In the intervening 8 months, on May 20th, The Wall Street
Journal reported that the number one concern of financial
professionals was lack of liquidity in the markets. In August
of 2015, PricewaterhouseCoopers published a study that
attributed ``the measurable reduction in financial market
liquidity to multiple factors, including bank derisking, due to
new regulatory frameworks.''
Last week, The Wall Street Journal reported that U.S. firms
are holding negative corporate bond inventories for the first
time since the Fed began reporting this separate data.
The Chair of FINRA has testified in this committee that,
``There have been dramatic changes with respect to the fixed
income market in recent years that has led to much higher
capital requirements, the Volcker Rule, that limits the ability
for proprietary trading with respect to bank holding companies,
and a range of other issues that have all had significant
impact from the standpoint of liquidity of the fixed income
market.''
So since it has been 8 months since you last appeared
before us, there has been news. Have you been able to determine
whether regulations like the Volcker Rule are a contributing
cause to the dramatic decrease in liquidity in our fixed income
markets?
Ms. White. Let me say that it remains a concern of mine, as
I testified 8 months ago. I think it does of all regulators.
But the answer to your question--the direct answer to your
question is no, as is reflected in the quarterly reports that
we make actually to this committee on that subject with our
fellow financial regulators.
I think the most recent one reflects both levels of
liquidity in the primary and secondary markets, as set forth
there, and the conclusion that one cannot determine impact from
the Volcker Rule. Obviously, there are a lot of factors
including capital requirements and others that go on.
I do note that at least recently, reports do indicate that
dealer inventories have gone into negative territory, and that
is something that obviously we will be looking very closely at
before the final report for this year. I am not trying to get
ahead of the report, but we will be looking very closely at
that, both for its existence, its meaning, and whether impacts
can be judged.
Chairman Hensarling. My time has expired, but Chair White,
the rest of the world is concluding otherwise. So I would hope
the SEC would pay very careful attention.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chair White, you will be asked today about your efforts on
a number of issues, and I am appreciative for your response on
the fiduciary duty rulemaking. But just for a second, would you
please explain to us how a lack of adequate funding does not
allow you to move as quickly as we would like you to move on
some of these issues? Are you at all hampered by inadequate
funding of the SEC?
Ms. White. We clearly--and I have testified about this
before--have responsibilities far beyond our resources, and so
we obviously try to make the smartest decisions we can in core
areas--in new areas we have been assigned since Dodd-Frank and
the JOBS Act. But clearly, it becomes a zero sum game, as they
say, at some point, and it does slow you down. Of course it
does.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much. With that, I would like to
just have you describe to us the SEC waiver process. The last
time you testified, I expressed concern with the SEC's policy
of providing waivers of disqualifications to bad actors on a
seemingly reflective basis and I questioned the transparency of
whether or not there should be public input.
As you know, I have a proposal that I think would remedy
this problem that would, among other things, require the
process to be conducted and voted on by the Commission that
will provide the public a notice-and-comment period and an
opportunity to request a hearing, and require SEC staff to keep
complete public records of all waiver requests and denials and
create a public database of all disqualified bad actors.
So here I am, even with a bill, talking about more work for
you in this area. Before I go any further, because I know this
is a little bit more complicated than most people think, would
you explain to us a little bit about that process?
Ms. White. Yes. First, I want to make it clear that the SEC
very aggressively pursues financial institutions and senior
corporate executives and our record bears that out during and
after the financial crisis. So when it comes to
disqualifications and waivers, it is very important to
understand that those are not enforcement remedies. Those are
separate provisions in the securities laws that are governed by
their very separate rules, very separate guidances that the
Commission and the Commission staff apply very vigorously, case
by case.
When an enforcement action of ours or someone else's may
trigger a disqualification, and then if a party is seeking a
waiver, and it is typically a waiver to be allowed to pursue or
continue to pursue business in a totally unrelated area, than
the enforcement action was about. The burden is on that party
to show us that--to simplify it a little bit it would be in the
public interest to grant that waiver.
The staff, in order to increase transparency and
robustness, has updated under my tenure and my direction,
guidance on the WKSI waivers, as well as the bad actor waivers,
and I think the Commission and the staff do very deep dives and
apply those standards quite robustly before making those
decisions.
If a waiver is granted, it is made public on our website.
If a waiver is not granted, typically, the party will withdraw
the request for that, and it includes non-public information. I
think if you look at only the public record, you would think we
are granting routinely in all of them, and that is not the
case. There are many, many that we do not grant.
And so a challenge is preserving the privacy of non-public
information, but yet, being able to provide publicly the
information that shows that we are not granting these waivers
as they are requested each time. It is a very robust process.
Ms. Waters. I would like you to take a look at my
legislation and see if there is anything that we could do with
that legislation to help you improve the process, if you
believe there is room for improvement.
Lastly, on BDCs, you have written a letter to us with your
concerns. I, and others, are concerned about support for small
businesses and we want to make sure that we do everything to
create resources. Can you help me understand what your concerns
are a little bit better and what we can do to make the bill
better?
Ms. White. First, let me say that I think BDCs are designed
to be an engine for economic growth, particularly for small
businesses, and that is good for everybody and it is something
that the staff and the Commission have been supportive of
throughout the years, frankly, since they were set up.
And I appreciate, by the way, that some of the concerns
that I expressed a couple of years ago with the prior bill were
addressed. I would be happy to talk about it further, but I did
recently submit a letter to you and to the chairman expressing
my concerns with certain aspects of the current bill, really
investor protection concerns that are significant concerns
which I felt I really must express.
Obviously, it is up to Congress what they do, essentially
in several areas, but primarily, the increase in leverage, as
well as the reduction of rights if I can, again, oversimplify a
little bit, in preferred stockholders kind of net net, you also
end up under the proposed bill, allowing a BDC to invest 50
percent of their assets in a financial institution.
That is currently 30 percent. And the core objective for
the BDCs is really to invest in operating companies and new
operating companies that you want to give a boost to. And these
are retail investors that we are talking about who own the vast
majority of BDC shares, so that obviously heightens whatever
investor concerns we have.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I hope
you will work with us to improve the legislation.
Chairman Hensarling. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from New Jersey, Mr. Garrett, chairman of our Capital Markets
Subcommittee.
Mr. Garrett. Thank you.
Chair White, when you were here once before, I opened with
the question, ``Are the markets rigged?'' Let me follow up now
with, is SIPC rigged as far as the coverage that you get from
there? And does the small investor actually know that he has no
coverage under SIPC with his statement?
Let give you a quick example. Years ago, I invested $2,000
when I came out of college in the marketplace. In over 30 years
now, the market has gone up, it has grown--I have gotten
dividend payments out, I have gotten capital gains, I withdrew
some money over the years to pay taxes and do--likewise. So
over the last 30 years, my statement says it is going up and up
in value. I have taken out that $2,000 that I initially
invested.
As I understand it, my SIPC coverage right now for my
statement--which says I have well over that $2,000; I have
about $5,000 or $6,000 in my account--is exactly zero. Is that
correct?
Ms. White. As I heard your scenario, that is correct
because what SIPC is designed--
Mr. Garrett. I have zero coverage, even though my statement
is telling me I have like $5,000 in there, but there is a
statement indication on the bottom of it that I have--SIPC
coverage on a statement when I go to the broker dealer that his
has a logo right there. Does anyone have an obligation to
inform me that I have exactly zero coverage on my brokerage
statement? Whose obligation is it to tell me that? Is that--
Ms. White. First all of, your account statement should be
accurate and obviously, what has sort of given rise to these
concerns is a huge Ponzi scheme, where the account statements
are--
Mr. Garrett. But who should tell me that I have zero
coverage right now?
Ms. White. The broker should tell you, but the broker in
question may be committing a massive Ponzi scheme, so you may
not get that--
Mr. Garrett. So it is a fiduciary duty of the broker to the
investment advisor to tell me that I have zero coverage?
Ms. White. I am not sure I could give you a legal opinion
on that, but what I can say is that what SIPC covers is what
securities and cash that the broker has custody of. So if, for
example, in your example, when you put in your $2,000, you had
invested in certain securities that had appreciated, so there
were securities in the hands of that broker, they would be
covered by SIPC.
But if instead, what your broker did was essentially never
engage in bona fide trades, it doesn't protect against fraud,
which is really what we are talking about, I think.
Mr. Garrett. We don't know exactly what is, but I am a
simple investor. I think I have this much money. I find out
that something went wrong, it is not the market issue, but in
actuality, your answer to the first question is I have zero
coverage. There is an obligation of someone, I guess the
broker, to tell me this and at that point, the wise thing for
me to do would be what? To move down the street to another
brokerage account, because then my coverage would go back up.
Is that not correct? The full amount that I have invested?
Ms. White. If you put that amount in that broker's custody,
it would be covered by SIPC.
Mr. Garrett. Right. So investors should be told that the
smart thing to do once you have withdrawn the initial
investment, is to move to another company.
Ms. White. But keep in mind, if you have withdrawn your
$2,000, but it had appreciated with securities to $7,000 and
the broker had those securities and then went under, you would
be protected to that $7,000.
Mr. Garrett. Not from SIPC, however. Not from--
Ms. White. You would be protected by SIPC, if in fact you
had invested that $2,000 at some point in securities and it was
still with the broker. But what you are not covered for is
essentially these Ponzi schemes that are reflected falsely on
your account statements.
Mr. Garrett. It depends on how the investments are made, in
other words? So I as an investor now need to know when I get
the statement, whether the investments are being done like in a
Madoff situation, or whether the investments are being done
some other way. So it really depends.
How is the investor supposed to know that, whether he is
really getting coverage or not then?
Ms. White. Of course, the problem is in the Madoff, and it
is a huge problem, obviously, in the Madoff situation is that
investments weren't being made. And so you had a massive Ponzi
scheme. So you were being defrauded kind of from beginning to
end.
Mr. Garrett. So the bottom line for me, as a simple
investor--and that really describes me well in these things; I
don't know how it is being done, and I really don't know
whether SIPC is going to be there at the end of the day.
I would like to move on to a bunch of other questions on
regulation D and Rule 506 under the Dodd-Frank Act, really
quickly here. So you have proposed some amendments to that? And
the question is, what is the effect of those amendments on the
marketplace? The SEC's Division of Economic Risk Analysis said
that only 2 percent, or $33 billion, of the capital raised
under reg D has come under 506 of the JOBS Act, which we did.
That would sort of tell me that there is a suppression
effect of your amendments just hanging out there. Can you
withdraw those amendments so that we can actually get the full
effect of the JOBS Act and 506(c) of Dodd-Frank?
Ms. White. As you mention, there hasn't been consensus on
those amendments, so they have not moved forward. I do think
they are important however. I still believe they are important
to give us greater information, greater clarity into how the
markets are operating. Obviously, we have a year-and-a-half of
operation now. We have had an interdivisional group looking at
those markets.
I have also inquired about, because I have obviously heard
the concern that just the fact that regulation is proposed may
be hampering those markets.
Mr. Garrett. Exactly.
Ms. White. The feedback that I have gotten, at least from
our folks, is that they don't believe that is the case. That is
not a definitive finding. But clearly, the 506(c) market has
been used, but not as much as one might have anticipated and
certainly not as much as the 506(b) market is being used.
Mr. Garrett. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from New York, Ms.
Velazquez.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chair White, recently it was reported that UBS was
underwriting bonds for Puerto Rico's retirement system, and
then placing the same bonds into mutual funds that were sold to
customers on the island--something that would be prevented by
the Investment Company Act of 1940.
However, due to the high cost of air travel at the time the
Act was passed, Puerto Rico and other U.S. territories at the
time, including Hawaii, were exempted from the 1940 Act. I have
recently introduced legislation, H.R. 3610, to close this
loophole and ensure that Puerto Rico and other U.S. territories
have the same protections as States do.
Do you believe that this loophole should be closed?
Ms. White. Let me say, I share your concern. I think when
the exemption was put into law, it was many, many years ago
when the thought was that just the practical and financial
difficulties of being able to sort of enforce that law in the
territories was just not there.
Today is a very different world. So I share your concerns.
I think the loophole should be closed.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you.
In the ongoing financial crisis in Puerto Rico, hedge funds
are playing a significant role. It is impossible, however, to
fully understand the scope of their investments. Some
disclosure requirements are only available to regulators, while
others do not cover debt securities or derivatives.
I recently introduced legislation, H.R. 3921, to close this
loophole and increase disclosure requirements on hedge funds.
Do you believe that further disclosure in this area will
benefit investors and the public?
Ms. White. I think I would have to study it further, the
precise parameters of it. I can see pros and cons, frankly, to
that approach. Clearly, registration and reporting are critical
to increasing transparency and protecting investors in private
funds. And this has been looked at very closely in connection
with Dodd-Frank when we were given authority over private fund
advisors.
And there is a lot of information that is actually produced
on Form PF by hedge funds and others.
But the judgment was made then not to basically expose or--
expose more than was prescripted to be exposed, the actual
holdings and strategies of private funds, whether hedge funds
or not, because that could lead to front-running and other
kinds of actions with respect to that kind of disclosure.
So, there are pros and cons to that. I need to study it
further.
Ms. Velazquez. Okay. Thank you.
And I hope that we can work with your office at least to
hear some feedback regarding the legislation.
Another issue that has come to our attention, and that I
care about as ranking member on the House Small Business
Committee, is that the small business online lending industry
that has grown rapidly in the past 5 years, and experts are
expecting double-digit growth through 2020.
Last week, I sent a letter requesting information on your
agency's involvement with small business online lending. Is
there anything--any preliminary comments on my request?
Ms. White. I have seen the letter. We will obviously be
responding to it in due course. In terms of what our space is
with respect to online lending, we don't regulate the loans
themselves, the lenders, and the terms of the loans to
borrowers. That is not in our space.
However, we do regulate online lenders when they sell
securities to investors that essentially fund these loans
whether through notes or investment contracts. They may need to
register the offerings. Some platforms, depending on how they
do it, could have to register as broker-dealers. We have
brought cases in the enforcement space on some of this. But our
jurisdiction really relates to protecting investors if, in
fact, their offering is made under the Federal securities laws.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Neugebauer, chairman of our Financial Institutions
Subcommittee.
Mr. Neugebauer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Chair White, for being here today.
I want to go back to the line of questioning that the
chairman was talking about, something I have had a great deal
of interest in, and that is the fixed-income market. Can you
tell me exactly what resources at the SEC are dedicated to the
fixed-income market?
Ms. White. I think we may have had this discussion at our
last hearing. Primarily, it clearly is not confined to our
Trading and Markets Division. And it is not segregated out as a
separate unit, which I think we did talk about before. And I
have had conversations--but we have 15 to 20 Trading and
Markets folks who primarily deal with the fixed-income markets.
We clearly have the Office of Municipal Securities, which is a
relatively small office within the municipal space, which deals
exclusively with that area as well.
And I have had several conversations with Steve Luparello,
particularly, who is our Director of Trading and Markets, about
the need for additional resources, perhaps a restructuring so
that we make sure that the fixed-income markets are getting the
attention that they deserve. And in his view now, and he has
persuaded me, I think we are structured as we should be and
resourced as we should be.
Although I will note that in our budget request, I think it
is for Fiscal Year 2016--we are obviously operating under the
C.R. now--we sought an additional 15 positions in Trading and
Markets and at least 2 of those will relate exclusively to a
study assessment of the fixed-income markets.
Mr. Neugebauer. And that is in the future. But today, there
are how many people doing that?
Ms. White. I would say in Trading and Markets, the last
time I asked for that sort of number, it was about 16.
Mr. Neugebauer. But just for corporate bonds.
Ms. White. Yes, it is--not counting the municipal
securities, about 16 was the last number I was given. It is a
rough number, Congressman, if I may say, because it is not how
it is structured, because there are other people who work in
the space as well who don't devote the predominance of their
time to fixed income issues.
Mr. Neugebauer. Back in August, PricewaterhouseCoopers
released a study on what they called the ``riddledness'' of the
liquidity in certain asset classes. And the study's findings
are of concern to me as it highlighted specific areas where
liquidity had measurably declined, including difficulties in
executing trades, reduction in market depth, increasing market
volatility, and the bifurcation in liquidity. The study also
notes that pending or future rules and regulations could have
further significant impact on the market-making activities as
we exit or a historic period of accommodative monetary policy.
Are you aware of the Pricewaterhouse study? Have you read
that and looked at it?
Ms. White. The answer is, I have read a number of studies,
and I believe that one as well, and certainly our staff has.
And it is also something that really both in the Trading and
Markets area and the Investment Management area that we have
been very attuned to and in dialogue with market participants
about those risks and those eventualities, particularly when
interest rates go up.
Mr. Neugebauer. So market liquidity is a pretty big deal,
isn't it?
Ms. White. It certainly is.
Mr. Neugebauer. I think the concern that I have and I think
others have is we are not sure that your agency is giving the
attention to it. Because we hear from a lot of different market
participants that the liquidity issue is a real deal.
And so I would hope as you move forward, that if you are
doing studies in that area, you would share some of the
findings with this committee.
I want to move to--in 2015, Commissioners Stein and Piwowar
released a statement supporting proposals to shorten the trade
settlement cycle for certain security transactions. Industry
groups and the Commission's Investor Advisory Committee
encouraged the Commission and market participants to move
forward on reducing this settlement cycle, citing that it would
improve investor protections and reduce systemic risk.
Additionally, an industry-led committee of members across the
securities industry issued a White Paper outlining the timeline
in actions required to move from T-3 to T-2 settlement cycle
for transactions in the United States in the third quarter of
2016.
Do you agree with moving to T-2?
Ms. White. Yes, is the direct answer. We actually responded
to a letter, I think it was from SIFMA and maybe others as
well, to me. I think the letter was addressed to me, as to both
the position that I took on it, and also asking for regulatory
support to help bring that about.
And so my letter was quite supportive. It is public. We can
certainly provide that. And I think the only thing I wanted to
be sure of is that it didn't foreclose possibly, down the road,
an even shorter settlement period.
Mr. Neugebauer. Why haven't you all acted on that?
Ms. White. I think it is not timely to act on it. But we
will act timely.
Mr. Neugebauer. What is timely?
Ms. White. Essentially we are--again, the letter reflects
this. We are--because I think they have gotten traction. We are
allowing the industry coalition, if I can call it that, to get
to the place where their systems can actually accommodate the
T+2, and so the regulation they need will be in place by the
time that happens, so, 2016.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from New York, Mrs.
Maloney, ranking member of our Capital Markets Subcommittee.
Mrs. Maloney. I thank the chairman.
Chair White, as I mentioned in my opening statement, I am
interested in the events of August 24th, in the markets. The
extreme volatility of that day meant that the SEC's automatic
trading halts for individual stocks were triggered nearly 1,300
times, and I know the SEC has said that it is collecting data
as quickly as possible to analyze what happened, and to
determine if there are any changes to the agency's rules that
are necessary.
Can you give us a sense of where this preliminary review--
what you have found in this review?
Ms. White. Yes, it is well along, and I am expecting that
we can share some initial results from that review in the near-
term. I think--and you are absolutely right as you commented
earlier, we didn't invite the mini stress test on August 24th,
but we had one. The markets did perform quite well, but clearly
there were issues that came out of that, and one of the
significant ones was obviously the market-wide circuit
breakers, as you said, were not triggered, given the amount of
volatility, the timing and so forth.
But we did have a large number of limit up, limit downs
trading pauses, and particularly, with ETFs. Most of them were
in ETFs, although interestingly, not on all ETFs. And so, even
with the same underlying security, it is a more complex issue,
which we are studying. In part what we are looking at is the
practical operation of our rules. Obviously, we have the limit
up, limit down rules in place, which were put in place as a
volatility moderator after the flash crash.
It is on a pilot basis, and so, one of things that we are
very, very interested in is the data that comes out of August
24th, as to what modifications, if any, what calibrations
should be made in the limit up, limit down rules. We are
looking very closely at the opening of the markets as well,
because that is when the majority of all this occurred, and
there were somewhat delayed openings, particularly on the New
York Stock Exchange.
Mrs. Maloney. Will this information or this analysis be
available before the end of the year?
Ms. White. I hope it will be. I don't want to commit to it,
but I would hope it would be.
Mrs. Maloney. Last December, you outlined a comprehensive
plan to update the regulatory regime for asset managers in
order to account for the significant changes that this industry
has undergone in recent years. The SEC has now proposed two of
the rules that you promised: enhanced disclosures; and the
liquidity management rules that you proposed in September.
But we still haven't seen the third rule yet, which will
require transition plans for winding down asset managers.
Can you give us an update on this third rule, and when can
we expect this rule to be proposed?
Ms. White. I think the next in the series--and this
obviously--it could change, but just in terms of the workflow,
will probably be the rule on derivatives.
And then, following that, would be the transition roles and
also stress testing, which are--it is really--I think
categorize it as three, but it is really sort of five separate
areas.
And so, in terms of the transition planning rules, which
are essentially designed to have funds in the industry be able
to deal with disruptions in their business in an optimal way.
That will not be this year, I think in terms of a proposal,
but I would hope it would be relatively early into next year.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. In terms of the stress test, would you
expect the SEC to propose a stress test rule for large asset
managers? And what are the challenges that you have encountered
in developing stress tests for large asset managers? Why is it
such a challenge?
Ms. White. It is a challenge and it is also--it is probably
the fifth in the five that I mentioned. And the staff is
working on them all at the same time and working very hard on
it.
Asset managers are not banks, and so one first can't just
transfer stress testing for banks into this space, and so to
come up with a meaningful test for very different funds with
different kinds of assets, different kinds of stresses that
matter is a real challenge.
But we are working very hard on it. It is actually a
requirement under Dodd-Frank.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. Lastly, I would like to ask you about
the SEC's use of administrative proceedings. And as you know,
Dodd-Frank expanded the SEC's authority to try cases in an
administrative forum where decisions are made by law judges
rather than always having to go to Federal court, which is
expensive and time-consuming.
Some critics have claimed that the SEC's administrative
proceedings amount to an unfair ``home court advantage''--and
some have even claimed that they deprive defendants of due
process. Can you speak to these issues? How do you feel about
it? Do you think the SEC does get an unfair home court
advantage when they are in the form of administrative law
judges? And what protections are in place to ensure that
defendants are still receiving their full due process?
Ms. White. Administrative proceedings and administrative
law judges have been used by the SEC for many, many years, as
well as other Federal agencies. Congress obviously gave the SEC
as well as other Federal agencies the ability to bring
enforcement cases in either district court or administrative
proceedings.
With respect to the SEC, we have a lot of expertise in our
administrative law judges. They deal with very technical kinds
of issues.
They are impartial and they have unique due process rights,
not the same as a district court, but for example, unlike in
district court, if you are a respondent in an administrative
proceeding, you would provide Jencks and Brady material, which
is essentially exculpatory information. That is not required in
district court, we turn over all of our unprivileged
investigative file.
We have also proposed actually for notice and comment
amendments to our rules of practice to provide additional
rights for defendants.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentlelady has
expired. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Missouri,
Mr. Luetkemeyer, chairman of our Housing and Insurance
Subcommittee.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chair White,
thank you for being here today. And I want to start off my
questions with regards to designation of insurers, insurance
companies as SIFIs. As chairman of the Insurance Subcommittee,
it is concerning to me as we continue to discuss this issue
with a lot of the insurance industry folks as well as those
insurance companies that have been designated.
Can you tell me the specific standards that you looked at
whenever you voted in favor of designating two of our domestic
companies as SIFIs over the objection of the insurance expert
on FSOC?
Ms. White. I think we may have talked about this in March
as well. I participated, I think, in the AIG and the MetLife
cases, not the others. Let me just--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I am aware of that. That is why I said
just--
Ms. White. That is why you said two. And the MetLife
designation, as you know, is in litigation, so I am somewhat
limited as what I can say. But what I can say, because the
statutory criteria are in the statute in public, FSOC's
guidance as to what it looks at is public. And then--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. My question, though, is what
standards did you look at that were different or more
significant to you than what the insurance expert on FSOC said
were not something that in his eyes rose to the level of
designated as a SIFI?
Ms. White. Well--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Where is the--to you the alarm or the--
Ms. White. It is so hard to get into the--into granularity
on that, I think, but obviously, we get very detailed
presentations and analyses from the staff. We have a standard
we are applying, and looking for certain criteria, I was
satisfied that those were met in that instance.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. One of the questions--
Ms. White. Listen--I must say listening very carefully and
respectfully and understanding the knowledge that the insurance
representative brings to bear on this.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. But you still went without--or went
against--
Ms. White. I made my independent decision, yes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. The other question that we always
get is--our concern that we always get from insurance industry
folks is we need an off-ramp, we need some way, some sort of
mechanism or a delineation of things for them to do to become
de-designated. Will you support something like that?
Ms. White. It exists to a degree. It is important to know
that because there is actually an annual review process of any
company that is designated. I think what--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. With all due respect, Madam Chair, that is
not a delineation of things for them to do; that is just a
report of where they are at. It doesn't tell you what--
Ms. White. Well, yes. What a company that is designated
will have received is a very detailed analysis of the basis of
the decision of designation.
Now in some cases, in many cases, you may have a situation
where it is essentially the core business model, and how much
leverage is used or the kind of derivatives that are used.
And so there hasn't been a delineation. It could be
difficult in many cases to do it, but the bottom line for me
is, I think the clearer that we are in FSOC about what it is
that could get you designated--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The concern that we have--
Ms. White. --and de-designated is a good thing.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The concern that we have, though, is that
there is a rubber stamp effect with FSOC with regards to
insurance SIFIs. When you have the insurance expert on FSOC say
no, it is not a problem, and yet everybody else goes along with
the international designation versus what we think is good for
our companies here in this country, it raises some questions
and concerns.
Ms. White. All I would say is I don't think--there is a not
a rubber stamp; it is an independent decision in my view,
clearly.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I appreciate the comment. I would venture
to disagree with that at this point. Also, SIFI designation for
asset managers seems to be headed down that same road, our
asset managers being designated as SIFIs headed down that same
road. We are very concerned about that as well. FSOC has
decided to look at activities and products of asset managers.
Does that concern you at all?
Ms. White. Again, FSOC hasn't ruled out designations of
asset managers, but I think the pivot, if I can call it that,
to products and activities that may raise potential systemic
risk makes sense.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Do you believe asset managers are
systemically important?
Ms. White. As phrased that way, I don't think the business
model in general creates that. And it is not confined to asset
managers. Securities lending is one of the activities being
looked--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. I guess my question is, do you
believe the business model of asset managers can be
systemically important?
Ms. White. As a business model it is an agency model and
therefore I think that it ordinarily would not be.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Interesting. I see my time is about up. I
yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Capuano,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Capuano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Madam
Chair, for being here.
Madam Chair, in the last, oh, I don't know, 20 years, do
you know which issue at the SEC has received the most comments
of any?
Ms. White. You are probably going to tell me political
contributions.
[laughter]
Mr. Capuano. I am not going to tell you anything--
Ms. White. I don't know. I don't know the answer to that.
Mr. Capuano. My understanding is political contributions
has received over a million comments--
Ms. White. It has received over a million, and I think
2,000 of those are unique. So that is a lot of comments.
Mr. Capuano. Right.
Ms. White. No question.
Mr. Capuano. And that being the case, again, I am asking do
you plan on addressing that issue in the foreseeable future?
Ms. White. Essentially, and I know we had this conversation
last time as well, there are very strong views of both sides of
this issue.
I think I have three, actually three fairly recent
outstanding letters from members of this committee, two
different letters, and some Members of the Senate as well; I
will be responding to those.
But as I have said before, our focus is on, and our
regulatory agenda focuses on congressional mandates and what I
consider to be mission-critical initiatives. Asset management,
I have mentioned the disclosure effectiveness initiative, and
equity market structure--
Mr. Capuano. Will the disclosure--
Ms. White. But I want to make clear there are avenues
through the SEC's rules, which is the shareholder proposal
route to raise these issues. And they are raised quite actively
and the staff--
Mr. Capuano. They are raised, but--
Ms. White. --essentially doesn't permit exclusion of them.
Mr. Capuano. They are raised, but they are not required by
the SEC.
Ms. White. There is not a mandatory disclosure rule. No,
sir.
Mr. Capuano. So therefore, voluntary, which is great--there
are some people who are good citizens who like to tell people
what they are doing, but there are a lot who are not.
Ms. White. And companies are voluntarily making those
disclosures.
Mr. Capuano. And I applaud those who have done it
voluntarily. No regulation is done because everybody does it
voluntarily. All regulations on every group are done because
there is always a handful of people who are not good players.
Regulations are not targeted to everybody because everybody
is a bad player; all regulations, including SEC regulations,
are targeted because there is always a handful of bad ones. The
fact you have some voluntary compliers, that is good and I
applaud them. Nonetheless, you have many that are not.
And you say, obviously--and I appreciate the fact that you
clarified that you are trying to focus on congressionally-
mandated one, but your disclosure effectiveness review
generated I believe 64 comment letters--64 versus 1.2 million.
And by the way, as I understand it, of those 64, 10 of them
related to corporate political disclosures. So Madam Chair, I
would suggest--
Ms. White. We will undoubtedly get more comment letters as
the disclosure effectiveness proceeds, but at least a couple of
those letters that, you are right, were submitted on political
contributions in connection with that initiative, also urge us
to focus first on our congressional mandate.
Mr. Capuano. Clearly, I think America has spoken in every
capacity they can to you and to your organization that they
want to prioritize this. It is not that difficult. And the fact
that you refuse to do it just kind of raises lots of questions.
But you also say you want to focus on congressionally-
mandated ones. What about Dodd-Frank Section 956(a)? You
haven't focused on that.
Ms. White. The incentive compensation rules.
Mr. Capuano. Yes.
Ms. White. The incentive compensation rule is a joint
rulemaking with our fellow regulators and we are very active--
there had been a proposal sometime ago before I even got to the
Commission.
Mr. Capuano. In 2011.
Ms. White. Correct. And we are all working on it very, very
actively as we speak.
Mr. Capuano. 2011, 2015, almost 2016, and you think that is
active?
Ms. White. I am describing the current state of affairs. We
are working on it very actively. The SEC is participating in it
very actively--
Mr. Capuano. When do you think you might have a final
response?
Ms. White. We are working very hard to come together on
that in the very near future.
Mr. Capuano. In the very near--
Ms. White. In the very near future.
Mr. Capuano. Is your definition of ``very near future'' the
same as mine?
Ms. White. I don't know. But it is the very near future
nevertheless.
Mr. Capuano. Madam Chair, those are two issues, one of
which is congressionally mandated, and by the way, it said 9
months after passage. You did have a proposal, your predecessor
had a proposal in 2011, as normal, and went back.
Since 2014, the other regulators have come up with a
conclusion, and it is the SEC that is holding this--
Ms. White. No, actually, all of the regulators are working
on this jointly, and we are covering sort of the entire swath
of different registrants, different kinds of registrants. It is
quite complicated, but it is all of us working on this
together, it is not the SEC holding anything up.
Mr. Capuano. --but, first of small, it is not complicated
to simply require political spending to be disclosed. That is
relatively simple. If you and your staff can't do it, let me
know. I will have it for you in a week. It is relatively
simple.
As far as the compensation, I want to be really clear: It
only applies to companies with assets over $1 billion. That is
all it does. It doesn't say how much, pay anybody you want any
amount you want, we simply want to make sure that the
incentives don't encourage companies to endanger this economy
again. That is all it is.
Ms. White. Absolutely. That is all it is, although how you
bring that about so it will be effective is not so easy.
Mr. Capuano. I understand that, but something is always
better than nothing. And my time has run out. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and thank you, Madam Chair.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Huizenga, chairman of our Monetary Policy and Trade
Subcommittee.
Mr. Huizenga. Right here, Chair White.
Ms. White. I never can find you.
Mr. Huizenga. Yes, I know. It is the new construction. We
are about a mile away.
So, a couple of things. Actually, the seat that you occupy
today was filled yesterday by Minister Evode Imena, who is the
minister of mines for Rwanda. And we had a hearing on conflict
minerals, Section 1502, it was--he was accompanied by the
ambassador, Mathilda Mukanatabana.
I'm very concerned about the effects of conflict minerals
in 1502, what effect it is having on Central Africa. And as you
may recall, it is not just the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(DRC), there are nine other countries that are covered by this.
As he put it, it is not a conflict minerals boycott but
rather an African boycott the way that 1502 has been
implemented. And you had said so yourself; I will spare you the
whole regurgitation of your own speech from October of 2013,
but you said, ``but as the Chair of the SEC, I must question as
a policy matter using the Federal securities laws and the SEC's
powers of mandatory disclosure to accomplish these goals,''
referencing the goals which I think we all share, and certainly
you and I do share, of making sure that the laudable goals of
reducing conflict, keeping extortion out of the marketplace and
those kinds of things is very true.
There was a letter that I, along with Chairman Hensarling,
Chairman Royce, and Chairman Garrett sent you on February 25th.
Your response letter stated that in the time period of July of
2010 through the middle of March of 2015, this year, the SEC
had expended over 21,000 hours and spent approximately $2.7
million on this particular provision, with which I think we
agree the SEC has little or no experience.
The hearing brought really two questions to mind for me.
First and foremost, is 1502 really truly achieving the
objectives that I think many of us agree on, of helping the
people of central Africa, giving them a better life and a
better opportunity?
I will tell you that Minister Imena not does not believe
that is the case, they are investing more money into compliance
than what their entire budget is for going out and exploring
new mining possibilities.
The Washington Post had said that--they did a story on the
conflict minerals rule, saying it is well-intentioned but ``set
off a chain of events that has propelled millions of Congolese
miners and their families deeper into poverty.'' So that is one
issue.
The second is, is the SEC the right agency to pursue and
enforce these rules in light of all of the other important
investor protection actions that do fall under your mandate?
My friend--I see he has just left, but my colleague from
Massachusetts who was just beating you up about 956(a) that has
been awaiting action since 2011, resource extraction, CEO pay
ratio disclosure rules, all of those other things that have had
time and attention but are not doing anything to make sure that
investors are protected.
I just--I really am struggling with how this is an
important element to you when we are seeing--and I understand
you are being mandated to do these things, but we are seeing
faster action on those that we are on 956(a) or on so many
other areas that we need to have a regulation. So please help
me understand.
Ms. White. First, that rule was proposed before I got here,
so some of those--
Mr. Huizenga. I fully understand. You are implementing--
Ms. White. I am not trying to--I am just saying--
Mr. Huizenga. --you are implementing what has been given to
you.
Ms. White. --the early history I don't know, but I believe
it contains also a deadline where some of the others may or may
not, but that is just a fact.
To some degree, kind of in both directions, I sometimes get
at cross purposes because of my view of congressional mandates
which is I do believe we have to carry them out and to do it in
the most cost-effective ways we can.
In terms of sort of what is in the queue when you can do
some prioritizing, but it is also--what I did when I first got
here was, because we had a lot in the queue, was to try to get
separate work streams going. And so for example, the 956
rulemaking is not done by the Corporation Finance Division as
this one is, but separate work streams. And so as they are
ready, we proceed with them, we do them as well as we can.
Some of the time and dollars are really because we are--we
have to be true to the statutory prescription and to do it as
well as we can.
Mr. Huizenga. I understand. And in my last remaining 5
seconds, we have seen the SEC budget increase 35 percent since
2010, 64 percent since 2005, and 300 percent since 2000. And I
think, I hope you are hearing from me and my other colleagues
on both sides of the aisle that we need to have priorities and
we may not be having to increase budgets if we would focus in
on what your core mandate is. And that is what I want to
encourage you to do today.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Clay,
ranking member of our Financial Institutions Subcommittee.
Mr. Clay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Madam
Chair, for attending today.
And in fairness to the SEC's budget, it does not contribute
to the deficit of this country, is that correct?
Ms. White. That is correct. It is deficit-neutral.
Mr. Clay. And let's stay on budget. The House and Senate
appropriations committees marks for the SEC's Fiscal Year 2016
budget represent level funding, ignoring yours and the
President's request for substantial increases.
Please describe what would be the effect of the SEC--of
level funding in Fiscal Year 2016. What initiatives would you
not be able to pursue?
Ms. White. I think any number of initiatives. I think we
are talking about budget in terms of budget increases over
time. We also have to look at what happened to our spaces of
responsibility, both the new spaces like crowdfunding and other
areas but also the complexity of the markets and how much they
have grown. And so what you see in our budget--and I do try to
do this very carefully--is to prioritize our core mission.
We have a lot of core missions because that is the nature
of the SEC, so there are a number of things that we could not
proceed with if under the current C.R., for example, we are
essentially in a hiring freeze which means that just as we need
to expand to cover crowdfunding, for example, you know, we
can't get those skilled personnel who are so important to our
initiative.
It will hurt enforcement, it will hurt exams, it will hurt
our IT development and enhancements, which is so critical to us
being an effective regulator.
Mr. Clay. And how does your budget compare to the industry
you are regulating? Has it kept pace with the growth in the
financial services industry?
Ms. White. We are outmatched. No question about it. I think
one metric that sort of makes the point very dramatically is
that it has been reported that 6 of our largest registrants
spend about $10 billion a year on technology.
Our entire budget is $1.5 billion.
Mr. Clay. And at this time--and you mentioned
crowdfunding--do you expect to need additional resources to
oversee these entities?
Ms. White. Yes. We have to build up that entire regime as
well as municipal advisors and others.
Mr. Clay. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And at this time, Mr. Chairman, I would like to yield the
remainder of my time to the gentleman from Massachusetts.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you. I thank the gentleman from Missouri.
Madam Chair, thank you for being here. I know that the
ranking member spoke earlier in the hearing about the well-
known seasoned issuer (WKSI) waivers and I know you made some
comments recently regarding that.
The idea, though--the basic idea, here, is that we would
reward good behavior with the WKSI title or label, a well-known
seasoned issuer and also allowing them off-the-shelf
registration. And yet we would withdraw that--we would withdraw
that privilege if we had felony conviction or securities fraud
on the part of these companies.
And so, what we have seen here repeatedly, I must say from
the SEC, is that even though they are convicted of felonies,
even though they are convicted of securities fraud, we let them
have that privilege. We don't discourage bad behavior. And so,
I am just asking you to try to explain that because I read your
statement but it is confounding to me.
Ms. White. Again, I have tried to lay this out and I made a
speech like last March on this--
Mr. Lynch. I read it.
Ms. White. --to be as clear as one could be. But first of
all, I think we are all about trying to punish bad behavior and
particularly financial institutions and senior executives who
have committed wrongdoing, and I think our record in
enforcement is quite aggressive and quite impressive.
In terms of WKSI, essentially, that was part of offering
reform. That had a somewhat different more streamlined set of
procedures--if I can call it that--for well-known seasoned
issuers, not just financial institutions, manufacturing
companies, et cetera.
In addition to streamlining, it also provides more
information real-time to investors. That is kind of the WKSI
regime. In terms of, if a company is indicted or commits
securities fraud or some other trigger for being disqualified
as a WKSI.
And, again, this is covered by regulation or statute with
respect to all disqualifications.
Then, what we also have covered by statute or regulation,
is a procedure for granting a waiver, putting the burden on the
party seeking the waiver. And in terms of the WKSI, what you
are looking most closely at is, can you rely on the entity's
disclosures going forward? The reliability of the disclosures.
So if the trigger happens to be--
Mr. Lynch. My time has expired. What I am saying is, a
conviction for fraud--a conviction for a felony, that is reason
to be less reliant--that hurts the reliability of these
companies, and they should have that title withdrawn from them.
That is my argument.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr.
Duffy, chairman of our Oversight and Investigations
Subcommittee.
Mr. Duffy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome, Chair White. It is great to have you back.
We talked privately, and I have seen the press release from
the SEC in regards to the tick size pilot program. You have
implemented a 5-month delay. We have talked about that. This is
not going to be a death by 1,000 delays, is it? You are still
committed to implementing the pilot program?
Ms. White. We are totally committed to it. We want to get
it right, though, so it will be meaningful, obviously. That is
the goal.
And we thought long and hard about it. We calibrated the
extension so that we can get good reliable data so we get the
results we are hoping for from the tick size pilot. We are
totally committed to going forward with it.
Mr. Duffy. And we want good data as well and to make sure
the pilot program is set up correctly. A little more time isn't
met with a big objection from us, just as long as you are still
committed to implementing the pilot program.
So, thank you for that. I want to follow up on the
chairman's question in regard to the corporate bond liquidity
and its relationship to the Volcker Rule. We think there is a
great tie in to economic growth and job creation through the
corporate bond market.
And, I think, you indicated today and in your last
testimony that you don't see a correlation between the Volcker
Rule and the lack of liquidity in the corporate bond market.
Is that correct?
Ms. White. That has been the conclusion of each of our--the
joint agencies, including ours--quarterly reports to this
committee.
In terms of not being able, certainly, to determine that it
is, I think is a better way to say it perhaps.
Mr. Duffy. Let me be clear first.
You would agree there is a liquidity issue in the corporate
bond market?
Ms. White. I agree that there is a concern, yes. I think we
try to give in each quarterly report exactly what we are seeing
in the liquidity and sometimes it is quite strong and sometimes
it is somewhat more volatile. I keep a close eye on it, and it
is a concern.
Mr. Duffy. So if not the Volcker Rule, then what? What is
causing the lack of liquidity?
You have to ask the question; it has to be a concern for
you. What is causing it?
Ms. White. Again, I think you have to look at whatever
particular market we are talking about, and a particular point
in time, and assess what is the liquidity? Because sometimes
there will be--talk about the lack of liquidity and it is quite
robust at that time. So that is why in those reports we do
both--here is what we are seeing in the primary markets, here
is what we are seeing in the secondary markets.
And then, also try to analyze what is having an impact on
that? Everybody is keeping a very close eye on the diminution
of liquidity, which is of great concern to everybody.
Mr. Duffy. And it would--
Ms. White. But ferreting out impacts is not easy in that
space.
Mr. Duffy. There is great liquidity, but you hit a bump in
the road, and all of a sudden liquidity vanishes. I think that
is the cause for concern.
And so, you can say, yes, sometimes there is great
liquidity--that is true. But we care more about those little
bumps that liquidity vanishes, and I think a lot of us would
argue that the liquidity issue has arisen with Volcker and
Basel and all the rules and regulations that have come to pass.
And, I don't know if you don't want to share your personal
opinion because it might be contrary to the position of FSOC--I
get that, but--
Ms. White. No, no. It is not that. I really do bore into
this with our own staff too, because one thing that we do for
every single rulemaking we do is to try to judge those
impacts--
Mr. Duffy. I would argue that there are people on the
outside, per the questions by the chairman, who have some
significant disagreement.
I only have a little bit of time left. I want to make just
a quick comment in regard to the corporate political spending.
Obviously, I get a lot of letters, as well. I know that
people rally. Folks around the country, whether they are on the
right or the left, send me letters. I am sure you get the same
and you know where those letters come from.
There is a political agenda. But, for a corporate political
spending disclosure--would that protect investors if you did a
rule to that effect? Would that be material to decisions
investors make?
Ms. White. That may be, to some degree I suppose, in the
eye of the beholder. But clearly if you are looking for what is
material to investors under current law in the particular
context of a particular company it could be a certain level of
spending or something else unique about a company.
If it is material now, it has to be disclosed. What is
being sought is a mandatory disclosure rule across-the-board.
Mr. Duffy. Right. This isn't material in regard to
investment decisions that are made. This is politics.
Politics are coming into play, and they are trying to send
a whole bunch of letters to you so we can find out how
corporations might give politically, and they can rally
protests and sit-ins, and we know how the game works. But I
would encourage you to push back and keep a sound, steady
course.
I want to quickly pivot. We had the Director of Investment
Management, David Grimm, here before the committee. I don't
know if you watched that testimony, but we talked to him about
the systemic risk of asset managers and how FSOC had actually
used your team and his team to get insight.
And I didn't feel very confident that the expertise within
the SEC has been tapped by FSOC, and it gives me concern that
we have FSOC making decisions that are contrary to those
experts in the field, say at the SEC with asset managers also
as Mr. Luetkemeyer brought up, Mr. Woodall voted against
MetLife and others.
And those who don't have that expertise are voting to
designate. So, we do have--and I know my time is up.
Ms. White. I would just say that staff is providing
extensive expertise that the FSOC on the subject of asset
managers is, in terms of, for example, the request for
information that went out in December. That is quite active,
and it is very important that we do provide that expertise. I
think it is being received.
Mr. Duffy. I didn't feel very confident through--
Chairman Hensarling. Time.
Mr. Duffy. I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr.
Lynch.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you again,
Madam Chair, for being here.
I would like to revisit a topic that Mrs. Maloney from New
York raised earlier today, and that is going back to the August
24th problems in the market. I realize at that time our
markets, U.S. markets, were responding to a sell off of Chinese
stocks earlier in the day. However, according to The Wall
Street Journal, there were dozens of exchange traded funds that
traded at shop discounts to their net asset value, or their
component value, leading to outsize losses for investors.
And I know your opinion was that the markets work very well
but there are some retail investors here that are very upset.
Do we have any sense of how much money retail investors lost on
the 24th of August?
Ms. White. Not as a net, net figure, I think. Because--and
particularly if you are trying to tie it to--
Mr. Lynch. Ballpark?
Ms. White. I would have to get back to you with whatever we
could do on that, but with respect to ETFs themselves, clearly,
you worry about retail investors in whatever spaces they are
in. And they are obviously in ETF spaces, and one of the
interesting things that I think will come out in our initial
results when they are made public is why some ETFs with kind of
the same characteristics didn't have that phenomena occur and
others did.
Mr. Lynch. Right.
Ms. White. Clearly, we are looking very closely at it.
Mr. Lynch. Reclaiming my time.
Ms. White. Sorry.
Mr. Lynch. I know that we have a couple of indices here, I
guess. The Vanguard Consumer Staples ETF and the $5.8 billion
Vanguard Healthcare ETF both plunged 32 percent within the
opening minutes of trading, and yet if you look at the
component stocks within those baskets, they were only down
about 9 percent.
So what was also troubling, at the same time the VIX, the
CBOE Volatility Index--went dark, so for that first half hour--
it didn't come on until 10 o'clock, and people didn't know how
much fear was in the market, or what direction things were
going in. So that was a problem.
And this is all in a time when the Dow experienced its
largest point drop in history. And so a couple of questions I
have are this.
Again, I ask you, how much was the loss for retail
investors? And I appreciate if you can get back to me on that.
But, given the fact that the whole idea of ETFs was to respond
to the flash crash, and the lack of liquidity, so people could
actually trade.
We have examples of--in the first 37 minutes, there were, I
think, 1,300 stops instituted on individual stocks, and--
Ms. White. I think that number covers the ETFs as well.
Mr. Lynch. Yes. Just, how can we prevent this problem?
Because we are going to have sell-offs in China again, at some
point.
Ms. White. Again, not commenting on the cause or causes of
August 24th. But what you are referencing now, at least
primarily, I think, is the limit up/limit down mechanism put in
after the flash crash, and that is precisely what we are
studying, based on that data that was generated on August 24th,
and how to recalibrate that to make it more effective.
The circuit breakers actually weren't triggered--
Mr. Lynch. Why the delta in the component stocks, versus
the ETFs? Why?
Ms. White. That is exactly what we are looking at. But it
is not a simple analysis, because you will have other ETFs with
the same characteristics that didn't experience those trading
pauses. So why is that? And that is one of the things we are
analyzing as well.
And as I say, this will be an ongoing study. But I am
hoping, in the pretty near future, we will be able to share
some results that will answer some of the questions.
Mr. Lynch. Yes. Do you know if in the beginning, in your
talk about the opening, that was a real problem? Do you have
any correlation--at least, evidence that high-frequency traders
jumped on this in the early opening?
Ms. White. Again, we should wait for the initial results,
because we are analyzing everything, but that doesn't pop out.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you.
And I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
Mr. Fitzpatrick.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. I thank the Chair for the recognition.
And, Madam Chair, thanks for your testimony here today.
As Members of Congress, we listen to our constituents, we
learn a lot about the economy, about what is holding it back,
what the problems are with job growth in the country.
And 4, 5, 6 years ago, what I used to hear about from my
constituents was high health care costs, high taxes, and a lot
of uncertainty in the Tax Code. I have to say that over the
course of the last 2 years, the focus has shifted dramatically,
and almost exclusively, to the cost of regulation.
Last week, I was back home in Bucks County, Pennsylvania. I
met with a constituent whose clients are banks, and he talked
about this one particular new startup--about 10, 12 years old.
I think there are less than 50 employees in the bank. He
said eight of them were compliance individuals, complying with
regulation. I have to say, even as much as we pay attention, I
was shocked at the numbers.
And those banks would tell us, these are individuals who
are not able to be processing loans or meeting with customers.
Last night, I met with a constituent not in the financial
services industry, in a different industry, but with the same
issue. He was emphatic about the cost of regulation and what it
was doing to his particular industry.
In my community, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, we have a lot
of high-tech biotechnology firms, startups, investors taking
big risks for them.
About 3 years ago, one of my constituents from a
pharmaceutical company--which employs many of my constituents--
named Jeff Hatfield testified before our Subcommittee on
Capital Markets, and I have his testimony here.
And what he was testifying on was the cost of regulatory
compliance, the negative impact on research, hiring, and
potential growth. Specifically, one remedy that he cited was
the filing status classification 12b-2, to encourage growth,
but also protect investors.
As I am sure you are aware, biotech companies may research
new therapies for years at a great cost without seeing an
actual profit, despite a lot of market valuation.
They are still required to comply with all of the
regulatory requirements. He was talking about 12b-2, I think he
also testified about 404(b), which is a section of Sarbanes-
Oxley that requires an awful lot of sort of external audits of
internal controls.
The SEC, I am sure, is looking at this. What are your
thoughts on what Jeff Hatfield testified before the committee,
and whether or not this cost is really dragging down innovation
and hiring in the communities?
Ms. White. What we do at the SEC is really quite vigorous
cost-benefit analysis, and that is of all of our rules. I think
one of the great success stories of the SEC, frankly, is our
Division of Economic and Risk Analysis (DERA) unit, our
economists who actually perform that work and a lot of other
work at the SEC, a lot of studies to try to really calibrate
both the baseline--where are we now, in terms of what are we
trying to accomplish with the regulation, what is the benefit
of that, where is the market now, and then, if we impose this
regulation in this form, what is its cost going to be?
And you clearly look at the size of a company when you do
that, too. You look at different industries when you do that,
too. Now, I can't tell you that the net comes out so that there
is not some of those costs imposed, obviously.
But what I can say is that the SEC really does a very
thorough analysis of cost-benefit.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. In terms of the size of the companies, a
lot of the pharmaceutical and biotech companies don't have a
lot of employees. They are highly compensated employees, and
they may have a lot of market value, but they are not going to
have any revenue for 10 years.
It could take $1 billion in research to get a therapy to
market, with no profit until that point in time.
So what does the SEC cost-benefit analysis say about those
companies, which are very important to my district, because
they can't grow--they are spending money hiring external
auditors, complying with a rule that I am sure was well-
intentioned, but not intended to be impacting firms like these.
Ms. White. I don't know how to answer that other than to
say that our economists try to look at it not just as, here are
the compliance costs, but what does it do to competition, what
does it do to the other economic impacts besides just--and I
don't mean to minimize it--the compliance costs.
But again, obviously, what is driving that analysis in the
first place is a need--a perceived need, certainly, for some
regulation to protect investors and the markets and to
facilitate capital formation.
But we should be doing as deep a dive as we can, no matter
what the industry is, no matter what the complexity--or
uniqueness, maybe, is a better word. And I appreciate that is
how the pharmaceutical R&D works, in particular.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Duffy [presiding]. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Scott, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much.
Chair White, are you aware that when we wrote Dodd-Frank,
in Section 913 we gave exclusive responsibility to the
Securities and Exchange Commission if there came a time when we
needed to put together a best interest standard for the
fiduciary? You are aware of that, aren't you?
Ms. White. I am certainly aware that 913 gives the SEC
authority to proceed. It doesn't mandate it. Yes.
Mr. Scott. Let me ask you this: why are you allowing the
Labor Department to take over your territory that we put in
Dodd-Frank, that was approved by the House, approved by the
Senate, and signed by the President of the United States?
Ms. White. I don't view it--and I have heard your comments
before--that way. Again, we are separate agencies. They do have
responsibility and statutory authority in the ERISA space. Even
as we--
Mr. Scott. Let me--
Ms. White. --sit here now, brokers have to comply, if they
are in the ERISA space, with the Department of Labor rules and
ours.
Mr. Scott. Let me respond to that, please. I was here. I
helped write Section 913. There was a reason why the Securities
and Exchange Commission came to set and let us do this--because
they were the regulatory agency.
Now, you mention ERISA. Not once--not one time--did the
Labor Department come over and said, ``Hold on, let us handle
the retirement.'' No. There was no discussion of that. That is
just happening now.
This is a critical issue, and if there ever was a time for
the Securities and Exchange Commission to stand up and do its
duty so that all of the American people can receive the proper
financial advice to make those critical decisions--do you
realize what the Labor Department is doing?
Do you realize what position that is putting FINRA and you
in as far as complying with these complexities? And if you
allow that, and sit back and disavow the authority we put into
913, that would be a very, very serious indictment on the
Securities and Exchange Commission.
So what I am asking you--and this is why--when you allow,
and you pass a rule which says that instead of a Commission
base, that now you have to pay up-front, fee-for-service, out-
of-pocket, before a financial investor can even talk to you
about it, that has a clear, disproportionate impact on the
lower income, the middle income, and especially African-
American investors and other minorities, because they are not
going to--they don't have that much.
And when you get to what they basically do--even if you get
to the annuities, which is what they really utilize--but you
have three different ones. You have the fixed annuity, the
variable annuity, the indexed annuity. That in and of itself is
enough to run most people away.
And then, if they go through that, then they have to sign a
contract. Now, I tell you, Chair White--I want to ask for you
to get more aggressive here. And because you are going to be
placed in the middle, FINRA is going to be placed in the
middle.
And if they had this unworkable best-interest contract
exemption, it would result in low- and middle-income people
being pushed from these less expensive Commission-based
accounts to the more costly fee-based up-front out-of-pocket
accounts.
How do you see FINRA managing this conflicting compliance
obligation? Because under current regulations, FINRA must find
cost to be a pivotal issue when assessing and making the
difference between what is best here.
Our financial system is complex and complicated, and you
are going to push out lower- and middle-income people from
being able to invest with their retirement.
I have great respect for you, and I want to make it plain:
Seize your authority back on this fiduciary issue. The Labor
Department should have said, if we got a retirement, it is
written in the Dodd-Frank, that the SEC has this
responsibility. The respectful thing for them to do is at least
come to you and FINRA, and say, let's harmonize something to
address this.
This is not theirs alone, and I am speaking for an awful
lot of very, very important people, the low income, the middle
income and most African-Americans, they need you to stand up on
this.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Westmoreland.
Mr. Westmoreland. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
Chair White, for being here.
Chair White, you realize that one of the things that we are
responsible for is trying to help our constituents solve
problems, and I have one that I would very much like for you to
address on behalf of my constituent.
Do you know what a naked option stress analysis is? Or an
NOSA?
Ms. White. I do now, I believe.
[laughter]
I think your staff indicated you had this issue with a
constituent.
Mr. Westmoreland. Yes.
Ms. White. I knew before, too, but I know more now than I
knew before you had the question.
Mr. Westmoreland. You and I both know more about it than
what we used to. And my constituent is, very, very aware of it,
and he has been quite successful in his career. And it is a--
the NOSA is a vehicle, created by Merrill Lynch to mitigate
risk from naked options trade, and when it is triggered, the
account holder must post an NOSA margin to cover potential
losses.
My constituent has contacted me, and we have been over and
over and over it with the SEC and Merrill Lynch and others,
trying to find out what triggered this call. And he has been
unable to get that resolved, and even though he has asked
Merrill Lynch on several occasions to give him that, they said
that is a resource that they have trademarked.
Now, do you think is necessary, do you think it is okay
that a company like Merrill Lynch could patent something to use
on their investors, and not be able to tell them what that is?
Ms. White. I don't want to speak about the specifics until
I know all of the specifics, but clearly there are a number of
obligations with respect to this, disclosure obligations,
suitability obligations. What I would suggest on this is that
I--it sounds like you have been talking to the SEC, I don't
know to whom at the SEC, but if I could have one of my senior
staff people follow up with your staff member, let's see if we
can get to the bottom of it.
Mr. Westmoreland. I appreciate that, Chair White, and I
have a pretty good file here that I will get to your staff
before you go, but it would certainly be something good,
because this gentleman has jumped through all the hoops, and
done everything, he and his wife both, to get an answer and
have been unable to do that.
And so, any help that you could you give us as far as
getting an answer or a conclusion of this, it would be much
appreciated by me and Mr. and Mrs. Denny.
So, thank you very, very much, and I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, ranking
member of our Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Madam
Chair, for appearing today.
Madam Chair, I would like to get some things for the
record; these are things that are of common knowledge to a
certain extent. It is true that you are a member of FSOC,
correct?
Ms. White. Yes.
Mr. Green. And that as a member of FSOC, you have voting
privileges?
Ms. White. Yes.
Mr. Green. And that as a member of FSOC, which is a newly
formed institution as a result of Dodd-Frank, you have the
ability to look at the entire financial system, looking for
risk that may be out there that can hurt the system, is that
correct?
Ms. White. Yes.
Mr. Green. Simple terms.
Now, in doing this, Madam Chair, would it be fair to say
that if we had had FSOC prior to 2008, we all would have been
more likely to see the risks that AIG posed, than less likely
to see them? Is it fair to say that there is a greater
likelihood we would have seen some of these concerns with AIG?
Ms. White. It is always hard to judge that, obviously, and
that you see what you see. But this is a mechanism that is
enormously important to seeing risks as early as possible,
because you have to bring all of the relevant financial
regulators, or a good component of the financial regulators
from different strata, in a room together, to talk about what
they are seeing. And there is no real substitute for
identifying a problem early than that, I think.
Mr. Green. This is why I ask in terms of more likely or
less likely. More likely to have seen it or less likely?
Ms. White. Certainly in theory, it should be more likely.
Mr. Green. And in reviewing entities such as AIG, which had
this London office that was doing some things that we didn't
find quite acceptable after the fact, in reviewing these
things, do you spend an inordinate amount of time at entities
that don't come under the $50 billion threshold as a trigger,
or designation as a SIFI?
Do you spend a lot of time before you cast that vote?
Ms. White. You spend a lot of time before you cast a vote,
a lot of time.
Mr. Green. And do you have an office to help you with
research, the Office of Financial Research (OFR), to help you
with the research? People who provide expertise to the
Treasury, and the Treasury can share its--
Ms. White. And certainly, OFR does research on various
issues. The FSOC staff, and the staffs of the member agencies
also do a lot of work.
Mr. Green. Thank you. And when you cast your vote, are you
told how to vote? Or does someone say to you, you have to vote
a certain way on these issues?
Ms. White. No.
Mr. Green. Is it your opinion that you have been a pretty
independent person serving on this FSOC?
Ms. White. Yes.
Mr. Green. And as an independent person, you put your time
in and you study things, and you come to final conclusions?
Ms. White. Yes, and I studied it with, not only the FSOC
staff, but our staff.
Mr. Green. Now, I just looked at some of the information on
some of the very large companies in this country. A good many
of them have triggers that bring them under the auspices of the
FSOC and the SIFI designation. If you have to study every one
of them to ascertain whether or not it should be a SIFI, it
would take a lot of time to do this, wouldn't it?
Ms. White. No question.
Mr. Green. Do you have the personnel, such that you can
study all of these mega-corporations that are $50 billion and
above, do you have the personnel to look at them with the kind
of detail that you need, if you did not have the trigger to
bring some of them under an umbrella?
Ms. White. Obviously, the resources are finite. You try to
prioritize the ones that pose, potentially, a systemic risk.
Mr. Green. And do you find that it is beneficial to have a
trigger, whether it is at $50 billion or some other amount, is
it beneficial to have a trigger?
Ms. White. That is a little hard to judge, because
obviously, what we are presented with are those that have met
that trigger. So you don't know what hasn't met that trigger, I
guess, to some degree. But logically, yes.
Mr. Green. And without the trigger, you find yourself
having to answer a good many more MetLife questions and a good
many more questions that relate to entities that you are trying
to sift through and ascertain whether or not they are SIFIs?
Ms. White. I think it would depend on what substitute
methodology you had.
Mr. Green. Okay, thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Royce, chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee.
Mr. Royce. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and Chair
White, thank you.
If we look back to the collapse of Lehman Brothers, one of
the lessons was the need to quickly understand the relationship
of corporate entities to one another. And so, out of the ashes
of Lehman's downfall, came the Financial Stability Board's
(FSB's) concept--and this was actually the direction of the G-
20--this concept of legal entity identifiers, or LEIs, as we
call them, where each entity has to register that unique 20-
digit code, and that makes their identity very clear when you
are trying to unravel something in real time, in terms of all
their financial transactions.
So last month, this committee passed legislation, which I
authored, requiring the Office of Financial Research to provide
an annual update on the progress of adoption of these LEIs,
here in the United States.
Now the global adoption I think is at 400,000; 400,000 LEIs
now in 180 countries. So if the OFR were to conduct its report
today, I am afraid that the SEC would lag behind a bit in terms
of the adoption in other countries. As we move towards more
transparency, this obviously this is part of our mission, and I
think the Commission did mandate the use of LEIs in its
security-based swap rules.
It didn't require it in other rules. So I guess I would
ask, should we expect that the SEC is going to require greater
use of this important risk management tool in the future?
And is there anything holding you back in that regard?
Ms. White. There is nothing holding us back. If it is
appropriate to the space, you want to make sure it fits, right?
But I think LEI is an enormously important tool.
The SEC has been a very strong proponent in those global
efforts that you mentioned, and we frankly look for--we are
looking for opportunities to use it more, I guess is the way I
would answer your question.
Mr. Royce. But to get to that point, you might promulgate
more rules in that direction in order to increase the adoption
where appropriate.
Ms. White. Essentially, as we are adopting whatever rules
as we go forward, we would look for that opportunity.
Mr. Royce. Right. Let me ask you another question, Chair
White, which goes to the Financial Services Committee's focus
here under the chairman. What we have been trying to do, under
the chairman's leadership, is to take a strong interest in
housing finance reform and see how we can move forward the
concept of bringing more private sector credit risk sharing
into the GSE's. We would like to get as many positive things
done as we possibly can in this quarter.
So real estate investment trusts are a logical investor in
these transactions. We have seen the communication from the
FHFA which says that it does not perceive any drawbacks from
greater involvement by REITs in credit risk transfers. This
might be an area that, sooner rather than later, we can move
forward additional steps to get more private capital. Could you
work with us to clarify that all of these risk transfer deals
are viewed as good read assets that do not undermine investor
protections?
Ms. White. We certainly would be happy to work with you on
that, and I think the staff may be working with you on that,
but I will make sure that they are.
Mr. Royce. I think that would be helpful. I think it is
very clear that as the Federal Housing Finance Agency says, at
the end of the day, there is a clear benefit in getting credit
risk transfers to get more private capital back in here for
this part of this equation and that REITs can do this,
according to them, and according to us.
We certainly see the benefit to this and it is--when you
are looking at a significant source of private capital like
this, it just doesn't make sense to, just because regulatory
hurdles, prevent that capital from being deployed. So we would
appreciate that assistance.
Chairman Hensarling. Does the gentleman yield back?
Mr. Royce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Washington, Mr. Heck.
Mr. Heck. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And Madam
Chair, thank you so very much being here.
I want to ask about the Volcker Rule, which I consider to
be fairly important. Of course, the Rule is final, but it is
not yet being enforced and is, at the end of the day, I guess
rather a bit of an experiment. So I want to pick your brain a
little bit about it as we await the time when it is actually
implemented.
What are you saying in terms of market behavior and
anticipation of the effective date? How do you see the market
changing? How do you see companies adapting to it? And do you
yet perceive any change in the risk being taken in the risk to
the financial system? Just talk generally about those kinds of
things. Is that--
Ms. White. Again, it is a little hard to judge at this
juncture with certainly, with any definitiveness on that. We
are basically just about now going into the exam for the
compliance period, actually, and all the agencies are.
We are coordinating well. We will learn more from that, but
before that period actually kicked in, we were obviously
talking to those subject to the rule to see if they were able
to provide the metrics they needed to comply and really, they
got a very--at least initial, positive read on that.
Mr. Heck. What does positive read mean?
Ms. White. Positive read, meaning that they should be able
to comply in a timely way. Now obviously, there are exemptions
in the Volcker Rule and there are prohibitions in the Volcker
Rule. And compliance is really at the trading desk level, and
so there is a lot to look at in terms of is this market-making,
or is this something that is prohibited?
I think we have to see what comes out of certainly this
first wave of exams to see, is it working, is there good
compliance, and then in terms of judging its effects, I think
that is down the road a bit.
Mr. Heck. But where you sit here today, based on what you
know and given that it is limited, are you confident that it
will in fact reduce risk to the financial system?
Ms. White. That is certainly the objective, which is
basically to not have these institutions that are connected
elsewhere engage in proprietary transactions. But again, I am a
person who likes to wait on the data, but I think that is
certainly the purpose.
Mr. Heck. It is the purpose. Are you confident that it will
achieve the purpose in large part?
Ms. White. I have to see the data. I am afraid on that.
Mr. Heck. Okay. Subject two. You are also currently
reviewing a change in definition for accredited investors. Your
predecessor was pretty clear that it very much needed to be
changed and updated. So I would like to ask you what the status
of your review of the definition of accredited investor is,
just a general timeline for you think that--where that work
will end up, what you personally think the direction needs to
be.
Ms. White. Sorry.
Mr. Heck. Go ahead.
Ms. White. First, clearly it, for a while, needed a really
deep dive look in terms of all the various criteria that needed
to be considered, not just net worth and income levels, but
including them.
Our staff has been studying that quite intensively for some
time and they really are coming to a conclusion of their work.
And the next step--really quite in the last phases of that
and the next step, which I think will be relatively soon, I
know you will want me to define that next, but relatively soon
to basically put out publicly what those findings are and what
the analysis is.
Mr. Heck. Is ``relatively soon'' something like 90 to 120
days?
Ms. White. I would think so.
Mr. Heck. And do you personally believe that there is a
definitive need to update?
Ms. White. I do believe there is a definitive need to
update. I can say that much. Yes.
Mr. Heck. Can you give an example of the kind of change
that you think--
Ms. White. I don't want to get--again, we will have to
decide this, so I don't want to get ahead of when we are a
five-person Commission also. But clearly, what we are looking
at beyond the traditional tests of net worth and income, are
other kinds of sophistication, experience, qualifications that
certainly many, many would argue should entitle you to be an
accredited investor.
And I think one wants to be sophisticated about and
realistic about what those other criteria are that would meet
any investor protection concerns, frankly. So we are looking
quite broadly.
Mr. Heck. Thank you. With that, I yield back the balance of
my time, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Hurt.
Mr. Hurt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank Chair White
for appearing before us today.
In your testimony, you touched on equity market structure.
I wanted to highlight one of the things that you said. You said
that you all had been proceeding, since your last visit here,
with an ongoing assessment of the U.S. equity market structure
to ensure that our markets remain the deepest and fairest in
the world and optimally serve investors and companies of all
sizes seeking to raise capital.
I wanted to turn your attention to the national market
system plans, NMS plans, that were created in 1975 as an
amendment to the Securities Exchange Act 40 years ago, and
obviously a lot of things have changed since that time. The
U.S. equity exchanges at that time were not-for-profit; they
were member-owned. Today, of course, they are publicly traded
and they are for-profit. And so a lot has changed in the last
40 years.
When you talk about plans for the collection and
dissemination of market data, I think that we would all agree
that if you want to ensure the deepest and fairest markets in
the world and optimally serve our investors, you have to have
accurate market data, and that has to be collected and
disseminated in a fair and accurate way.
In the aftermath of the of the NASDAQ SIP outage in August
2013, I think there were some concerns that were raised about
the governance of these National Market System (NMS) plans. We
know that the NMS plans--plan participants are exclusively
representatives of the exchanges in FINRA with no industry
representation, and that leads it--it has been argued, to two
separate problems.
One is that you don't have a broad-based representation
among these participants in providing the best sort of
leadership and vision for what needs to take place in making
sure that these SIPs are the best they can be.
And then two, and perhaps of greater concern, is the
conflict of interest issue, and that, of course, has to do with
the fact that because the way the revenue is shared, there is a
disincentive to invest in the SIPs to make them good as they
should be.
And also, the secondary issue relating to a conflict of
interest has to do with the fact that these exchanges have
their own data feeds that compete the SIPs information.
So I was wondering if you could talk a little bit about
where you are, and what you think can and should be done as it
relates to the reform in the governance of these NMS plans?
Ms. White. This is one of the reasons that I correctly
identified this very deep comprehensive review of NMS and
equity market structure, even before I was confirmed, as one of
the highest priorities, and we have proceeded on that really,
in a sense, on two parallel tracks. One, there are some things
that clearly would optimize the markets that we are proceeding
on in terms of specific rulemaking.
And then the other is really the more comprehensive review.
That takes into account--and we have obviously spent a lot of
time dealing specifically also with SIP governance and single
point of failure and it is enormously important that the SIP
provide its information quickly with the consolidated
information.
And we are--and I think you can see, from our work on the
Market Structure Advisory Committee and the subcommittees that
we just formed, that we are looking very much at that issue--
those issues, as well as just kind of the whole role of the
exchanges in the equity market system. We are not--we haven't
concluded on those things, but very much front attention.
Mr. Hurt. Can you, as you sit here today, explain to me
what resistance there is or why we should continue to have
these participants that are exclusively from the SROs, without
including anybody from industry?
Ms. White. I am not sure I can provide that answer, other
than to say that one of the things we need to make sure of as
we are making the changes, is that the system continues to
function. And I am not suggesting putting a representative of
the industry on there; that would mean it didn't continue to
function, but we are trying to sort of optimize every aspect as
we go.
So, I could probably provide you some further information
on that.
Mr. Hurt. I would appreciate it. And I do think that the
conflict of interest issue is something that obviously goes to
the fundamental fairness issue that I think that we all want to
see in our markets.
Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
I bring up FASB's $2 trillion addition to the liabilities
in assets on American balance sheets each time you are here. I
want to commend you for stepping forward--and say yes, FASB
gets their authority from the SEC, and you take responsibility
for their decision to delegate that authority.
They didn't follow the Administrative Procedure Act. They
didn't listen to anybody in the construction field. They didn't
do any cost-benefit analysis. And we are going to see a decline
in construction employment as a result of this new rule.
So I will just ask you: Do you take responsibility for all
that?
Ms. White. We have had this discussion before. And again,
the SEC has ultimate responsibility for accounting standards.
We have obviously, for many, many years, recognized the private
sector, therefore FASB is the standard-setter. And the SEC has
the power--
Mr. Sherman. And if I can interrupt, the SEC hasn't
required them to follow the Administrative Procedure Act. The
SEC has done nothing with regard to their processes or their
outcomes.
Ms. White. I understand your point. From your point of
view, they haven't followed their due process procedures. I
certainly haven't received that information from any other
quarter in terms of the process that they have followed.
Mr. Sherman. You haven't received that information from
whom?
Ms. White. Among others, obviously people comment on their
process publicly all the time, as well as our staff and the
Chief Accountant's office.
Mr. Sherman. The people who comment live in the world I
used to live in--the world of accounting. They have barely
heard of the Administrative Procedure Act. It is foreign to
that world to let carpenters and pipefitters come before the
agency and say, ``Please don't ruin my family and my job.'' And
so they refuse to listen to any of those people.
Ms. White. Again, information that is coming to me is that
FASB--comments were received on this proposal obviously several
times. And that they were responsive to some and not to others.
Mr. Sherman. They wouldn't--that is why I am using the word
``listen,'' rather than the word ``invite'' people to send e-
mails that will be thrown away. They wouldn't listen to anyone.
They didn't do a cost-benefit analysis. We are going to see a
decline in construction jobs. There is no benefit from this--
Ms. White. Of course, the standard is meant obviously to
convey the economic reality of the transaction. And I know we
have had this conversation before, but it was actually in 2005
that the SEC staff recommended that FASB undertake the, in
effect, capitalization of--
Mr. Sherman. Right, with no cost-benefit analysis; they
never discussed it with anybody who showers after work rather
than before work.
Ms. White. And, again, in terms of where a cost-benefit
analysis comes in or doesn't for an accounting standard,
because the purpose--I know you are a CPA, and a very good one,
but the purpose is really to convey the economic reality of the
transaction. I know they put off the transition period. We are
cognizant of--
Mr. Sherman. Right. The transition--they don't convey
economic reality in their discussions, which is why they have
no defense for FASB number two, which also distorts the
American economy by penalizing companies that engage in
research.
Every accounting--and I will ask your Chief Accountant to
look at this because it is proof that they don't always do it
on the basis of economic reality--theorist for decades has said
that you capitalize research. They don't, because it is not
convenient.
And to come here and say, well, they just reflect
accounting theory and economic reality, is a misstatement of
what they do. And I know I have brought up with your people
FASB number two, and they basically say, ``Look, we don't want
to listen to reality; we don't care; we want to do what is
convenient.''
And this approach--if the same people who tell you that
accounting theory--and it doesn't--requires leases to be
capitalized, let them cite you any accounting theory which says
that research should be written off and not capitalized. The
accountant--you have empowered. You take responsibility for.
They give you some talking points. These decisions are as
important as any reached in Congress.
They affect hundreds of thousands of lives. And the
procedure and the outcome is not something that your agency can
be proud of.
I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from South Carolina,
Mr. Mulvaney.
Mr. Mulvaney. I thank the chairman.
And thank you, Chair White, for coming in today.
A couple of minor deals, and I am going to talk more than I
ordinarily do, just so we can have you understand where we are
on a couple of different things.
Thank you very much, by the way, for offering the proposed
regulations on crowdfunding. The last time you and I spoke in
March, you gave us your best efforts to get them done by the
end of the year and we appreciate that. I understand they were
published at the end of last month, the end of October, and
they are out now for review.
When can we expect those to be implemented on the JOBS Act,
the crowdfunding portion of that?
Ms. White. Essentially--I think they become effective in, I
want to say October 2016. They are final rules now.
Mr. Mulvaney. Right.
Ms. White. So it is a matter of the effective date. I think
it may be October, but it may be earlier.
Mr. Mulvaney. Okay. So, October of next year or earlier.
Ms. White. Yes, but I think it could be May. I will have to
give you the exact date.
Mr. Mulvaney. That is fine. That would be great.
The only thing--when I got them, one of the questions I had
was--I used to run a small business. They are almost 700 pages,
which I suppose on the one hand is to be expected, given what
we are doing here, which is going out to the retail public,
small investors for the first time, so there are a lot of
protections that need to be built in.
One of my questions, though, on this is how do you all--
have you all talked about how you are going to handle de
minimus violations? We have small mom-and-pop organizations--
that is who this is designed to help--now having to deal with
700 pages full of regulations. Have you all given this much
thought as to how you reconcile those two things?
Ms. White. Look, the answer is we are not out there to get
people on this. We want this marketplace to work; we obviously
want investors protected in the marketplace. One of the things
that I have done since I have been here on these new
marketplaces that we are setting up, whether it is lifting the
ban on general solicitation or A+ or crowdfunding, is to have
an interdivisional working group all over it when it begins, as
opposed to looking at it a year from now.
Which means, as part of that, it is not just Enforcement or
Examination, although it includes that clearly. But it is also
Corporation Finance and Trading and Markets and people who can
give guidance and help people conform to the regulations as we
go. So hopefully, that will be helpful.
Mr. Mulvaney. And lastly, and just--
Ms. White. The effective date, I happen to have here.
Mr. Mulvaney. Okay.
Ms. White. Once in a while, I bring a piece of paper: May
16, 2016.
Mr. Mulvaney. Beautiful. Thank you for that.
Lastly, you all changed the size of the investment for the
small retail investors. You took it down to $2,000. Very
briefly, could you tell us your thinking on that?
Ms. White. What we were doing in the crowdfunding space was
to try to address concerns. We got comments from both
directions, such as, this is just not going to be workable;
there is not enough capital. You are sort of shutting people
out of the markets, too. We really are concerned about fraud,
and people losing money.
And so that was one of the adjustments we made in respect
to comments we got--really, in direct response to comments we
got.
Mr. Mulvaney. Thank you. I encourage you to keep an open
mind. If things work out as we hoped they would when we passed
the bill, then we can review those limits as well as other
things in the bill.
I want to switch gears now to the Small Business Credit
Availability Act that Ms. Waters mentioned in her comments. And
I am going to speak more than I am going to ask here, just to
let you know where we are coming from on a couple of different
things that are in this bill.
So, we are talking now about BDCs. We have your most recent
letter from early November. We have gone through it. And we are
very excited about working with you to get the SEC okay with
it. I think you know that we have worked with your folks over
the last 18 months to do exactly that.
You raised a couple of things in your letter that we think
are probably not entirely accurate, specifically dealing with
preferred stock. In fact, we actually think that the bill does
exactly what you say you want it to do. We look forward to
sitting down with you on that.
There are other places where we think that maybe your
concerns are a little bit misplaced. You have concerns, for
example, about leverage and the impact of that on a retail
investor. And we thought we had mitigated that by having that
cooling-off period, by having the BDC announce they were going
to lever up in order to give folks time to get out of the
investment if they were uncomfortable with that.
So we think we have addressed some of the other things.
Regarding the 1 year, I know you objected in your letter to
only having 1 year to write the rules. Keep in mind, that grows
a little bit, Chair White, out of our experience. As happy as I
am that we now do have the JOBS Act crowdfunding things, they
are almost 3 years late. And so we are sort of trying to hold
your feet to the fire, as we do as Congress.
Secondly, we do think that a lot of the changes that are
contained in the bill are not going to require very dramatic
changes in the rulemaking. It could be as simple as changing
ratios or changing numbers and so forth without doing a
wholesale of review. So we hope that when you sit down to do
the rules, you will see that maybe it will be easier to write
these rules than you anticipated in your letter.
Finally, and this is the big one, I hope that--when you
first looked at it back, I can't remember, it was October, you
didn't have a problem with a couple of different sections,
specifically section 60 of the bill, when you said, in your
view, these provisions did not raise significant investor
protection concerns. In the most recent letter, you say the
exact opposite about the same section.
So we do hope that when we do sit down, we won't have a
circumstance where the goal posts moved, and we can simply work
on it together.
Ms. White. It was based on experience in between, but we
are happy to work with you and your staff.
Mr. Mulvaney. Thank you very much.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Minnesota, Mr.
Ellison.
Mr. Ellison. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chair White, conflicted investment advice costs investors a
lot of money. Some have said $17 billion a year. And I am very
concerned that workers who are sold IRAs with high fees and
hidden commissions damage their retirement security. And I am
very supportive of the Department of Labor's decision to move
forward with a rulemaking to protect workers.
The SEC and the DOL have different jurisdictions, statutes,
missions, and mandates. For example, the SEC does not have
authority over insurance. I would prefer the SEC follow the
lead of the Department of Labor in protecting the retirement
accounts of workers.
So can you respond to that? I would like to know what your
thoughts are on this issue. Do you see there being a looming
retirement crisis? And what role would a ``best interests of
the consumer'' standard be, and what value would that be in
terms of moving forward in this space?
Ms. White. My own personal conclusion--as I think I surely
have conveyed before--is that we should subject brokers and
investment advisors to a uniform fiduciary duty based on the
Section 913 recitation of best interests of the client,
irrespective of your own financial interest.
And that obviously applies to those classes of registrants.
In terms of what the Department of Labor is doing, I have said
before, they are a separate agency, they have separate
statutory authority, and they are proceeding.
Obviously, coordination is important. We do that with all
kinds of agencies when there is some overlap. From our point of
view--my point of view, and again, it is up to the entire
Commission as to whether and what the parameters would be of
our uniform fiduciary duty role--it would be done under Section
913 of Dodd-Frank, which, as you know, provides some parameters
to our uniform fiduciary duty that takes some specific
cognizance of the broker model, I think.
And so that is one of the things that we would obviously
have to be considering as we proceed under that authority,
which is different than Labor's authority.
Mr. Ellison. Thanks.
Also, when you were here in March, I urged you to finalize
the CEO median worker pay ratio rule. I'm glad to see that the
SEC has finalized that rule. Congratulations, and thank you.
The gap between CEO and worker pay has grown substantially,
as you know--from 20 to 1, back around 1980, to now 300 to 1,
which is really remarkable.
Now, most people come at this from a moral standpoint, and
they say it is not right and it is not fair, and I agree that
they are right. But I want to ask you about something a little
different. Is it good for the economy at large?
And so, I would like to direct your attention to a graphic
that I have. Many argue that paying CEOs in stock options
encourages them to prioritize their personal short-term benefit
over long-term needs of workers, investors, and the firm.
Many have called to eliminate the CEO performance pay
loophole in Section 162(m), because stock options are
considered performance-based under Section 162(m), the
deductibility is unlimited. Do you have any thoughts about
this?
Ms. White. I speak as the Chair of the SEC here. I think
one of the things that we have been very active in is
disclosure of executive compensation.
And indeed--we talked a little bit earlier about Section
956 in the Dodd-Frank Act, that we and fellow regulators are
working very hard on, which is basically incentive comp, to
make sure that excessive risks aren't taken.
I think I have to leave to others, the broader issue. So
that is really not in our remit, as they say.
Mr. Ellison. Yes, but do you agree that--I am sure you are
well aware, when people talk about the disparity between CEO
pay and median pay, a lot of times the argument is, is this
right or not.
Leaving that argument aside, do you have an opinion as to
how a very wide disparity--say, going from, say, 20 to 1 in
1980 to 300 to 1 like nowadays--how does that impact the
functioning--the proper functioning of markets, of retirement,
of consumer demand? Do you have any views on that?
Ms. White. I think where we operate in that space--if we
do, in particular--would be in the 956 space, which is
basically to try to ensure that the incentive compensation of
executives--oversimplifying a little bit--in financial
institutions is not done in such a way as to encourage
excessive risk-taking, which obviously--
Mr. Ellison. That is what I am asking you. Do you think it
does?
Ms. White. We are going in our rulemaking with our fellow
regulators, we try to deal with that.
Mr. Ellison. I appreciate your answers.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr.
Pittenger.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good afternoon,
Chair White.
Chair White, in your opening statement, you clearly
conveyed that you are committed to the three-pronged statuary
mission--to protect investors, maintain fair and orderly and
efficient markets, and facilitate capital formation.
Included in that, do you read anything that would be
considered social engineering?
Ms. White. I wouldn't, no.
Mr. Pittenger. Yes, ma'am.
In that light, over the last 5 years, you have spent
thousands of man-hours and millions of dollars to defend
rulemakings that really don't address the crisis and, from our
perspective, don't fit into the scope of your mission, whether
you are dealing with the conflict minerals issues or the
resource extraction or the CEO pay disclosure rules that were
just discussed.
How do you relate your role in these issues--it seems to me
to be a diversion, whether--in terms of scope of mission. Is
this an interest of yours? Is this something of the
Administration that you feel compelled to carry? Why would you
move away from what clearly is your scope of mission?
You are coming and you are wanting to increase your budget
by 25--at a billion and a half right now, to go to billion
eight--.88. A significant amount of money, and it seems to me
that it is expansion of your footprint. It is expansion of your
role and expansion--the bureaucratic entrenchment of your
agency.
As we look at the Federal Government today, people are
concerned--they see the overreach, they see the footprint of
the Federal Government. They see the impact. Look at our
economy. A very slow economic growth of 2 percent.
Do you appreciate the fact that maybe this death by 1,000
cuts in terms of overregulatory involvement of the engagement
in so many of these unrelated efforts having an adverse effect
that may be well intended, well designed by those who share
those concerns, but killing the goose that laid the egg?
In trying to protect everything, aren't you hurting the
overall cause?
Ms. White. First, I very much believe in furthering our
core tripartite mission, and I think I have talked about that
at some length, and it has several aspects to it.
I think what you may be alluding to, at least primarily,
are some of the congressional mandates that the SEC was charged
by Congress--and it is Congress--to carry out.
And what I said a little bit earlier is, I do believe, when
I have a congressional mandate, that means I carry it out. We
try as hard as we can to carry it out in as cost-effective a
way--
Mr. Pittenger. Do you feel as though--
Ms. White. --and as consistent with our mission as we can.
Mr. Pittenger. --Chair White, that fits into your scope of
mission?
Ms. White. It is part of the mission given to us by
Congress.
Mr. Pittenger. As you stated earlier, to protect investors;
maintain fair, orderly, and efficient markets; and facilitate
capital formation--do these extra additional forays really fit
into that scope of mission?
Ms. White. I think we can't talk about them as a group. We
have obviously done a number of the mandates that you might put
in that category, that we have certainly seen some investor
advantage to. But again, if it is a congressional mandate, I
think we have to--we have an obligation to carry it out in the
best way we can.
Mr. Pittenger. Let me ask you this in closing. If there are
excessive disclosure requirements that hurt our capital
markets, if that is true, and would you buy into that, that
there could be?
Ms. White. Part of what we are trying to do with the
disclosure effectiveness review is to make the disclosures more
meaningful for our investors and obviously not to create
gratuitous--
Mr. Pittenger. We are talking about an excessive amount. We
hear from the market continually about the excessive burden of
these disclosures. They increase the compliance cost, they make
it more difficult to raise capital, all of these things have a
combined effect to slow our markets and impact our economy.
Would you agree that the reality is that these excessive
burdens are really having an adverse effect?
Ms. White. It is one of the reasons we do that very deep
cost-benefit analysis I was describing before. We obviously
want to look at--
Mr. Pittenger. But let's look at the overall--
Ms. White. Not burdening, but--
Mr. Pittenger. Respectfully, I just have a few seconds
left. Respectfully, can I say look at the results today, it is
all about results. Can you say with all your good judgment,
with all these disclosures, all these requirements, all these
mandates, all these compliance issues have been healthy as it
relates to growing and expanding our economy? Or has it
honestly had an adverse effect?
Ms. White. I don't think it is static; I think we have to
be focused on as these rules go out that we think are important
looking at exactly that.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Murphy.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Chair
White, for being here. It's good to see you.
My first question, I think, was already somewhat asked by
the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Capuano, regarding
Petition 4637 on the shareholder funds for political
activities. Just to dive into that a little bit more, as far as
timing for a response from that, where do you think we stand
and what is the timing that you think we can expect to hear
back from you?
Ms. White. On the letter, you mean?
Mr. Murphy. Yes.
Ms. White. As I have said earlier, I have three relatively
recent letters, some from members of this committee, another
one from different members of this committee, and I am
expecting to respond to them fairly shortly.
As I have also said, though, we are focused on our mandated
rulemakings and mission-critical initiatives that I have
described.
Mr. Murphy. And just to make sure--my understanding is when
1.2 million comments put in that this is a record, I guess,
just to make sure, you feel that is sufficient to move forward.
Ms. White. There have been a lot of comments on this and
very strong views on both sides. I think there are about 2,000
unique comment letters. There is clearly intense interest on
both sides of this issue.
One of the things I mentioned before is that I watch what
is happening in terms of companies--the shareholder petitions
that are being filed, which is through our regulations that is
made possible and the number of companies increasingly that
voluntarily are making those disclosures. There is a recent
survey out, I think, just in the last 2 or 3 days showing those
numbers are up.
Mr. Murphy. Okay. Thank you. And then as it relates to DOL
and their moving forward on fiduciary duty, I know there have
been some questions on that as well. Can you just elaborate a
little bit more on the distinct responsibilities between SEC
and DOL and how you plan on moving forward with this?
Ms. White. Sure. Essentially two separate agencies, two
separate statutory regimes. The Department of Labor obviously
is responsible for the very important ERISA space and has been
since 1974, I think.
And again, I think I mentioned this a little bit earlier,
but actually even as it exists now, brokers for example who are
our registrants who are in the ERISA space or parts of the
ERISA space are subject to different DOL rules and different
rules under the securities laws and regulations. So I think
each agency has to judge for itself how it is proceeding.
With respect to the SEC, we don't have a mandate to proceed
with the uniform fiduciary duty, but we have authority given to
us by Dodd-Frank in Section 913 to do that. I personally, after
lots and lots of study, made the judgment that I think we
should proceed with analyzing a rulemaking to impose a uniform
fiduciary duty consistent with Section 913. There is a lot of
analysis to do on it, economic and otherwise, and it is complex
and not a quick exercise.
I think the Department of Labor's initial proposal on
theirs was actually in 2009.
Mr. Murphy. Yes. I think one of the concerns we all have on
both sides of the aisle is duplication, and multiple, multiple
agencies are looking at the same exact thing. I know you have
had some meetings with Labor Secretary Perez and hopefully I am
sure having these conversations is your way of staying in your
lane, and who is doing what.
I think we all want to get the bad actors out, but at the
same time don't want duplication. We want taxpayer money spent
as wisely as possible.
Have you had that conversation? Where do you see that
heading?
Ms. White. What we have done--and I think this is again
before I was here, but really from 2009 forward--and then
obviously I am familiar with the more recent context--is the
staff of the SEC--this is not the Commission, although I also
participated in some meetings with Secretary Perez--provided
technical assistance and expertise from our space to them, some
of our economists met with them on a number of the issues.
And I think, as you do in--frankly, any time you overlap
with any other agency--take the CFTC on swaps and securities-
based swaps, you each have your authorities. They somewhat
differ sometimes, but you try to be as consistent as you can
because obviously it is not good for market participants if
they have two sets of rules that they have to comply with. But
often, there are different markets, different statutory
obligations, and so there is not perfect consistency. But it is
very important as you go forward on anything that overlaps that
you talk and try to do what you can to conform.
Mr. Murphy. I am running out of time. But quickly, can you
just talk briefly about what you think the SEC's role is in
cybersecurity? To me, that is one of the biggest threats that
is--
Ms. White. It is one of the biggest threats and risks we
all have, full stop. The SEC has three areas of specific, I
would say, jurisdiction. One is we did, I think, in November of
last year, our regulation SCI, which is security, compliance,
and integrity, which essentially is a rulemaking with respect
to our critical market infrastructures to raise the bar on the
resiliency of their systems and report incidents to us when
they--and others when they actually have them. Part of that is
cyber.
We deal with the brokers and the investment advisors and
their risks. We put out disclosure guidance and we stay as
active in this spaces as we can. We also bring enforcement
cases when people don't--
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
Ms. White. --do what they are supposed to under our roles.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Missouri, Mrs.
Wagner.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome, Chair
White. I wore my Kansas City Royals blue--
Ms. White. I see it.
Mrs. Wagner. --to make you feel welcome from your first 10
years growing up with the world champion Royals.
Ms. White. But I am a Yankees fan, as I told you.
Mrs. Wagner. I know. I know. I am a Cardinals fan.
Ms. White. Okay.
Mrs. Wagner. In following up on some of the questions that
have been asked about the DOL fiduciary rulemaking, I do want
to associate myself with my friend, the gentleman from Georgia,
Mr. Scott.
In the SEC's absolute purview on anything having to do with
the uniform fiduciary rule, and following up on what the
chairman said, you talked at the last SIFMA annual meeting
about this full out focus.
So what does ``full out'' mean to you? When can we expect a
rulemaking?
Ms. White. I want to make clear at the outset, this is my
view: It will ultimately be a Commission decision. I have
obviously given staff direction, and they are very, very
actively working on it. It is complex; it is not quick, but we
are working toward--in the very short-term the--most of the
details of what the proposal would be.
Now that doesn't suggest that in 2 months, you are going to
see a proposal. This is a long, complex exercise, and it has to
involve the full Commission.
Mrs. Wagner. It does, and I am glad to see that you are
looking at a shorter-term rather than the longer-term, and
obviously, you will need to come back before this committee and
the Senate Banking Committee; you have to talk about
alternative remedies to a uniform fiduciary standard that would
address investor confusion, including simplifying of titles,
and enhancing disclosure.
All of these things are things that I hope are part of this
ongoing analysis.
David Grimm, with your Division of Investment Management,
stated that further analysis still had to be done. What is the
scope of analysis, and what do you anticipate is the timeline
for completing it?
Ms. White. Again, I cannot kind of overstate the complexity
and the importance of getting this right, and part of that is
clearly the very deep economic analysis that our economists
will do as we are proceeding with that.
So, in terms of impacts, in terms of--for example, I think
have said this before, if we ended up at the end of the day
with a rule that imposed uniform fiduciary duty, but we
deprived retail investors of reliable, reasonably priced
advice, we would not have succeeded, obviously.
And so, our economists have a lot of work to do as we
proceed with this.
Mrs. Wagner. You are correct, we have to get it right, and
I think the DOL proposal is 1,000 pages of wrong.
Can you tell us about your analysis, including a study of
the impact of the DOL's proposed rule on investment advisors
registered with the SEC?
Ms. White. It would have impact, I think, on investment
advisors as well as broker-dealers. What we did with the DOL
proposal, though, was essentially, as I mentioned before,
provided technical assistance to them, which included--from our
staff and it is our staff who are providing how it might impact
on investors and how it might, what the lay of the land is now
in terms of how brokers operate, how investment advisors
operate.
It really depends on--and obviously, the Department of
Labor is taking in a lot of comments about impacts. And so it
depends on how--
Mrs. Wagner. Tens of thousands of comments. And in fact, we
received a letter, I received a letter from Secretary Perez,
stating that they were going to make no changes, no re-
proposals, even prior to the public comment period opening up.
And I am very dissatisfied with this. I know you said that
you are providing technical assistance, and in that quote
before Senate Banking, you even talked about, particularly the
lower end, which I care deeply about, in terms of customers'
choice, access to products, and the cost of those products. I
think that is absolutely key.
Do you have any concerns that some U.S. investors could
potentially suffer based on the new fiduciary definition that
the DOL is proposing?
Ms. White. I don't want to comment on that specifically,
other than to say that I think the Department of Labor--and
certainly, our technical assistance included that concern as
you proceed with any rulemaking, and we have it in proceeding
with ours.
Mrs. Wagner. I am just looking at a couple of examples,
here, on how the DOL, I think, conflicts with securities laws.
And I understand that DOL's fiduciary duty rule will require
financial advisors to provide 1, 5, and 10 year projections on
investment returns as part of projecting investment costs under
the best interest contract exemption.
Does this potentially conflict with the Investment Advisers
Act of 1940, especially its antifraud provisions?
Ms. White. I would have to analyze that with my folks in
the Investment Management Division, specifically. But what I
indicated earlier is even now we have different roles in the
ERISA space--it is different statutory authority that applies
to our brokers, our registrants than the Federal securities
laws require. But I am happy to get back to you on a specific
one.
Mrs. Wagner. I would like that--for you to take a look at
that, and also just, with the indulgence of the chairman, take
a look at the DOL definition and term on recommendation. It
differs completely from the definition used by FINRA. So I am
concerned about some of these differences and really reiterate
that this is the FTC's purview through Section 913, and we
would love for you to move as quickly as possible.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentlelady has
expired. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Colorado,
Mr. Tipton.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you Mr. Chairman. Chair White, thanks for
taking time to be here today. You previously stated that the
independence of the SEC should be respected, and noted your
particular expertise in terms of dealing with a variety of
issues. And, with that in mind, I believe it is important that
we consider the Federal Reserve's work on mapping transactions
within the capital markets, and many view this as an early
stage to be able to have the Federal Reserve regulate much of
the capital markets under the guides complex transactions.
Are you fully committed to making sure that the SEC
maintains its position as the regulatory body?
Ms. White. Yes. I think one has to recognize, though, that
after Dodd-Frank, there were some reassignments of some things,
and so we end up doing more things in consultation with the
Federal Reserve by statute.
I am not saying that is bad, I am just saying--but the
short answer to your question is yes.
Mr. Tipton. Great. If the Fed does continue this policy
with securities products and firms, if they are going to be
regulated under bankcentric modes, what type of an impact will
that have?
Ms. White. It is hard to answer that in a vacuum, and I do
think--and we have discussed in connection with asset managers
and--our doing stress testing as we are required to under Dodd-
Frank. One has to recognize that asset managers are different
than banks.
And so that means that however you regulate, however you
stress test, if you do it optimal is going to be different.
Mr. Tipton. Yes, and I think that is actually part of the
concern that we are seeing as some of this is being formulated,
that we are going to see and that this seems to be the track
that they are on. To be able to try and de-risk completely is
going to impact some of the work that apparently you are trying
to do in terms of being able to have some capital formation--
access to capital because that is one of the big issues that we
are hearing in our communities, simply for small businesses to
be able to actually--to be able to reach out.
Do you believe it is important that the FSOC has decided to
review activities and products in the asset management industry
for systemic risk?
Ms. White. Do I think it is important, you said?
Mr. Tipton. Yes.
Ms. White. I think it is a focus that makes sense. It
really goes beyond asset management. I think I cited before the
example of securities lending as one of those activities.
Obviously, that is not just asset managers.
FSOC really is charged with looking for systemic risks and
addressing them in the system.
They have certain authorities and--to deal with them if--
but I think the pivot, at least for the time being, from a firm
focus to products and activities, makes sense the SEC staff has
been quite active in, I should say, the December request for
comment on those.
I see their work as complementary to ours, but we obviously
have been the primary regulator of the asset management
industry for 75 years and we are proceeding with a regime of
regulations that we think is important to do and makes sense to
do, and that is completely independent from FSOC. I think what
they are doing is complementary.
Mr. Tipton. Okay. I appreciate your answer on that, but
you--one comment that you just made in terms of going through
and seeking comment. One of the concerns, obviously in my
district and maybe nationwide, is small businesses. You have
the Government-Business Forum on Small Business Capital
Formation and the response from the forum comes out and you--
what do you believe are some of the most specific issues that
small businesses are talking about right now?
Ms. White. There are a number of them. We actually have
that meeting tomorrow, by the way, our annual forum is tomorrow
morning. It is enormously useful. If you look over the years, a
number of the recommendations from that forum, I am not
suggesting all of them--that we have actually proceeded with.
Clearly, they result in a lot of interest in crowdfunding.
There is a lot of interest in A-plus. One of the things we did,
by the way, when we did crowdfunding, is that we also proposed
to amend our Rule 147 and Rule 504, which really is addressed
precisely at those small, in-State businesses that want more
facility to raise capital.
And so, that goes beyond the JOBS Act. That is not
something mandated, that is something that we are very excited
about, as were, frankly, the North American Securities
Administrators Association (NASAA) State regulators.
Mr. Tipton. Great. I do think it is worthy of note that
Pepperdine University did conduct a study and it said that 53
percent of the respondents--small businesses--believe that the
current business financing environment is restricting growth
opportunities, and 46 percent believe it is restricting their
ability to be able to hire new employees.
So I would encourage you, as you are holding those forums,
not only to listen, but to actually hear what they are having
to say because these impacts--cost benefit analysis that you
have been speaking are having a real impact.
And Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to submit a
question for the record in regard to 10K filings on a lot of
our mining industries and to be able to get a response from
that.
Chairman Hensarling. Without objection, it is so ordered.
The time of the gentleman has expired. The Chair now recognizes
the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Williams.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Chair White, for being here. You
talk of your support for small business. I am a small business
owner, and you support the International Financial Reporting
Standards (IFRS), and as you know, the IFRS does not allow the
use of last in and first out accounting.
My concern is, if we transition from the current U.S.
method of generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP)
accounting to IFRS, the toll on U.S. businesses would be
unsustainable, and frankly cause most of them to go out of
business.
I think the number to be recaptured is somewhere in the
range of $100 billion. Now, you have publicly stated that
considering whether to further incorporate IFRS into the U.S.
financial reporting system is a priority of yours.
The last time you were here, I believe you told my
colleague, Mr. Barr, that your object was to get a single set
of global standards. FASB and IASB have made attempts in the
past to come to an agreement. Those efforts have always been
unsuccessful.
I saw in comments I believe he made yesterday, that the
Chief Accountant, James Schnurr, urged supplemental use of
global rules for U.S. companies. Yes or no, do you have any
comments on how that would work?
Do you agree with that? Do you agree that it should be
supplemental?
Ms. White. Mr. Stivers, actually, I think you said he made
a recommendation to me--he also made a speech, I think last
December, about that, and certainly I am quite interested in
that.
Just to be clear, what I have said, though, is that I think
the Commission, if we can, should speak again on this issue.
Mr. Williams. Okay.
Ms. White. Just speak again. Not saying what that would be.
And so, I think in terms of sort of the one high-quality global
standards as a goal, I certainly favor that.
That doesn't answer all the details along the way. It
doesn't for a moment suggest what the position might be for
further application of IFRS--they obviously apply to foreign
private issuers. Now, that is very different.
Mr. Williams. All right, thank you.
Based on those comments--he, by the way, also said there is
virtually little or no support among U.S. companies for a
wholesale change--do you still consider incorporating IFRS as a
priority of yours? Yes or no?
Ms. White. Again, I don't think I ever stated that as a
priority of mine. My priority was to get the Commission to say
where we are.
Mr. Williams. Okay. Is your inclination to adopt IFRS based
on a desire to have one standard worldwide financial reporting
system, or is it because you believe the IFRS standards are
preferable to GAAP?
Ms. White. That is not what I intended to convey. The SEC,
some time ago, before I came in, by regulation, has allowed
foreign private issuers to use IFRS without reconciliation.
But plainly, the convergence projects have gone where they
have gone and not gone where they have not gone.
Mr. Williams. All right.
Ms. White. And so, there are differences in the system.
Mr. Williams. In the case of last-in first-out (LIFO)
inventory reporting, IFRS does not allow the use of LIFO. In
contrast, the U.S. tax code requires the use of LIFO for
financial reporting if it is used for tax purposes.
Effectively, then, the SEC would be making tax policy. Were
you aware of this potential impact?
Ms. White. I am aware of the impact, but I don't want to
imply for a moment that I think it ought to be done, period.
Mr. Williams. Yes.
Ms. White. But clearly, it has IRS and IRC implications.
Mr. Williams. Do you think you should be, effectively,
setting tax policy?
Ms. White. No.
Mr. Williams. Okay. Do you have a substantive position on
the use of the LIFO inventory method?
Ms. White. I don't. Obviously, the method under GAAP is the
one that applies.
Mr. Williams. You realize, though, how destructive it would
be to small businesses here?
Ms. White. I am quite aware of the complexities of that
issue, absolutely. All I want to make clear is that I think
some of the positions that you are indicating were mine really
are--I haven't concluded on any of that.
My only priority is to get the Commission to say where it
is on some of those issues, not suggesting for a moment where
that would be.
Mr. Williams. Have you consulted with the Treasury about
this potentiality? And if so, is the Treasury comfortable with
the SEC setting LIFO inventory--slash inventory tax policy?
Ms. White. The answer is I haven't consulted with Treasury
on this because it is not ripe at all to consult with them on
it, not because it is not an important issue, if we were to
reach it.
Mr. Williams. LIFO is an important--
Ms. White. Very important.
Mr. Williams. --accounting method for small businesses.
Ms. White. Absolutely.
Mr. Williams. And the recapture of $100 billion, as I said
earlier, could devastate small businesses. It could cost jobs.
So I appreciate your following through on that.
Ms. White. Absolutely.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Maine, Mr. Poliquin.
Mr. Poliquin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Chair
White. I appreciate it very much. I know you missed your
opportunity to go to Maine this summer, but I know next year is
another year, and you will make it--
Ms. White. I am coming.
Mr. Poliquin. --your vacation, and spend as much money as
you can. I appreciate it.
Chair White, the State of Maine has the oldest average age
in the country. And Maine's second district, which I represent,
comprising western central, northern and down east Maine, is
likely the oldest district in the country.
In addition to that, coast to coast, there are 40 million
Americans who live in rural areas.
Now in parts of Maine--and, I am sure, other parts of the
country--when you are living in those areas, we often don't
have internet conductivity. We have power outages all the time,
even if we do have conductivity.
In addition to that, 41 percent of our seniors in this
country, regardless of where they live, don't use the internet.
So, I know your mission, in part, is to make sure our investors
receive all the information they can to make sure they are
protected in decisions that they are able to make.
Now, one of your own studies back in 2012, Chair White,
indicated that 71 percent of investors, regardless of age,
prefer to receive their reports from mutual funds and what have
you, on paper. Right now, there is a proposed rule in your
agency--30E-3--that you and I talked about back in August.
Ms. White. Yes, we did.
Mr. Poliquin. And in this rule, if I am not mistaken, a
mutual fund company can simply send a letter to a senior or any
other investor saying, you are no longer going to receive your
quarterly statements or your portfolio holdings or whatever it
might be unless you fill out this form and send it back to us
saying that you want to continue to receive those reports in
paper form.
Now, what happens if the mail doesn't go through? Or what
happens if you are on vacation in Florida and you live up in
Madawaska, Maine, and the letter gets lost in a snowbank? Or
what happens if you change locations and you are in between
addresses, or for some other reason, you are away from home?
This is just not fair, in my opinion, Chair White. It is
just not right. So, I think when it comes to--with all due
respect--the mission of the SEC, that I know you are
responsible for upholding, it makes a lot of sense to make sure
that our investors have the option of receiving their paper
financial reports unless they opt out. Otherwise, it is much
too confusing.
Now, if someone decides to opt out, instead of opt in, that
is all fine. So I am hopeful that you will commit to me today
that you will retain this option, because that is--with all due
respect--part of your mission.
Ms. White. I can't commit to that, because we have an open
period of comment until January on this. What I can say--and we
talked about this to some degree on the phone--is that the
proposal tries to address the concern. Although, again, we have
a number of comments in the same vein as yours, which we are
obviously weighing very seriously.
But in the proposal we have tried--the staff has tried to
build in, it is not just sort of one letter that gets lost in
the mail. Which I understand is a risk, don't get me wrong. But
also, it would periodically, again, be solicited on the
issues--so some of the problems that have been identified in
terms of receipt and choice the proposal tries to address.
But I fully take your comment about switching the
presumption, basically.
Mr. Poliquin. Chair White, my mom, whom I love dearly, is
87. She can barely use a cell phone--
Ms. White. But again, she would have the option not to
receive it by--she could get paper--but I fully take the
concern. Yes.
Mr. Poliquin. I appreciate that very much. I have a very
short amount of time left. I would like to morph, if I can.
Chair White, thank you very much. Our financial services
industries is the envy of the world, and it gives all kinds of
options to investors saving for their retirement or for the
kids' education, and also, is the backbone liquidity to our
economy that allows us to grow and raise capital and hire more
workers.
I am very concerned, and you and I talked about this a
little bit this summer, I believe, also about asset managers
and pension fund managers and mutual funds be designated as
SIFIs. And in particular, I know there has been a movement
through FSOC and also some of the other folks who come before
us, that you are starting to look at activities instead of
asset size.
Now, I would like to ask you if I can right now, what
activities are of concern to you, because if Mr. Hill and I
manage a couple of different pension funds--mutual funds--and
his performance is better than mine--
Mr. Hill. It would be.
Mr. Poliquin. It would be. Then my clients would go to his
and the assets are not on our balance sheet anyway. They held
it in the trust department down the street. So if something
happens to me, it is no systemic risk to the economy or to the
capital markets.
Ms. White. And I think that is why you have seen the pivot
to particular activities. One of the things we are dealing with
in our separate, primary regulator space too, is liquidity risk
management kinds of issues, just to make sure that--because in
an open-end fund, you are entitled to get your money right
away. Those kinds of risks.
I mentioned before, securities lending, which asset
managers and other people not even under the SEC's jurisdiction
may use and does that pose any risk. But there are no answers
there. It is really just asking questions and I think it is
good to ask those questions.
Mr. Poliquin. I will submit to you, Chair White, that there
is no risk in the asset management business model to the
economy and please look at that very carefully and make sure,
with your position on the international regulatory bodies, that
you make sure that we stand up for American asset managers when
it comes to any regulatory issues with respect to your
industry.
Thank you very much. Have a wonderful Thanksgiving.
Ms. White. Thank you, you too.
Mr. Schweikert [presiding]. Thank you, Mr. Poliquin.
I now recognize the gentleman from Arkansas, Mr. Hill.
Mr. Hill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Chair, thank you
for being back before the committee and congratulations on a
good GAO audit. I know that makes every management team smile
when you get that. And also, congratulations on clearing up
some of your 50 front burners; maybe you are down to 40 or so
now.
I would like to start out by talking about equity market
structure. I thought SIFMA wrote a very thoughtful piece last
July, I think, in 2014 about their suggestions on equity market
structure challenges that we have seen over the course of the
past few years, including some of the references to this
summer.
And you have now formed an Equity Market Structure Advisory
Committee and a couple of comments about that I am concerned
about. I would like to get your thoughts.
I understand they have subcommittees meet in private
without any transparency on their policy recommendations. I
would like your thoughts on that. And then, I noted that the
overall membership in the committee didn't include NASDAQ, it
didn't include the New York Stock Exchange, it didn't include a
big retail broker-dealer, and I come from the retail broker-
dealer space, so I am always concerned about the best
execution, the promise that we make to do as our regulator to
achieve best execution.
So I am concerned those entities are not involved in your
Market Structure Advisory Committee. Could you respond to that,
please?
Ms. White. Yes, I would be happy to respond to it. First,
the Commission--and it is really all five of us on the
Commission, went through a very lengthy process of vetting and
of trying very hard to diversify points of view and expertise
on the 17-person committee, which is what it is by charter. And
so there is an exchange, obviously represented on the
committee.
There actually is, at it turns out, two other
representatives who were formally actually at primary listing
exchanges as well. There is a representative who represents the
retail brokerage point of view, although we still keep looking
at that. And we have clearly had requests for others to join.
One of the things that we have done, and again, this is
something you just keep looking at because you really want that
diversity of perspectives, is to structure that committee so
that we get input from others from every constituency, whether
it is retail brokers or it is NASDAQ or it is the New York
Stock Exchange.
So each of the meetings, in effect, is a roundtable where
we have NASDAQ, and the New York Stock Exchange, and so forth.
And the subcommittees, that is something that the other
advisory committees use to great effect to just get things
done, but they don't decide anything, and they are also able to
open at least parts of their meetings, if they choose,
publicly.
Mr. Hill. Let me urge you to open those meetings or parts
of those meetings. I only urge you to make sure you get the
full complement of those who want to participate in this
process in the retail industry, and particularly, so you
include exchanges, but to not have the two leading exchanges,
NASDAQ and the New York Stock Exchange, represented strikes me
as short-sighted.
Let me switch gears. Generally, in your experience--I know
you have an enforcement and legal background and I have an
investment management background, do you believe that
retirement fund managers have the principal obligation of
maximizing long-term returns for their beneficiaries and their
plans? Is that a general thing you bring to the table, is a
belief that is their primary objective?
Ms. White. Maybe it is because of that legal background and
the SEC's jurisdiction, you want to serve the best interests of
your client is what you want to do. That is what your fiduciary
duty is.
Mr. Hill. Yes, but I think if you have full discretion over
an account and you are an investment manager, you have to act
in their best economic interest, wouldn't you say?
Ms. White. Yes.
Mr. Hill. That causes me concern about a recent decision by
the Department of Labor, not the fiduciary standard, but
Secretary Perez has recently encouraged and has given guidance
to institutional managers that environmental, social, and
governance issues are equal to economic return issues. We live
in a world of underperforming of defined benefit plans that
aren't fully funded, and yet, we have direction from the guy
who is in charge of ERISA to look at other things besides
economic performance.
Would you like to respond to that?
Ms. White. Do I want to? Or--
Mr. Hill. We will, it is really--
Ms. White. --would you like me to?
Mr. Hill. --so much fun to do it.
Ms. White. I don't want to comment on his specific comment.
I will say that I think what you, and it is a lot of my--but,
yes. I think what you are trying to do is serve the best
interest of your client. Obviously, you can have a client who
says, ``Look, I care about this, this, this, and this as you
invest for me.'' That is really up to your client.
Mr. Hill. Yes, but economic return--we are not fully funded
and economic returns are how we achieve that and I think the
Department of Labor is way off track there.
Last question, you have some vacancies on the Commission,
and would you commit to this committee that you wouldn't bring
controversial elements up if you don't have a fully functioning
Commission that has bipartisan members on it?
Ms. White. Anything can be controversial. I think what--
Mr. Hill. True. But I mean any big, major issue follow on
that we are working on. We are concerned that you are going to
not have a fully functioning Commission with bipartisan
appointees and we would like your commitment that you would be
cautious about what you try to bring through the Commission
without fully confirmed bipartisan appointees.
Ms. White. I do think the work right now--there are four of
us: one independent; one Republican; and two Democrats, and we
are moving forward with our agenda. I think we can. I am going
to take everything into account, but I do think we should
proceed. I don't know how fast confirmations--assuming they
occur, which I assume they will occur.
But you obviously sort of read your agenda as you go along.
Mr. Hill. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Schweikert. Thank you, Mr. Hill.
I now recognize Mr. Rothfus.
Mr. Rothfus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Chair
White, for being with us today.
I just want to touch on the--some of the folks have been
talking about the bond market--corporate bond markets. I wanted
to ask a question about that.
Has the FSOC, again, of which you are a voting member, ever
conducted any analysis of the systemic risk that could result
from a lack of liquidity in the corporate bond market due to
regulatory initiatives like the Volcker Rule, in Basel III?
Ms. White. I don't think, as phrased that way. Obviously,
the four or five of us who report quarterly to this committee
do that kind of assessment, at least in terms of the Volcker
Rule.
Mr. Rothfus. As you know, the chairman reached out to you
at the beginning of the year for a status update on a number of
initiatives that are designed to facilitate capital formation
and ensure that the U.S. capital markets remain the leader,
rather than focusing on politically divisive issues.
For example, the chairman asked for the status of potential
SEC efforts to modernize the rules governing transfer agents.
This topic, although highly technical, is of interest to me
because the rules have not been updated since the 1980's. I
also think it is a rare occurrence when you have bipartisan
support within the SEC, given that former Commissioner
Gallagher and current Commissioner Aguilar--their statement in
June of this year.
In February 2015, you stated in your response letter to the
chairman that the SEC staff is considering recommendations. I
would like to follow up with the chairman's request for a
status update as of today?
Ms. White. We are actually quite actively focused on the
transfer agent issues. I don't want to get ahead of what we are
going to do or give you a specific date, but I think you will
see something coming out quite soon. I don't want to say when,
but I mean in the next couple of months.
Mr. Rothfus. In what form would that be?
Ms. White. I don't want to say that until it comes out,
because one of the things that we are having to balance is that
because we haven't updated these rules for 40 years, you need
some data to inform yourselves in terms of some of the things
that you might propose. There may be other things that you can
tee up as a direction you think you are going in as part of
that.
So that is really what we are trying to balance, to be as
pinpointed as we can, but also make sure we get the input we
need by whatever form we put this out in, so--
Mr. Rothfus. So you haven't made a determination whether it
is going to be a concept release or some other release?
Ms. White. We have not, although we are thinking about
maybe some combination.
Mr. Rothfus. Mr. Gallagher and Commissioner Aguilar said,
``A lengthy delay in updating the Commission's transfer agent
rules will be bad for the markets, investors, and issuers. A
concept release may be warranted to gather additional
information and viewpoints on certain topics, but there are
critical reforms requiring immediate action that we can propose
now.'' Would you agree with that?
Ms. White. Yes, and not only do I agree with that, but I
asked them to do it, in other words, to come back with areas of
agreement. So I do agree with that.
Mr. Rothfus. Let's see. You have questioned whether SEC
disclosure powers are best used to address societal ills,
noting in a speech that, ``Other mandates, which invoke the
Commission's mandatory disclosure powers, seem more directed at
exerting societal pressure on companies to change behavior,
rather than to disclose financial information that primarily
informs investment decisions.
``That is not to say that the goals of such mandates are
not laudable, indeed most are. Seeking to improve safety in
mines for workers or to end horrible human rights atrocities in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo are compelling objectives,
which as a citizen, I wholeheartedly share. But as the Chair of
the SEC, I must question, as a policy matter, using the Federal
securities laws and the SEC's powers of mandatory disclosure to
accomplish these goals.''
What is the cost to investors when there is an overemphasis
on mandatory disclosure requirements that seem to be targeting
societal ills, rather than what may be considered ``material''
by a company?
Ms. White. It is hard to say what the cost is, obviously,
and investors can see things differently.
I think I went on in that speech to say, though, that if it
is a congressional mandate, even if as described in the prior
remarks, I do consider it our obligation to carry that out.
Mr. Rothfus. As you know, last April the U.S. Court of
Appeals found that the SEC's conflict minerals rule violated
the First Amendment because it required companies to shame
themselves. Given the political and shaming nature of the pay
ratio rule, is it unreasonable to assume that the pay ratio
rule will likely also violate the First Amendment?
Ms. White. We certainly study that precise issue and we
believe it comports with the First Amendment.
Mr. Rothfus. This week, Commissioner Piwowar proclaimed
that the SEC's corporate disclosure regime has been hijacked by
social activists. Do you agree with Commissioner Piwowar that
the SEC's disclosure rules are meant to serve investors, not
special interests?
Ms. White. I certainly agree that our disclosure regime is
meant to serve investors. Again, I think that if they are
mandated disclosure rules, we have an obligation to carry them
out. It is the law.
Mr. Rothfus. Can you explain how the SEC's pay ratio rule
serves investors over special interests?
Ms. White. I think--and again, it is in the release--what
the pay ratio rule does is--and it is a mandated rulemaking
obviously--to provide investors another data point in judging a
CEO's compensation. That is the finding in the release.
Mr. Rothfus. I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Schweikert. Thank you, Mr. Rothfus. It looks like it is
just us.
Ms. White. Okay.
[laughter]
Mr. Schweikert. A couple of things, Madam Chair. First off,
you have always been very kind to me, and your staff has been
terrific, and because of that, I am just going to yield myself
as much time as I may consume because I have a lot of
questions.
Ms. White. Okay.
Mr. Schweikert. You already hit the clock on me. Okay, this
is--I am going to ask you for almost a narrative answer on
this, and pretend no one is watching or listening. Being
someone who was both, I think, intellectually and emotionally
vested in crowdfunding, in the JOBS Act, in Reg A-plus, but
let's use JOBS Act and the crowdfunding portion.
Almost 4 years beyond when the rules should have been done,
in something that from the IQ you have around you and yourself,
should not have been very complicated. I beg of you, could you
walk me through--
Ms. White. Sure.
Mr. Schweikert. --what happened.
Ms. White. I don't think it was 4 years; I think it was 3
years. Not that that is the answer here--
Mr. Schweikert. Okay. It is 3-plus. I will give you--well,
let's call it 3.
Ms. White. Okay.
Mr. Schweikert. Look, your staff and others were very kind
to let us see some of the letters that were coming from certain
union front groups and other groups that disparage
crowdfunding. But help me understand, because as this hearing
is supposed to be about resources, was this a resource issue,
was this a political issue, was it an intellectual capital
issue? Why so long?
Ms. White. I have already described how our need for
resources is really across-the-board, but this is one where--
and I believe I testified to this in March when I was here--we
knew this rulemaking was going to be very complicated going
into it because the statute is quite prescriptive in some
areas, funding portals which are enormously important to
investor protection is a complicated piece of that as well.
And then, we did our proposal. I really tried to light a
fire under the proposal. We got it out pretty quickly after I
got here, I think. And then the comments came in, and we were
trying--and again, we have to work within the statute when it
is prescriptive--
Mr. Schweikert. But--
Ms. White. --but we try to make it--
Mr. Schweikert. --but also the statute actually had some
deadlines too.
Ms. White. No, no, no. I am not--I am just saying we do
need to observe those, obviously. Some places give us
discretion, some places don't. And the goal is to make it
workable and to safeguard investors in the new marketplace. And
that proved to be very, very difficult.
Mr. Schweikert. And what I was asking in my question
design--and maybe I need to do this in writing because some of
this is uncomfortable--is the power of certain activist groups
to delay something at the same time both the right and the left
here get behind these microphones and talk about the desperate
need for economic growth and the new economy and the future
that brings us, and then some of the things that we tell our
constituents we are doing for them to grow the economy take 3
years to get a rule set done.
Ms. White. But again, I will give you my own perspective.
We are talking in the context of crowdfunding. This was done
purely on the merits to get it workable, to get it to protect
investors. There is no politics, no activism, no anything.
Mr. Schweikert. In that time, what, 2 dozen States actually
did their own and produced their own rule sets and are up and
running.
Ms. White. Yes, but they also did not have the same
statutory framework we had to work with, and it is not a
Federal rule. And I mentioned it earlier, one of the really
important, I think, exciting things we did the same day we did
crowdfunding are these amendments to Rules 147 and 504, because
that is really quite solicitous of those State crowdfunding
statutes too. Obviously, it is a proposal at this point, but I
think that is a good thing.
Mr. Schweikert. If done robustly, there is actually an
interconnectivity there that actually could be very helpful for
the economy. And this is one of those--just because as I was
walking out to grab a meeting, I thought I heard something in a
previous question, I think with Representative Luetkemeyer. And
it sounded like the regulatory or additional regulatory
scrutiny when an investment organization will pledge their
holdings up for shorts or a loan on their book. Did I pick up
something there--
Ms. White. I don't think so.
Mr. Schweikert. All right. Last one, it is also important
to us. We accept that your Commission, the Board right now is
short one Republican. There is a certain nervousness out there
that in the waning days of an Administration, the independence
of the SEC--this is more of just a request for your greatest
prudence as rules are being brought for a vote of yourself and
your fellow Commissioners that you are shorthanded and
something that would be controversial, have a cascade effect
policywise, be dealt in that light that there is a voice
missing.
Ms. White. Again, I think literally and otherwise, I am
extraordinarily independent. We try to do these rulemakings on
the merits. Obviously, I think we have had an allusion to the
3-2 votes that we have had. And that is sort of part of the
landscape, I think at this point in time. We need to move
forward with the agenda, but I certainly will be sensitive to
all things.
Mr. Schweikert. And because I have no one else waiting, I
am going to give myself a couple of extra moments here. For the
SEC and your team, how much interest and focus is there, shall
we say, on the new economy? As we see Silicon Valley is
spending lots and lots of resources trying to find ways to
provide financial service-type products, lending products,
crowdfunding platforms or other types of platforms, do you have
someone on your team who actually now is specializing in trying
to say, this is our future, this is coming at us, here is new
technology--
Ms. White. Yes, is the answer to that. One of the things
that we have been doing for the last several years is to make
sure that we have, I am going to call it the market expertise,
but really, the points of view that would encompass the new
products, the new innovations on--
Mr. Schweikert. Are there some things--because this is one
of the things in our lives that actually may be bipartisan--we
can do as policymakers to provide you with tools or statutory
mechanics to allow you to embrace and run with those ideas that
are good and do it as fast as possible so we are not slowing
down what many of us believe is our future of our economic
growth, and that is the new economy?
Ms. White. What really helps us is that outside expertise
genius, that we make sure that we have in-house when we can.
And we do try to do that.
Mr. Schweikert. Okay. Chair White, thank you so kindly for
your patience and the time you gave us today.
Ms. White. Thank you very much. Thank you.
Mr. Schweikert. I would like to thank our witness.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this witness, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to this witness and to place her responses in the record. Also,
without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days to
submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in the
record.
And with that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:09 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

November 18, 2015
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
