- NATIONAL CREDIT UNION ADMINISTRATION OPERATIONS AND BUDGET

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

NATIONAL CREDIT UNION
ADMINISTRATION OPERATIONS
AND BUDGET

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
AND CONSUMER CREDIT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

----------

JULY 23, 2015

----------

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 114-46

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

NATIONAL CREDIT UNION
ADMINISTRATION OPERATIONS
AND BUDGET

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
AND CONSUMER CREDIT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 23, 2015

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 114-46

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

97-159 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Chairman

PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina,  MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
Vice Chairman                        Member
PETER T. KING, New York              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BRAD SHERMAN, California
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
BILL POSEY, Florida                  WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
Pennsylvania                     DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        AL GREEN, Texas
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
ROBERT HURT, Virginia                ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio                  JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee       JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
MARLIN A. STUTZMAN, Indiana          TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        BILL FOSTER, Illinois
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              PATRICK MURPHY, Florida
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina     JOHN K. DELANEY, Maryland
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
KEITH J. ROTHFUS, Pennsylvania       DENNY HECK, Washington
LUKE MESSER, Indiana                 JUAN VARGAS, California
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
FRANK GUINTA, New Hampshire
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas
BRUCE POLIQUIN, Maine
MIA LOVE, Utah
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas
TOM EMMER, Minnesota

Shannon McGahn, Staff Director
James H. Clinger, Chief Counsel
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit

RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas, Chairman

STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico, Vice      WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri, Ranking
Chairman                             Member
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
BILL POSEY, Florida                  RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
Pennsylvania                     CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
MARLIN A. STUTZMAN, Indiana          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina     JOHN K. DELANEY, Maryland
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  DENNY HECK, Washington
KEITH J. ROTHFUS, Pennsylvania       KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
FRANK GUINTA, New Hampshire          JUAN VARGAS, California
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas
MIA LOVE, Utah
TOM EMMER, Minnesota

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
July 23, 2015................................................     1
Appendix:
July 23, 2015................................................    31

WITNESSES
Thursday, July 23, 2015

Matz, Hon. Debbie, Chairman, National Credit Union Administration     4

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Matz, Hon. Debbie............................................    32

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Neugebauer, Hon. Randy:
Written statement of the American Bankers Association........    61
Written statement of the Credit Union National Association...    63
Written statement of the Independent Community Bankers of
America....................................................    97
Letter to Hon. Jeb Hensarling, Hon. Richard Shelby, Hon.
Maxine Waters, and Hon. Sherrod Brown from 53 State Bankers
Associations, dated July 23, 2015..........................   101
Written statement of the National Association of Federal
Credit Unions..............................................   103
Written statement of the National Association of State Credit
Union Supervisors..........................................   107
Matz, Hon. Debbie:
Written responses to questions for the record submitted by
Chairman Neugebauer........................................   110
Written responses to questions for the record submitted by
Representative Mulvaney....................................   317
Written responses to questions for the record submitted by
Representative Sherman.....................................   378

NATIONAL CREDIT UNION
ADMINISTRATION OPERATIONS
AND BUDGET

----------

Thursday, July 23, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions
and Consumer Credit,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:20 p.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Randy Neugebauer
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Neugebauer, Pearce, Posey,
Fitzpatrick, Luetkemeyer, Mulvaney, Pittenger, Barr, Rothfus,
Guinta, Tipton, Williams; Clay, Scott, Maloney, and Sinema.
Also present: Representatives Royce and Fincher.
Chairman Neugebauer. The Subcommittee on Financial
Institutions and Consumer Credit will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the subcommittee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``National Credit Union
Administration Operations and Budget.'' Before I begin, I would
like to note that there are several National Credit Union
Administration (NCUA) staff members here today. And committee
policy is one staff member per witness. This is to ensure
public participation. In the event we have more public audience
members come in, we will ask some of the NCUA staff to head to
our overflow room upstairs.
I would like to thank Chairman Matz for being flexible with
our schedule. As you know, we were scheduled to have this
hearing tomorrow. And then the leadership decided we weren't
going to be here tomorrow. The Chair was gracious enough to
change her schedule. And we appreciate that.
I am going to now recognize myself for 5 minutes for an
opening statement. Good afternoon to the committee. Financial
institutions are the backbone of Main Street America. Credit
unions particularly share a unique relationship with
communities. After all, they are the core of the cooperatives.
They help bring unserved and underserved customers into the
financial mainstream. They provide the first credit card for
young adults trying to build credit. They help the first-time
home buyer purchase the home they have been dreaming of. And
often they are the last corporate citizen left standing in many
rural districts, including many areas of my own district.
Perhaps most importantly, though, they are experts on
relationship banking, helping to customize products to fit the
needs of their customer base.
Unfortunately, credit unions, like community banks, are
suffering from the one-size-fits-all regulatory actions of the
Federal regulators. For example, some credit unions now undergo
stress testing like their larger bank counterparts. Because of
this increased regulatory burden and the related compliance
costs, we have seen a massive consolidation of credit unions,
and inflexible product standardization, which has limited some
of the customer choices.
Data from the National Credit Union Administration shows
that we lost nearly 1,000 credit unions between 2010 and 2014.
This trend presents a threat to communities across the country,
especially rural and semi-urban areas such as the 19th District
of Texas. I worry that without some regulatory flexibility,
credit unions will be less able to meet local needs, will stop
offering products, or consolidate. To me, this signals problems
in the health of the credit union industry.
Today's hearing will mark the first time since 2011 that
the NCUA Chair has testified before Congress. As with any
Federal agency, it is imperative that we conduct vigorous
oversight of budgeting and operations. This ensures that the
money paid into the system by the credit unions is being spent
appropriately and that the taxpayers remain protected by a
strong Share Insurance Fund. Further, it ensures rigorous
debate of policy decisions made by the NCUA.
NCUA has undertaken significant regulatory policy changes
under Chair Matz's leadership. And it is necessary to
understand how these actions are affecting the health of the
credit union system. Today, our Members will get to tackle both
of those tasks. During today's hearing, I am hopeful that Chair
Matz will address two issues in particular.
First, NCUA's budget has increased each year since 2008,
sometimes in double digit percentages. However, during the same
time, the number of credit unions has dropped by nearly a
quarter. I hope to hear Chair Matz outline clear justifications
for this budget increase that does not appear to be matched to
other supervisory demands.
Second, I am concerned that the NCUA has not appropriately
outlined how it will address the industry's best practice of
using capital buffers on top of regulatory capital
requirements. The NCUA must clearly signal how it plans to
supervise this industry's best practice to ensure capital is
efficiently put to use and that there remains robust and safe
credit availability for our constituents.
I look forward to hearing Chair Matz's perspective on these
important issues and more during today's hearing. Thank you.
And now, with that, I yield to the ranking member of the
subcommittee, Mr. Clay.
Mr. Clay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Chair Matz, for your testimony. And, Mr.
Chairman, I would like to relay something pertaining to your
remarks about credit unions and what purpose they serve. As a
young adult with my first job, I applied for an auto loan with
my community bank, where I had checking and savings accounts,
and was denied the loan and was forced to go join the Wright
Patman Credit Union, where I was approved for the loan, which I
paid off in half the time. So they took a chance on me. And I
am certainly going to take a chance on credit unions. So thank
you.
Like most banking regulators, the NCUA's budget is derived
from the entities that they regulate, an arrangement designed
to insulate the Administration from political pressure. Such an
arrangement should not, however, trade the pressure of the
congressional appropriations process for pressure from the
credit union industry to shape their budget, an arrangement
that was agency policy from 2001 to 2008, but that undermined
the Administration's ability to respond to financial crises and
its ability to prevent losses to the Share Insurance Fund.
I look forward to a discussion that actually reflects the
concerns that credit unions have in their day-to-day core
operations, whether they be proposals to allow them to raise
supplemental capital or expand member business lending or other
regulatory relief proposals. I look forward to hearing more
about how we can work with the NCUA to ensure that the
regulatory environment for our credit unions is one that allows
them to thrive but that also protects members and the Share
Insurance Fund. And thank you again for your testimony and your
leadership.
I yield back.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
And now the gentleman from New Hampshire, Mr. Guinta, is
recognized for 1 minute.
Mr. Guinta. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Good afternoon, Chair Matz.
It is a privilege and an honor to be representing the First
Congressional District of New Hampshire, where the first ever
credit union was founded in the United States. In 1908, St.
Mary's Bank emerged in a small town called Manchester, which is
my hometown. Since then, Manchester has grown to be the State's
largest city. And surrounding the City came more credit unions
and community banks. Now there are 27 credit unions in New
Hampshire, 14 of which are in my district.
However, community banks and credit unions have been
consolidating at an alarming rate. According to the quarterly
data posted on the NCUA's website, credit unions have declined
52 percent from 1990 to now. I sit here and ask myself, why is
this happening to our community financial institutions?
Consumer choice, I think and hope, is something that we as
Americans all value. However, we have seen this negative trend
continue and even be enhanced, I think, by rigorous regulatory
requirements by the Dodd-Frank Act.
You, Madam Chair, called 2015 the year of regulation
relief. And I certainly hope that is true. I look forward to
working with you in that approach because I think the harmful
regulations our financial institutions have faced need to be
addressed immediately. So I very much thank you for coming here
today and working with us. And I look forward to hearing your
testimony.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
The gentlewoman from Arizona, Ms. Sinema, is recognized for
1 minute.
Ms. Sinema. Thank you, Chairman Neugebauer and Ranking
Member Clay, for holding this very important and timely
hearing.
As you may know, Congressman Mulvaney and I are sponsors of
bipartisan legislation to bring greater transparency to the
National Credit Union Administration's budget process by
requiring a public hearing on the budget before adoption. This
legislation is simple and straightforward. It would require
NCUA to publish a draft budget on an annual basis and then hold
a public hearing with notice and opportunity for public comment
before the NCUA Board makes a final determination on how funds
are spent.
As NCUA is funded almost exclusively through fees assessed
on credit unions, we believe the public and the credit unions
that are regulated should have an opportunity to weigh in as
NCUA considers its annual budget.
Between 2001 and 2008, NCUA held public hearings. I look
forward to hearing from today's witness about why these
hearings have been discontinued and how the agency can improve
the current budget process to make it more open and
transparent.
Again, thank you, Chairman Neugebauer and Ranking Member
Clay for holding today's hearing.
And thank you, Chair Matz, for sharing your expert view
with us today.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentlewoman.
Today, we welcome Debbie Matz, the Chair of the National
Credit Union Administration. Chair Matz was nominated by
President Barack Obama to serve as the eighth Board Chair of
the National Credit Union Administration after confirmation by
the U.S. Senate on August 7, 2009. She was sworn in as the
Chair on August 24, 2009. Ms. Matz served on the NCUA Board
from January 2002 to October 2005, and is the first NCUA Board
member to return for a second turn. She was nominated for her
first term by President George W. Bush. As the NCUA Chair, Ms.
Matz heads the independent agency overseeing the regulation and
supervision of the Federal credit unions and the National
Credit Union Share Insurance Fund (NCUSIF), which protects the
accounts of over 6,500 federally-insured credit unions serving
more than 96 million members, and managing more than $1.1
trillion in assets.
Chair Matz, we are glad to have you here. You are now
recognized for 5 minutes. And without objection, your written
testimony will be made a part of the record.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE DEBBIE MATZ, CHAIRMAN, NATIONAL
CREDIT UNION ADMINISTRATION

Ms. Matz. Thank you. Good afternoon, Chairman Neugebauer,
Ranking Member Clay, and subcommittee members. Thank you for
inviting me to appear before you.
When I came back to NCUA as chairman in 2009, in the wake
of the Great Recession, the credit union system was on the
brink of collapse. To prevent this, we developed an
unprecedented mechanism to securitize $50 billion in toxic
corporate credit union assets. Within a few months, 351
consumer credit unions, holding nearly $52 billion in assets,
were close to failing.
Compounding the situation, NCUA's budget and staffing in
the years leading to the crisis had not kept pace with credit
unions' growth and increasing complexity. In fact, during the 7
years leading up to the financial crisis, NCUA cut a total of
91 staff positions, even though credit union assets had
increased by 73 percent. During the same period, NCUA's budget,
as a percentage of credit union assets, declined by 35 percent.
NCUA was understaffed and underresourced.
We soon rectified these problems while preventing any
unnecessary budget and staffing growth. To efficiently manage
shifting workloads, we reallocated existing resources wherever
possible. For example, to provide more supervision to credit
unions that pose greater risks to the Share Insurance Fund, we
have reallocated exam hours away from smaller credit unions
towards larger ones, rather than simply adding new examiners.
The NCUA budget is developed from the bottom up each year,
using a zero-based budgeting process. Every office in the
agency must justify its staffing level and each expenditure.
Through this process, we efficiently allocate resources towards
priorities detailed in NCUA's strategic plan. The full plan and
budget details are posted on our website.
NCUA leads financial institution regulators in budget
transparency. Our website contains a dedicated budget resource
center that includes annual fund audits, budget summaries and
slides, office-by-office spending plans, and a host of other
budget information exceeding what other financial regulators
disclose.
Among my top priorities are providing transparency and
communicating effectively with all stakeholders. To this end, I
have held 18 in-person listening sessions, hosted 11 online
townhall webinars, and crisscrossed the country speaking to and
meeting with tens of thousands of credit union officials
representing every State. This is one of the most important
aspects of my job because I receive the most useful feedback
when I hear from the people who actually run credit unions.
I heard their comments about our exam process. I heard we
needed to target regulations to risks. I heard our member
business loan rule was too prescriptive. I heard we should
remove the cap on fixed assets. I heard we needed to improve
how we designate low-income credit unions. I heard we needed to
streamline how we approve fields of membership. And I heard we
needed to reduce burdens on small credit unions.
So, I am here to tell you we listened, and we acted. We
relieved unnecessary burdens as we have modernized our
regulations. The NCUA Board remains committed to providing
regulatory relief that does not compromise safety and
soundness. We continue to act on all practical suggestions as
we move toward a principles-based regulatory framework and
enhance credit union powers within our authority.
As NCUA eases regulatory burdens and responds to emerging
risks, our supervision budget and staff must keep pace with
credit unions' growth and complexity. Reports by GAO and our
inspector general underscore this need.
Today, key credit union system metrics have recovered to
pre-crisis levels. And, notably, the percentage of assets in
troubled credit unions has been reduced to a manageable level,
down to just 1 percent. The recovering economy is, in part,
responsible for the improvements in credit union performance.
Credit is also due to the CEOs, managers, and boards who make
tough choices to keep their credit unions solvent, as well as
the NCUA staff who supervised credit unions under very
difficult circumstances.
We are now on the right track. Both the credit union system
and NCUA are in remarkably better condition than when I became
chairman. I will continue working to protect the safety and
soundness of credit unions and protect the 100 million account
holders who are federally insured by NCUA. I look forward to
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Matz can be found on
page 32 of the appendix.]
Chairman Neugebauer. Thank you.
Chair Matz, the NCUA approved a budget in 2015 by a vote of
2 to 1 of $279.4 million, an increase of 4.2 percent. Over the
last 7 years, the average increase in the budget has been about
8.49 percent and is much--one, year I think it was 13 percent.
This kind of contrasts dramatically from the budget, say, of
the FDIC, which has been decreasing its operating costs for the
last 5 years, including 3 percent for 2015. And they cut 325
positions this year.
NCUA has reported to Congress that credit unions performed
well during the financial crisis and continue to grow and serve
their members. Further, the NCUA has previously justified these
budget increases by saying the credit unions have become more
complex. Can you kind of walk us through this pretty large
budget increase, how it is justified, and kind of elaborate how
credit unions have become more complex?
Ms. Matz. Certainly. And to your point about the FDIC
versus the NCUA budget, FDIC has two budgets: a resolution
budget; and an operating budget. During the crisis, the
resolution budget went up very dramatically and has been coming
down. But when you look at their budgets combined or their
operating budget in isolation, it has been very comparable to
ours throughout the past probably 5 or 10 years. So we are on
parity with the way the FDIC has been operating in terms of its
budget increases.
But during the crisis, we lost 102 credit unions, which
cost the credit union system about $750 million. We have been
doing everything we can to make sure that doesn't happen again.
I believe that the reason we lost those 102 credit unions was
because our staff simply did not have the resources to
supervise them effectively heading into the crisis and during
the crisis because we were down by 91 employees at the time
that I got there. And so, it was my intent to make sure that we
have the resources that we need to protect the safety and
soundness of the growing industry.
In front of you, you will see slide 3, which shows you our
budget as a percent, per million dollars, of federally-insured
credit union assets. And you can see that it was way down, when
we had the budget hearings. It was way down. And it has trended
up somewhat. But it is still considerably lower than where we
were in the year 2000. At that point, our budget was $328 per
million dollars of federally-insured assets and now it is $249.
So, I think we are operating very effectively.
But we need to keep ahead of the complexity of the
industry. I have said many times that NCUA should not be
holding the industry back. And the industry, the credit union
industry, needs to stay competitive. And so, they need to be
providing electronic services to their members. They want--they
asked for and we gave them derivative authority to hedge
interest rate risk. They need more flexibility in the way they
do business. Just today, at our Board meeting, we eliminated
the cap on their fixed-asset investments.
Chairman Neugebauer. Let me change direction here, because
we have a limited amount of time. A review of the NCUA's
inspector general materials, loss reviews for the limited
number of credit union failures during the financial crisis,
reveals that the NCUA examiners did routinely identify problems
on a timely basis. In other words, the examiners, it is not the
issue that we had enough examiners, but the problem, and they
indicated they did uncover the problems, but what the report
did indicate was that it wasn't a function of not detecting the
problems but the proper follow-up. And so, it would lead one to
believe that what we don't need is more examiners, but
evidently, we need more competent examiners. What is your
response to the report that said that your folks found out the
problems but didn't deal with them appropriately?
Ms. Matz. In fact, there was a series of material loss
reviews. So, it depends on which one you look at. But their
capping report, which summarized all of the material loss
reviews, said we were not detecting problems early enough. And
they did not comment on our staffing level. But we have held
the staffing level constant for the past 4 years. So, our
intent is not to increase the staff. We have been reallocating
our workload, so that we have taken examiners from small credit
unions and reassigned them to larger credit unions so that we
can do our job effectively without increasing the staff.
Chairman Neugebauer. So the number of credit unions has
decreased by 25 percent, but the budget has gone up. That seems
to be contradictory.
Ms. Matz. It is not contradictory. In fact, because the
number of assets and the complexity of the credit unions has
gone up more rapidly than the number of credit unions has
declined. And if you have more complex institutions, you need
to have staff who are well-trained to supervise those
institutions.
Chairman Neugebauer. My time has expired.
I now recognize the gentleman from Missouri, Ranking Member
Clay, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Clay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
H.R. 2287 would provide credit unions and their trade
associations the opportunity to participate in predecisional
hearings on the NCUA's operating budget. It is my understanding
that, relative to other financial regulators, the NCUA is a
leader amongst its peers in providing transparency around its
budget process.
Madam Chair, describe the information that you already make
available to the public concerning the NCUA's budgeting process
and how would your budget transparency efforts compare to those
of other financial regulators?
Ms. Matz. Thank you for that question. When I came onto the
Board in 2009, one of my top goals was to improve transparency
and communication with all of our stakeholders. And to that
end, I began to hold listening sessions around the country. I
have held 18 of them. I started holding virtual townhall
meetings through webinars. I have held 11 of them. In fact, I
have one coming up on Tuesday that was planned quite a while
ago. And I have crisscrossed the country meeting with credit
unions. I find it more effective to hear from the people who
run the credit unions.
When we held the hearings when I was on the Board last
time, typically what we had were three or four representatives
from the trade associations who read statements prepared by the
trade associations. And the statements were consistent across
the witnesses and through the years. And the message was cut
your budget, cut the number of examiners, cut the time you
spend in the credit unions. That was not productive. It was not
constructive in terms of developing our budget.
What is constructive is when I go out and talk to the
credit union officials and I find out what things are really on
their minds and how we can respond so that they can do their
jobs better. But in terms of transparency, we have a budget
resource website that has all of our budget advisory memos that
are given to each of the Board members, describing in detail
what the budget is. We have line-by-line budgets for each
office in the agency. We have our audits from our accounting
firms. It goes on. There are dozens of things on our website. I
don't really think there is much on our website that doesn't
answer every possible question, including frequently asked
questions. No other financial institutions regulator does that.
And no other financial institutions regulator holds hearings on
its budget.
Mr. Clay. How would enhanced disclosure of the NCUA's
operating budget and the other funds it administers support the
core operations of credit unions? I am just curious.
Ms. Matz. I don't think it would enhance our budget process
at all. In fact, our budget has a minimal impact on the credit
unions themselves. Our budget, as a percentage of the actual
credit union expenditures, is less than 0.02 percent. It is a
very minimal amount. So, I don't think they are adversely
impacted at all by our budget.
Mr. Clay. In your experience in interacting with credit
unions in the field, have you ever gotten requests from the
credit unions themselves about further transparency into the
NCUA's budget or the other funds that it administers?
Ms. Matz. I can tell you, as I said, I have crisscrossed
the country and met with tens of thousands of credit union
officials. And I really can't remember getting a question about
the transparency or really about our budget in general. Now
that the trades have whipped this up as an issue, you might be
hearing about it. But I can tell you in all the years that I
have been on the Board, meeting with credit union officials,
this is not one of the issues that has come up.
Mr. Clay. Interesting. I appreciate your responses. And,
hopefully, we all understand that this could be motivated by
the trade associations.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
And now the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Posey, is
recognized for 5 minutes. Mr. Posey has stepped out, so we are
going to recognize the gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Luetkemeyer, for 5 minutes. He has also stepped out.
Let's go to the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr.
Mulvaney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mulvaney. I thank the chairman.
Chair Matz, I get a lot of questions back home about the
overhead transfer rate, the amount of money that you all take
out of the security insurance fund to use for your overhead.
You mention it in your testimony and say that the operating
budget is reimbursed from the State insurance fund. That is the
OTR, so the overhead transfer. You go on to say that your
methodology for calculating the overhead transfer rate was
validated in 2011 and 2013 by PricewaterhouseCoopers. On your
website, and I see you have something there as well, it says
that: While PricewaterhouseCoopers made recommendations to
improve the process on the OTR, overall, they determined that
the methodology was sound and reasonable.
So I did something that I think is fairly reasonable, which
is I went to your website to get the overhead transfer rate
review, which is the one that was done for you by
PricewaterhouseCoopers that you mentioned in your opening
testimony and on the website. And when I turned to the first
section, which I think is a fairly reasonable section for
somebody to go to to try and get up-to-speed on it, the
executive summary, I got to page 5, and it says: ``The findings
and conclusions of this study, which are based on an analysis
of available facts and circumstances, are presented below.''
And I get an entirely redacted section. In fact, that happens a
lot. There is a bunch of different places that are redacted. I
think 15 pages are redacted.
I tried to figure out why that was. And someplace on the
website, you all also mentioned Section (b)(4) of the Freedom
of Information Act. You go to read that, and it says that you
don't have to--or it is okay to redact essentially things that
are trade secrets and commercial or financial information
obtained from a person or privileged or confidential material.
All of which is cool. Okay.
Until I get to this, which is the unredacted copy of your
agreement. By the way, did you know that I have this as you sit
there today?
Ms. Matz. I didn't know that you had it. I had no idea.
Mr. Mulvaney. Okay. You did not know that I have it. Okay.
I am going to read to you one of the redacted sections that you
all cut out of the conclusions of the executive summary
regarding transparency. Again, you can't get this publicly. But
you can get it if you get the unredacted version. It says:
``Based on the PricewaterhouseCoopers review, the OTR
methodology was considered lacking in terms of the extent to
which the classification of NCUA's activities between insurance
and regulatory represents a consensual view.''
It goes on to say that: ``Further, there was found to be
dissatisfaction within the industry with respect to NCUA's
efforts to communicate and explain the OTR methodology in
adequate detail. It is recommended that the NCUA should
consider providing more visibility on how it characterizes its
activity to the different industry groups and credit unions and
possibly solicit their feedback with regards to the
reasonableness and accuracy of the classification.''
How is any of that a trade secret?
Ms. Matz. Sir, I should point out to you that when I
learned, just recently, that that redacted version was on our
website--and I have to say I was somewhat shocked by it
myself--I discussed it with the staff and the unredacted
version will be going up. However, I should point out--
Mr. Mulvaney. When did you have that conversation?
Ms. Matz. Yesterday.
Mr. Mulvaney. Yesterday. Why did you have it yesterday?
What happened yesterday to prompt you to have a discussion with
your staff?
Ms. Matz. I guess it was just a discussion of the things
that were on our website about--
Mr. Mulvaney. It had nothing to do with this hearing? You
just happened to be randomly looking at your website yesterday
and decided--
Ms. Matz. No. No. I was discussing with the staff what we
have on our website that affects our budget and wanted to see
it.
But what I wanted to say is that subsequent to that, in
2013, we did have a study by PricewaterhouseCoopers--
Mr. Mulvaney. I got that. And if I get a chance to get to
that, I will. But let me ask you the question, who made the
decision to redact the 2011 report before it went up on the
website? Was that you? Or was that somebody else?
Ms. Matz. Our general counsel's office.
Mr. Mulvaney. Did you approve that decision?
Ms. Matz. I wasn't aware of it.
Mr. Mulvaney. Do you believe that information to be a trade
secret?
Ms. Matz. I don't.
Mr. Mulvaney. And your answer is, you are going to go ahead
and put it up?
Ms. Matz. Yes.
Mr. Mulvaney. By the way, the irony of redacting something
that says you should be more transparent--
Ms. Matz. Yes. I got the irony.
Mr. Mulvaney. I got you. Thanks very much.
Another thing you redacted, by the way, later in the
document, it says that: ``NCUA should also check if the OTR
decisions are subject to the Administrative Procedure Act and
if formal notice or comments are required on its OTR
calculation process and results.''
I won't ask you if that is a trade secret. You will
probably say it isn't, and it is going to be on your website
soon anyway. Let me ask you, have you done that?
Ms. Matz. Do you want me to answer the question?
Mr. Mulvaney. No. I want you to answer the question I have
asked you, which is, have you done what PricewaterhouseCoopers
asked you to do in 2011 regarding the Administrative Procedure
Act?
Ms. Matz. Our general counsel has advised that we do not
need to publish it. However, in my written testimony I indicate
that we are, in fact, going to publish the formula for review
and comment.
Mr. Mulvaney. Lastly, you mentioned earlier that the budget
was on your website. I have your budget. Thank you for sending
it to me. It only took me 18 months to get it. I am really
excited about having it. I got it yesterday. I appreciate that.
Is the line-by-line budget that you gave me yesterday available
on your website?
Ms. Matz. Not at this time.
Mr. Mulvaney. When it will be available on your website?
Ms. Matz. We can put it up as soon as--
Mr. Mulvaney. Finally, there is one thing redacted in the
reports--I won't read it verbatim because I don't have time--it
says that you should look at, explore future avenues of
communication with the folks that you regulate.
Would you agree that my bill with Ms. Sinema, going back to
the original process of having input, direct input, and
meetings on your budget could be one avenue by which you could
increase your communication with the people that you regulate?
Ms. Matz. It would increase the communications, but it
would not be effective.
Chairman Neugebauer. The time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. Mulvaney. I am certain that you think it won't be.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Neugebauer. I now recognize the gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Scott, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chair Matz, let me make sure now, the NCUA, the National
Credit Union Administration, your budget is funded through fees
from your credit unions across the country, is that correct?
Ms. Matz. That is correct.
Mr. Scott. So it is safe to say the credit union members
themselves bear the total cost of the agency's operations and
expenses?
Ms. Matz. That is correct.
Mr. Scott. Okay. Let me ask you this, do you hold public
hearings for your budget?
Ms. Matz. No.
Mr. Scott. Can you tell me why you do not do that?
Ms. Matz. I make it my business to go out and meet with the
people who run the credit unions and have significant dialogues
with them on any issue that they would like to discuss. When we
had budget hearings in the past, we were just hearing from the
trade associations, from one representative from each trade
association. We were not hearing from the people who have their
funds in the credit unions or really from the people who run
the credit unions.
Mr. Scott. Do you think that is a very good way of holding
yourself accountable to these stakeholders? Do you think that
it could be improved if you did have public hearings, where the
people who are paying the freight would have an opportunity to
interact with you and you have an opportunity to satisfy any
concerns that they may have about your budget which they are
paying for?
Ms. Matz. When you say ``they'' are paying for, I assume
you mean the credit unions. And I would take exception to that.
Credit unions are cooperatives that are owned by their members.
They can only raise capital through retained earnings.
Mr. Scott. But, ma'am, you just agreed with me that the
credit unions' fees provide your budget.
Ms. Matz. Yes. But it is not their money. We assess the
credit unions. But it is the members who own the credit unions.
And it is the members' funds. And if we don't have adequate
resources, we can't protect those funds.
Mr. Scott. Okay. Well, the members are the credit unions,
and the credit unions are the members.
Ms. Matz. No. That is not true.
Mr. Scott. And the members come from them.
Ms. Matz. I disagree with that.
Mr. Scott. What do you disagree with?
Ms. Matz. I don't believe that the credit unions
necessarily represent the members. And if they did, they
wouldn't be asking us to cut our budget because I think the
members would like us to protect their life savings and would
like us to have the resources that we need to do that
adequately.
Mr. Scott. That is why I think it would help you and help
with the transparency if you did have hearings. The record is
clear. I don't see how you could have such a negative attitude
toward the very people who, through their fees, are paying your
salaries, your operating expenses.
Let me go on. I have another question here. Is it true that
you have a secure room, in quotes, ``a secure room'' at your
headquarters?
Ms. Matz. Yes.
Mr. Scott. What is the purpose of this room?
Ms. Matz. It is a sensitive compartmentalized information
facility, known as an SCIF. And we are required to have it by
Executive Order so that we can communicate sensitive
information.
Mr. Scott. And how often is this room used?
Ms. Matz. There is somebody there every day monitoring it.
Mr. Scott. And how much did it cost to create this room?
Ms. Matz. It cost over a million dollars. I don't know
exactly how much.
Mr. Scott. And did you do a cost-benefit analysis before to
determine what the cost and benefits were?
Ms. Matz. We knew what the cost was going in, and we knew
we were complying with an Executive Order and that we can't
receive or disseminate classified information without it. We
can't do our job without it.
Mr. Scott. Without this--
Ms. Matz. Correct. In this--
Mr. Scott. Why do you say you can't do your job without it?
Ms. Matz. Because if there is classified information to be
transmitted, we wouldn't be able to either transmit or receive
it. We would have to go to somebody else's facility. In other
words, before we had it, we would have to go to the Treasury
Department, for instance, in order to be part of the classified
discussion, in order to receive the information. And so now,
just like all of the other Federal financial regulators, we
have that facility on the premises.
Mr. Scott. Okay. I think, from what I have heard you say,
that it would not be a bad idea for you to consider--I think it
would help with the relationship building with your credit
unions. They play a vital role in what you are doing. And it is
very important for transparency. So I think from your testimony
here, it shows that there is a need for you to consider having
public hearings for those who are paying the freight.
Chairman Neugebauer. The time of the gentleman has expired.
I now recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Posey, for 5
minutes.
I will say to the Members, I am going to try to strictly
adhere to the 5-minute rule. We are going to have votes here in
a little bit. And I would like to get as many Members in as
possible before that. We do plan, if Members intend to continue
with the hearing, to come back after votes. But we would like
to get through as many as we can.
Mr. Posey, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Chair, the NCUA has said that a limited number of
credit unions would be downgraded if the risk-based capital
proposal was in place today. I am interested in what impact
this proposal would have had if it had been in place at the
height of the fiscal crisis in 2009. Has the agency prepared or
seen any analysis of how many credit unions would have been
downgraded during the crisis? And of those that would have been
downgraded under the proposal, how are they doing today without
the proposal having been in place at the time? Do you kind of
follow that question?
Ms. Matz. I think I do.
Mr. Posey. Okay. Did they all go away? Or are most of them
doing fine today?
Ms. Matz. Our analysis is that if we had that risk-based
capital proposal in effect prior to the crisis, we wouldn't
have lost all of the credit unions that we lost during the
crisis. I don't have the exact number with me, but I can get it
for you.
Mr. Posey. Yes.
Ms. Matz. Is that what you were asking?
Mr. Posey. Yes. I have some credit union data which
indicated that had the proposal been in place during the
financial crisis, it is estimated that only 45 credit unions
would have been downgraded. And of those, 41 would be well-
capitalized today. The point is, that is the pain this proposal
will cause all credit unions worth the gain of regulating a few
bad actors that NCUA could have already reined in through the
normal exam process?
Ms. Matz. Back-testing has shown that had we had that in
place, it would have caught a large number of those 102 failed
credit unions, in fact. First of all, we are required by
statute to have a risk-based capital rule comparable to the
other financial regulators. And so, this is meeting our
statutory responsibility. But we have modified the rule. We
feel that it is important to have a forward-looking indicator.
So it was not intended to really catch credit unions now. It
was intended to get them to start planning so that they monitor
the risks in their portfolios and have sufficient capital to
cover those risks going forward.
Mr. Posey. Okay. The Risk-Based Capital Study Act was
recently introduced in the House to require the NCUA to examine
certain issues with respect to this proposed rule. Under the
legislation, the NCUA would not be able to move forward on the
proposal until after this study is completed. Given that the
second risk-based capital proposal received an even higher
number of comments than the first, has there been any
discussion at the agency to slow down the process here and,
perhaps, study the issue further before proceeding ahead with
the final rulemaking completion?
Ms. Matz. Thank you. We studied the issues exhaustively
between the first and second proposal, which is why it was
almost completely rewritten in response to the comments we got
from Members of Congress and from the credit unions. So, I
don't intend to delay it. We are reviewing the comments that we
have gotten. And the ones that are substantive, and we are
responding to, are mostly positive. There were a lot of form
letters, mostly form letters, and most of them simply stated:
Don't pass another risk-based capital rule. We do have a
statutory responsibility to go forward.
Mr. Posey. My thought was that if it took 12 months last
time to come up with a new proposal, shouldn't we kind of be
giving it the same amount of time and effort to review the
current one just to make sure we get it right?
Ms. Matz. I feel like we have gotten it right.
Mr. Posey. Many more comments to respond to and a whole lot
more input.
Ms. Matz. The comments are mostly form letters saying we
don't need a risk-based capital rule. So they really weren't
very constructive or prescriptive. But we have studied it. I
don't know what more we can study. We have studied it in-depth.
And we feel that this is a very fair rule that will not
immediately impact more than about 20 credit unions which can
either raise more capital or shift some of the risk out of
their portfolios. For the rest of the credit unions, it
actually adds to their capital or net worth.
Mr. Posey. How many do you regulate? So we are saying 20
out of how many?
Chairman Neugebauer. I'm sorry, the gentleman's time has
expired.
Ms. Matz. 6,100.
Chairman Neugebauer. I now recognize the gentlewoman from
New York, Mrs. Maloney, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you very much.
Chair Matz, I speak to my credit unions all the time. And,
quite frankly, they have never raised transparency of the
budget. Is this a really big issue with the credit unions, the
NCUA?
Ms. Matz. I have heard a lot from the trade associations
about it. But when I go out and talk to the credit unions, up
until now I really have not heard about it at all.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. Despite the very significant and
substantial revisions to your risk-based capital rule, the
credit union industry continues to express concerns that some
of the risk weights assigned to credit unions will
unnecessarily require them to hold additional capital and will
ultimately restrain their ability to lend as much as they would
like. So my question is, how do the risk weights under your
revised proposal for credit unions compare to similar risk
weights for banks?
Ms. Matz. Thank you. Many of the risk weights that we have
are comparable to banks. In fact, about 75 or 80 percent of the
assets in credit unions would be weighted exactly the same as
they are for banks. And I think another 15 or so percent would
actually be weighted less than they are for banks. So we are
pretty comparable to how the banks are risk-weighted.
Mrs. Maloney. Do you think credit unions should be the same
as banks?
Ms. Matz. We have exempted credit unions that are under
$100 million because they are not complex. But for the complex
credit unions, yes, I do.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. And I have heard a whole disparity of
opinions on your third-party vendor proposal. The GAO and the
FSOC support your position for enhanced authority. But the
credit unions make the argument that it is not necessary and
would lead to increases in regulatory burden in your budget.
Can you tell me, what are gaps in your regulatory authority,
and whether it would increase your budget?
Ms. Matz. If there is one thing that keeps me up at night,
it is the cyber threat, and our lack of vendor authority. We
are the only financial banking regulator that does not have
vendor authority. It really ties our hands in being able to
make sure that the system is secure. So we are requesting the
legislative authority because if we see a red flag, we need to
be able to go in and examine, supervise that third party, and,
if there is a problem, to get them to correct it, and to let
credit unions know about it. We simply don't have that
authority now.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. That is a consideration.
I am also aware of legislation that is pending that would
require NCUA to hold budget hearings before your budget has
actually come out. But I understand that you are a peer leader
in transparency. Can you describe the information you make
available?
Ms. Matz. We have a budget resource page on our website
which has very extensive information. I don't know any other
financial institutions regulator that provides any budget
information on their website or at least it might be minimal.
But we provide very extensive information on our website. I
believe we are more transparent than any other Federal
financial institutions regulator in terms of our budget.
Mrs. Maloney. And can you explain how your supplemental
capital proposal could work with the revised risk-based capital
rule when finally implemented?
Ms. Matz. NCUA has the authority to permit credit unions to
raise supplemental capital, but only for the purposes of their
risk-based capital ratio. And that is not included in our risk-
based capital proposal. So at the time that we finalize it, we
intend to put out a proposed rule which would permit credit
unions to raise supplemental capital for the purposes of their
risk-based capital ratio.
Mrs. Maloney. And, finally, in your written statement you
mentioned your support for H.R. 1188, bipartisan legislation
that would permit more small business lending by credit unions.
Can you describe how that would help credit unions across the
country?
Ms. Matz. Credit unions now operate under a statutory cap,
which I feel is very arbitrary.
Mrs. Maloney. What is the cap?
Ms. Matz. The cap is 1.75 times net worth, required to be
well-capitalized. And so, as a regulator, I would like to see
credit unions diversify their portfolios. I think business
lending is an important part of that portfolio.
Mrs. Maloney. My time has expired. Thank you.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentlewoman.
I now recognize the gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Luetkemeyer, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Chair, last year, the day before this committee
scheduled a markup on H.R. 4042, which is my legislation to
require a stop and study of MSAs, you sent a letter asking
that, and I quote, ``the House Financial Services Committee
refrain from considering amendments to tomorrow's markup
related to NCUA's risk-based capital rule.''
I have never received a letter from an Executive Branch
agency asking me not to do my job, which is to legislate. Can
you please explain?
Ms. Matz. I just felt as a regulator, that it was important
for the safety and soundness of the system. And I was concerned
about it.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Let's figure out first here the
responsibilities of each branch of government. My understanding
is that the responsibility of the Legislative Branch is to
propose legislation. And in each bill we pass, there is a
clause that always says that the Executive Branch and the
departments that pertain to whatever the legislation is about
have the ability to implement and promulgate rules that will
implement the law. And so I don't know where the Executive
Branch has the authority or the reason to tell us what to do.
Ms. Matz. I wasn't telling you what to do. I was just--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Madam Chair, you asked that the House
refrain from considering amendments. You were telling us not to
do any amendments to the capital-based rule.
Ms. Matz. I was telling you to, yes, as a consideration so
that I could do my job and protect the safety and soundness of
the system.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. My point is that the Executive Branch
should carry out the wishes of the Legislative Branch.
Ms. Matz. Absolutely.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. And this is the problem with this entire
Administration. Right now, the Legislative Branch is being
compromised because they believe the Executive Branch can go
out through Executive Order and through bureaucratic fiat
create law. That is not the way the Founders designed these
three branches, coequal branches, by the way, of government.
This is not what they intended for the Executive Branch to do.
And, quite frankly, I hope from now on you will refrain from
telling us what to do.
Also, I am kind of curious, you came up with a risk-
weighted rule. I was wondering if you did any sort of study to
evaluate with regards to MSAs their performance during the
financial crisis?
Ms. Matz. I believe that we did, yes. I don't have the
information handy.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. One of the things that I am working
on is with regards to SIFI designations, both for banks and
nonbanks. NCUA sits on FSOC, is that not correct?
Ms. Matz. Correct.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Can you explain to me how you could vote
for designating four nonbanks, three insurance companies and
another industry, as SIFIs?
Ms. Matz. Yes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. What criteria did you use?
Ms. Matz. We used the criteria that was set out in the
Dodd-Frank Act.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. What did you use?
Ms. Matz. The criteria that were set out based on their
size, interconnectedness, their leverage.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. How big is the biggest credit union?
Ms. Matz. About $65 billion.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Is it a SIFI?
Ms. Matz. Not within the financial system, but certainly
within the credit union system. What I am saying is that it is
systemically important to our fund in the credit union system.
But it would not be considered systemically important to the
entire financial services system.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Right now, there is a threshold of $50
billion. Anybody above that has to comply with the stress tests
and all sorts of other rules and regulations. Does this credit
union comply with that?
Ms. Matz. Yes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. Are you considering designated--
would you support designated as a SIFI then? Is it
interconnected enough?
Ms. Matz. The financial institutions that have prudential
regulators are not considered as SIFIs under the FSOC
designations. Those are for nonbank institutions.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I only have 30 seconds left. I have one
more question I want to get to before we run out of time, with
regard to designating these insurance companies as SIFIs. I was
in the insurance business for 30 years. I have no idea how you
can tell me that one insurance company, if it goes down,
destroys the entire economy. Can you give me an example of how
this works?
Ms. Matz. We look at mainly their leverage, their
interconnectedness.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. On FSOC, Mr. Woodall is one of the
members, and he represents the insurance industry, and he voted
against that.
Ms. Matz. That is right.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Why would you vote against him, somebody
who actually knows the industry and represents them?
Ms. Matz. I think that is why the Act was written the way
it was, where it brings diversity, and we bring our individual
perspectives. And we get briefed by the staff. We get
information from the entity. And then we each make up our
respective minds.
Chairman Neugebauer. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. So you are going to ignore the one person
who has best knowledge of the industry.
Thank you.
Chairman Neugebauer. I now recognize the gentleman from
North Carolina, Mr. Pittenger, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chair Matz, I would like to kind up pick up on that. In
2014, and again on July 20, 2015, the former chairman of this
committee, Barney Frank, an author of the Dodd-Frank bill,
stated that he did not believe that asset managers should be
regulated as SIFIs. Would you state your perspective then on
why you believe that they should be?
Ms. Matz. Asset managers? We are now looking at the asset
manager activities rather than designating specific asset
managers--
Mr. Pittenger. Do you believe they are systemically risky?
Ms. Matz. Pardon me?
Mr. Pittenger. Do you believe that asset managers are
systemically risky? And if so, how?
Ms. Matz. We are looking at the activities that they
perform. And there might be activities that are systematically
risky. But we have not finished that analysis at this point.
Mr. Pittenger. Can you name any specific asset managers
that you believe are of concern to you as chairman of NCUA?
Ms. Matz. We are looking at all the asset managers.
Mr. Pittenger. But you can't?
Ms. Matz. I would rather not. We are looking at all the
asset managers. We are not, I am one member--
Mr. Pittenger. Systemic risk--
Ms. Matz. Pardon?
Mr. Pittenger. --to the financial system in this country.
Can you name any?
Ms. Matz. We are not designating asset managers. We are
looking at the activities of asset managers. And until I am
briefed on it, I don't have an opinion.
Mr. Pittenger. We received testimony, this committee did,
that the SIFI designation for asset managers would result in
$100,000 in cost to each investor. Are you aware of that?
Ms. Matz. No. But we are not designating asset managers
now. We are looking at the activities of the asset managers.
And that is a long way off. We are only beginning to have those
studies done.
Mr. Pittenger. But that is where you are probing. That is
what is on your radar screen. Do you believe that any action
taken by FSOC to designate asset managers and their activities
systemically important would be consistent with the
congressional intent of Dodd-Frank?
Ms. Matz. I think if we finally got to the designation, we
wouldn't make that designation unless we believed that. And I
certainly wouldn't support it unless I believed that.
Mr. Pittenger. Chair Matz, what do you understand is the
business of an asset manager? Would you explain to me their
business?
Ms. Matz. It is managing the assets of individuals.
Mr. Pittenger. All right. They have the obligation to their
clients to invest, is that right?
Ms. Matz. Correct.
Mr. Pittenger. And these are owned by the clients, they are
third-party custodians?
Ms. Matz. Yes.
Mr. Pittenger. They have contractual obligations. They are
advisers, and they are agents, aren't they?
Ms. Matz. They are--
Mr. Pittenger. They are advisors, and they are agents on
behalf of their clients. Is that correct?
Ms. Matz. Yes.
Mr. Pittenger. I think it is important to note that these
managers don't also employ the balance sheet leverage. Is that
correct?
Ms. Matz. To the best of my knowledge, it is.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
And now the gentleman from New Hampshire, Mr. Guinta, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Guinta. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chair Matz, as I stated in my opening statement, financial
institutions across the Nation are merging or consolidating at
what I would consider a pretty alarming rate. And that concerns
me because, to me, that represents less access to credit for a
whole host of individuals for a whole host of needs that
families, average families require. There were 12,891 credit
unions back in 1990. And today, I believe we have about 6,200,
according to the first quarter data that you put out. So would
you talk to me a little bit about, over the last 25 years, why
there were so many consolidations and if you think--what, if
any, portions of Dodd-Frank would have something to do with
that? Or if you don't think Dodd-Frank had anything to do with
that, I would like to know that as well.
Ms. Matz. We provided some slides. Just in reference to
that last question, slide 1 shows the decline in federally-
insured credit unions since 1990. And you can see the
trajectory started in the early 1990s and has just continued
after Dodd-Frank. It did not start with Dodd-Frank. So,
personally, I don't think Dodd-Frank was related to credit
union failures. But it is a sad story. And it is one that has
been very frustrating to me because we lose about 250 credit
unions a year. And that has been consistent for the past 20
years. It is a result, I think, of not being able to achieve
economies of scale, of not being competitive in the
marketplace. Frequently a manager who has been running the
credit union for 25 years decides to retire, and there is no
succession plan. And the Board realizes that their members
could probably be better served by merging. So, the vast
majority are voluntary mergers.
We have an Office of Small Credit Union Initiatives, which
I helped to create when I was on the Board last time, which
works with small credit unions and provides free consulting
services for them. And they have helped about 600 credit unions
grow from the definition of small to large. So, in that number
there, that includes some credit unions, I believe--I might be
wrong--but there are about 600 credit unions that aren't
considered small anymore because now they are over the limit.
But it is a source of frustration because small credit
unions frequently are located in areas where there are no other
insured financial service institutions. And so we really try to
work hard and do a lot of hand-holding and we have exempted
small credit unions from a number of our regs so that we can--
where we can--mitigate the regulatory burden on them.
Mr. Guinta. So because of the trajectory before Dodd-Frank,
you are saying, Dodd-Frank, because of the losses post and pre
are essentially similar or identical, you are saying Dodd-Frank
has nothing to do with it?
Ms. Matz. I haven't seen any evidence of it.
Mr. Guinta. Okay.
When I talk to bankers who are running credit unions in New
Hampshire, they talk to me about the regulatory burden, the
compliance requirements. Anywhere from 10 to 30 percent of
their time is now focused on regulatory. So I couldn't speak to
pre-Dodd-Frank. But I can tell you that post-Dodd-Frank, that
is the single largest concern expressed to me by credit union
executives. If that is what they are telling me, and they are
on the ground, it is not consistent with your opinion relative
to Dodd-Frank.
Ms. Matz. I just haven't seen evidence of it. I know that
there is a burden on small credit unions. There is a burden on
all credit unions. Small credit unions have a very difficult
time dealing with the regulatory burden, but it is the
regulatory burden in general. It is not necessarily NCUA.
The one I hear most about is BSA. They have a great deal of
difficulty complying with BSA. So if I had to pick one, that
would be the one that I hear most about.
But I just can't answer that. I just don't know, but it is
very frustrating to me that we are losing so many small credit
unions. And we work hard to meet with them and to see if there
are ways that we can change our policies so that we can help
them out.
Mr. Guinta. In New Hampshire, we have about 1.3 million
people, so we are very community-based. So I understand the
concerns or the items that you ticked off, economies of scale.
I disagree with that, because in New Hampshire we tend to go
look to our local community bank or credit union for help. But
I would invite you to come to New Hampshire with me, and meet
some of these credit union execs because I would love to--
Ms. Matz. I would welcome the opportunity to do that.
Chairman Neugebauer. The gentleman's time has expired.
Ms. Matz. I would like to do that.
Mr. Guinta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Neugebauer. I will now go to the gentleman from
Colorado, Mr. Tipton, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Chair Matz, for being here. In NCUA's 2014
annual report, it is noted that 17 of its 15 credit union
failures occurred because of instances of fraud and ended up
costing the Share Insurance Fund $36.5 million as well as, in
October 2014, at the NCUA Board meeting, your CFO Mary Woodson
stated that 94 percent of the losses to the Share Insurance
Fund were related to fraud. Are these fraudulent-related losses
to the Share Insurance Fund, are those of concern to you?
Ms. Matz. They are a concern on the one hand because it is
fraud. But in terms of the impact on the Share Insurance Fund,
it is a minimal impact. But, yes, unfortunately, mostly the
fraud occurs in small credit unions because they tend not to
have internal controls or have very few internal controls. So--
Mr. Tipton. And that is part of your oversight--
Ms. Matz. It is.
Mr. Tipton. It is. And perhaps a little follow-up on my
colleague Mr. Guinta's comments with regard to the regulatory
process. You discussed several NCUA priorities and initiatives,
including a proposed rule on risk-based capital for credit
unions, vendor examination authority, and stress testing for
credit unions. If the NCUA is unable to prevent $36.5 million
in losses to the Share Insurance Fund this last year, is it
really going to be capable of handling expanded regulatory
authority?
Ms. Matz. I believe we are, yes. The fraud--
Mr. Tipton. How many more people will you have to add?
Ms. Matz. None. We are not planning to add any more people.
We are reallocating resources, but we don't intend to add any.
We intend to train people differently, but we are not planning
to add any more.
Mr. Tipton. Do you own any responsibility on that? because
you said that part of this failure was regulatory in nature.
What are you doing to address that?
Ms. Matz. The fraud failure?
Mr. Tipton. Yes. You didn't identify it.
Ms. Matz. We have given our examiners more training on
dealing with fraud, and we have provided certifications for a
number of examiners, fraud certification.
Mr. Tipton. Is all of that training completed now?
Ms. Matz. It is ongoing.
Mr. Tipton. It is going to be ongoing. Chair Matz, in 2014
the NCUA issued a final rule that was going to require the
submission of capital planning proposals and stress testing for
credit unions with assets greater that be $10 billion. The rule
applies to five credit unions that already conduct their own
stress testing.
What was inadequate about the internal stress test that
spurred the NCUA into creating a stress-testing rule that is
not required by Dodd-Frank?
Ms. Matz. We couldn't validate the individual stress
testing that they are doing, and so we weren't. They are our
largest credit unions and they certainly pose, each
individually and certainly as a group, a large risk to the
Share Insurance Fund. We needed to make sure that they are
holding sufficient capital, and so we are doing the stress
tests now. But after 3 years, when we have a record and know
how they operate, they can apply to us to then just do their
own stress testing.
Mr. Tipton. You just used the words, ``We couldn't verify
the veracity of their stress tests. We couldn't monitor it.''
Do you do the stress testing through the NCUA?
Ms. Matz. No. We contract that work out.
Mr. Tipton. So it is not you at all. You don't have the
expertise to be able to do this?
Ms. Matz. No, that is correct. That is correct.
Mr. Tipton. That is correct. So what do you pay for that?
Ms. Matz. For the contract? It is $4 million.
Mr. Tipton. $4 million, and that is in your budget, I
assume.
One other question I would like to be able to address is
the expansive powers that we are seeing out of Dodd-Frank, FSB,
FSOC, organizations that you are affiliated with, obviously, in
terms of the broadening regulatory net. We see General Electric
now trying to be able to dispose of assets in order to not be
classified as a SIFI. That is going forward.
Chair Matz, as a member of the FSOC, are you willing to be
able to give some kind of a roadmap so that these businesses
are not just shooting in the dark as to whether or not they are
going to be designated? Because from what I am hearing from you
and from other representatives of the Administration, once we
put one marker down, we are then going to go after shadow
banking, which will require more regulation, which will require
more Administration. So are you willing to give a roadmap so
the businesses know what to be able to do?
Ms. Matz. I think that is very important, yes.
Chairman Neugebauer. The time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you.
Chairman Neugebauer. The gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Williams, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Chair Matz, for being here today. Chair
Matz, we have become aware of an NCUA policy of awarding on-
the-spot bonuses and cash awards to employees, cash bonuses of
up to $2,500 that can be paid to employees twice a year, and
they get these for services going above and beyond the call of
duty. We have heard that the NCUA's HR department bragged,
actually bragged about paying over $1.2 million in these
bonuses in 2014, frankly, for just doing your job.
Now, from what I can see, there appears to be little to no
control over these payments. Any manager can give a cash award
to anyone with as little as a one-paragraph justification. We
are told that this program has become commonplace within the
agency. So my first question is, who approves these bonuses,
and what policies and controls are in place to manage the
distribution of these cash rewards?
Ms. Matz. For the smaller ones, the $250 on-the-spot
awards, it is the first-level supervisor. They can only give a
certain budgeted amount each year. So, that is somewhat
prescribed. They can't just keep giving them. They only have a
certain number that they can give. The larger it is, the more
signoffs they need on it.
Mr. Williams. Have you personally awarded such bonuses to
your staff?
Ms. Matz. Yes.
Mr. Williams. To whom and in what amounts?
Ms. Matz. That is a good question. I believe I--
Mr. Williams. It is only money.
Ms. Matz. I believe I awarded $2,500 to my chief of staff,
who had not received a pay raise in 5 years.
Mr. Williams. A lot like the private sector.
Ms. Matz. I'm sorry?
Mr. Williams. Much like the private sector that hadn't
received any pay raises.
Ms. Matz. And I provided a cash award to my administrative
assistant, and I believe that was either $1,000 or $1,500.
Mr. Williams. When was the last time you awarded one of
these bonuses?
Ms. Matz. It was probably a year ago.
Mr. Williams. Okay. Now, how about in 2015? How many on-
the-spot bonuses or cash awards has NCUA given out?
Ms. Matz. I don't know, but it is on our internal website.
We post it so our employees are aware of who is getting awards.
Mr. Williams. But you are not sure how many went out?
Ms. Matz. I don't know. As I said, we have a total amount,
a prescribed amount, beyond which the agency can't go.
Mr. Williams. Okay, now correct me if I am wrong, but this
is money that the credit unions give to you through fees.
Ms. Matz. I'm sorry.
Mr. Williams. This is money that the credit union gives to
you in fees?
Ms. Matz. Correct.
Mr. Williams. Okay, and for the purpose of supervision to
ensure safety and soundness?
Ms. Matz. Correct.
Mr. Williams. But I bet some of these credit unions would
actually love to be lending out the money to their customers
rather than having some bureaucrat in Washington get a bonus
for just doing her job. So what would you say to the credit
unions that I have back in my district? I have quite a few.
What would you say to the credit union community about these
bonuses?
Ms. Matz. I would say that they are bonuses to people who
work very hard to protect the safety and soundness of the
deposits that members have in their credit union, and that when
people go above and beyond, they deserve to be recognized so
that we can retain our talented employees.
Mr. Williams. And you think the credit unions would agree
with you as opposed to having that money to loan out to small
business owners like me?
Ms. Matz. I have no idea.
Mr. Williams. It might be a question you want to ask them
the next time you meet with them.
Ms. Matz. I am sure they give bonuses to their employees as
well, using their members' money.
Mr. Williams. Finally, since this hearing is focused on
transparency, would you provide this committee with a complete
list of employees who have received these bonuses in 2014 and
2015, so that we can shed some light on the policy and learn
more how it works?
Ms. Matz. Sure.
Mr. Williams. Would you do that for us?
Ms. Matz. Absolutely.
Mr. Williams. I would appreciate it.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
And now the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Barr, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chair Matz, I want to continue along the lines of
questioning from Mr. Williams over here regarding not just
bonuses but some of the, what I would consider irregularities,
in the NCUA's 2015 budget.
In the Office of Consumer Protection, pay and benefits for
2015 are $7.3 million, up 9 percent, I believe, or equal to
$600,000, yet the office has only added 2 people. What accounts
for this large budget increase?
Ms. Matz. I would have to get back to you on that, sir.
Mr. Barr. Okay, if you could, that would be great.
And given the fact that the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau has now been with us for 4-plus years, how is this
Office not duplicative of the mission of the Bureau?
Ms. Matz. It deals with the fact that the CFPB examines
financial institutions over $10 billion. Our Office of Consumer
Protection does fair lending exams on credit unions of all
other sizes, which we are required to do by law.
Mr. Barr. But, obviously, the Bureau has--the Bureau's
policies impact credit unions that have less assets than $10
billion. Do you agree?
Ms. Matz. They impact them, sure.
Mr. Barr. Sure. And so my question is, why is an Office of
Consumer Protection necessary within your agency?
Ms. Matz. As I said, they do exams, fair lending exams,
which the CFPB doesn't do. They also respond to consumer
complaints about their credit unions because CFPB only handles
complaints on institutions above $10 billion.
Mr. Barr. How about the Office of Small Credit Union
Initiatives? Your annual report says that half of all small
credit unions shrank in 2014 with an average return on assets
of just 4 basis points. Obviously, these institutions are
struggling. Yet, your budget cuts the programming budget to
offset a 5-percent pay increase for office staff, the overall
budget is unchanged, so this appears to be a pure shift from
programming to employee pay. Am I misinterpreting that, or is
that accurate?
Ms. Matz. I don't know. I would have to go back and look at
it.
Mr. Barr. Okay. I think the credit unions would appreciate
you looking at that because it may not be the right message to
send, particularly to struggling credit unions.
Ms. Matz. And I would be happy to come up and discuss this
with you once I get briefed on it and understand it myself.
Mr. Barr. Thank you. One other question on this, on the
2015 budget, for the Office of Human Resources, why does the
NCUA need 44 human resources staff to service fewer than 1,300
employees? By my calculation, that HR-to-staff ratio is 1 to
30, which is 3 times higher than the average for a large
company. So why such a robust HR division?
Ms. Matz. We have 9 percent turnover, so they are
constantly putting out vacancy announcements, arranging
interviews, doing outreach, handling all of our benefits. I
can't--
Mr. Barr. And yet.
Ms. Matz. I can't defend the exact number, but I am just
telling you what they do.
Mr. Barr. Okay. No, I hear that, and yet also the HR office
is spending $3 million on contracted services. So you have a
very large staff plus you are contracting out.
Ms. Matz. They also handle all of the training for our
examiners, so that is part of their budget. And the contracting
also includes the hotels that they use for the training.
Mr. Barr. Okay, let me shift really quickly to, again, this
idea of the conflicting missions of the NCUA and the CFPB, and
I will just take an example on payday lending. On page 24 of
NCUA's annual report, that report mentions NCUA's effective
payday alternative loans rule, under which Federal credit
unions may charge up to 28 percent on short-term loans meeting
certain conditions. The Bureau has proposed its own payday
proposals that are widely expected to prohibit credit unions to
continue to offer the product that your rules specifically
permit. Can you address this apparent contradiction?
Ms. Matz. I have, and the parameters of our rule are
exempted from the CFPB rule. They didn't exempt our rules
explicitly, but they wrote it so that our--
Mr. Barr. I understand the way it is written, and I
understand--but as a matter of policy, okay, this is the policy
of the government, on the one hand. One agency, the Bureau,
accuses these providers of short-term credit as predatory on
the one hand, and yet, you are offering the same products?
Ms. Matz. No.
Mr. Barr. --or permitting the same product, rather?
Ms. Matz. No. Our product is an alternative because it can
only be a maximum of--
Mr. Barr. I don't believe it is necessary--I am not saying
it is predatory. I am just saying there is a conflict in how
the Federal Government is treating these products.
Ms. Matz. They are looking at the predatory loans, which
are maybe 300 percent, and the credit union loans have a
maximum APR of 28 percent. So we provide guidance so that
credit unions can make those loans in a way that competes with
the more expensive loans, but is much more reasonable for their
members.
Chairman Neugebauer. The time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. Barr. I thank the chairman, and I yield back.
Chairman Neugebauer. I ask unanimous consent that the
gentleman from California, Mr. Royce, a member of the full
Financial Services Committee, be allowed to join the panel and
ask questions.
Without objection, Mr. Royce is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Royce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you very much, Chair Matz, for being with us
today. It is good to see you. I want to thank the NCUA for its
recent efforts in working to provide regulatory relief to
credit unions that are sound, and safe, and stable. And I think
doing so will be beneficial not only to the credit union
members, but also to the American economy. I also appreciate
your testimony today in support of legislation that Mr. Meeks
and I have crafted to provide relief to credit unions from the
member business lending cap. As you expressed, particularly for
smaller credit unions, the current statutory cap makes it very
difficult or impossible for credit unions to successfully
support the small business community.
While your testimony specifically cites your support for
this bill, H.R. 1188, the Credit Union Small Business Cap Jobs
Creation Act, I also want to get your thoughts on H.R. 1422,
the Credit Union Residential Loan Parity Act. As you know, this
bipartisan bill would correct the disparity between banks and
credit unions in the treatment of loans made to finance the
purchase of one-to-four-unit non-owner-occupied residential
dwellings. I see this as a simple straightforward fix,
especially when you consider the potential positive impact in
helping finance investment in multi-family and affordable
housing.
So I was going to ask you, Chair Matz, in this legislation,
would the NCUA support this, and do you see a difference
between one-to-four-unit loans and commercial business loans?
Ms. Matz. Thank you, yes. And thank you also for your
sponsoring the IOLTA Parity bill. Yes, we certainly support
that legislation, and in fact, in the risk-based capital rule,
we treat the one to four residential units as consumer loans
rather than business loans. But that is as far as we can go
because of the statute. So, we would welcome that relief.
Mr. Royce. I appreciate your support for that. I also
encourage other members of the committee to join me in
supporting this bill because it would unlock about $11 billion
in credit union lending for small business. That is important.
On another front, as you indicated in your testimony,
improving the field of membership rule is a priority for the
NCUA. You have even set up a separate working group to address
regulatory relief needs on this front. I know the NCUA has a
proposed rule addressing proposed streamlined field of
membership procedures and is working to address issues related
to community charters and occupation charters. And my question
is, while much of this work could be left to the NCUA alone, is
there anything Congress should be doing to address the field of
membership issues in the statute?
Ms. Matz. Thank you for asking that. Yes, there are several
things that can be done, but probably the most impact would
occur if community charters would be allowed to take on
underserved areas. That would help keep the Federal charter
competitive and would provide relief to a number of community
charters, which really would like to take on underserved areas,
but can't do it. And it really makes no sense. I can't figure
out any reason for it. And we hate to say no, but we have no
choice.
Mr. Royce. Thank you, Chair Matz, very much, for your
testimony here today.
And, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back the balance of my
time.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman, and now the
gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Fitzpatrick, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to yield my time to Mr. Mulvaney of South
Carolina.
Mr. Mulvaney. I thank the gentleman. Chair Matz, thank you
for the second round of questions, and the opportunity to
follow up on a couple of things you said earlier. You may have
seen many of us on the dais react in a stunned fashion when you
said something that I can't actually believe that you said. You
said you don't believe that the credit unions represent their
members.
Ms. Matz. Yes.
Mr. Mulvaney. You are nodding your head ``yes'' as if that
was actually what you said. So who do the credit unions
represent?
Ms. Matz. The credit unions in asking for budget hearings
and telling us that we need to cut our budget and cut our exam
hours are not representing the best interest of their members.
Mr. Mulvaney. I got you. When they ask to cut the budget,
whose money are they trying to save? It is their members',
isn't it?
Ms. Matz. Yes, it is.
Mr. Mulvaney. Isn't that exactly what you would expect them
to do, try and protect their members' money?
Ms. Matz. No, I would expect them to want to have--
Mr. Mulvaney. You wouldn't expect them to protect their
members' money?
Ms. Matz. Not in that way. That is not protecting the
members' money, sir.
Mr. Mulvaney. Okay, so tell me again who you think the
credit unions represent? If they don't represent their members,
who do they represent?
Ms. Matz. Credit unions by and large haven't been asking
for this. It is the trade associations.
Mr. Mulvaney. I didn't ask you that, although it is a
really good answer to a question I didn't ask. So I will ask it
again. If the credit unions don't represent their members, who
do they represent?
Ms. Matz. I can't answer that. You would have to ask them.
Mr. Mulvaney. You don't have any opinions about it? They
represent themselves? Are they preying on their own members?
Have you talked to the CFPB about this?
Ms. Matz. Credit unions--when they ask us to cut our exam
hours--are not representing the best interest of their members.
Mr. Mulvaney. I am a credit union member. Are you a credit
union member?
Ms. Matz. I am.
Mr. Mulvaney. I am a credit union member. I think they are
representing me when they ask you to do that. In fact, I happen
to believe that my credit union represents me fairly well. And
as a member of that credit union, I like the fact that they are
trying to guard my money and be fairly conservative with it.
Ms. Matz. How are they guarding your money?
Mr. Mulvaney. You have a budget that has gone up much
higher than the rate of inflation. You have a staff that is
going up higher than the other regulatory bodies, but let's
continue this line of reasoning.
You said, when I asked you about why you didn't like my
bill, that you didn't think that input from the credit unions
into your budget process, more input, would be helpful. But you
also said in response to a question to another Member earlier
today that you really thought that input from your own
employees was helpful in that budget process.
So what I hear, as a member of a credit union, is that you
don't think the input from the people who pay for you is
helpful, but you do think that the input from the people that
you pay is helpful. So help me reconcile what an ordinary human
being would describe as self-serving crazy talk.
Ms. Matz. I go out all the time and speak to credit union
officials and board members. I have been doing this for 6 years
in this term and 4 years in the last term. And I can tell you,
the NCUA budget is not something that comes up. They talk about
our regulations.
Mr. Mulvaney. It comes up with me.
Ms. Matz. But it doesn't come up with me.
Mr. Mulvaney. I represent one of the most heavily credit
union districts in the country. It comes up with me all the
time. So you are saying they never raised with you concerns
about your budget? This is something that a trade association
has drummed up in order to raise dues or something like that?
Ms. Matz. That is what I am saying.
Mr. Mulvaney. So you think that the credit unions are happy
with your budget?
Ms. Matz. I don't think the credit unions really care
about--
Mr. Mulvaney. Now, wait a second. Let's go back and say
that. If it is not an issue for them, then what is the harm in
going through the process that is laid out in my bill? What is
the harm of having meetings with them, of having them have the
opportunity to go over the line-by-line budget? If they are
happy with your budget, and it is just an issue that is being
ginned up by a trade association, what is wrong with passing my
bill?
Ms. Matz. We are an independent regulator, and while it
might have a good intention, I don't think it is good
government to have the people who are regulated trying to
participate in the budget-making process of the regulator, the
regulator who determines how many exam hours it needs and where
those hours are going.
Mr. Mulvaney. Why not?
Ms. Matz. Because I think it is influencing, negatively
influencing. When I was on the Board last time--
Mr. Mulvaney. Would you rather we just put you on a budget
here? Would that solve a lot of problems, just not make the
credit unions pay for you here, but have you be an appropriated
regulator? Would you like that more?
Ms. Matz. I am fine with the way it is.
Mr. Mulvaney. Well, you are. But evidently the people that
you regulate aren't. So I am asking you, as opposed to having
to answer to the credit unions because you don't think it is
right that they have input--that is what you just said. You
said you don't think it is right to have input in the budget if
you are the one that is regulating them. That is fine. You
don't regulate us. You can come to us and ask for money. Would
you rather have Congress looking over your shoulder than the
credit unions?
Ms. Matz. An independent regulator is not answerable to the
entities it regulates.
Mr. Mulvaney. Or to anybody, evidently. You are not
answerable to us. It took me 18 months to get a copy of your
budget. So I will ask you one last time over the last 8
seconds: Would you rather leave it the way that it is, or would
you rather come into the appropriations process and have
Congress oversee you?
Ms. Matz. I am fine the way it is.
Mr. Mulvaney. I figured you probably would be. Thank you
very much.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman. I would like to
thank Chair Matz for appearing before the panel today.
And, without objection, I would like to submit the
following statements for the record: the Independent Community
Bankers of America; the American Bankers Association; the
National Association of Federal Credit Unions; the Credit Union
National Association; the National Association of State Credit
Union Supervisors; and the Joint State Banking Trade letter.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this witness, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to this witness and to place her responses in the record. Also,
without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days to
submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in the
record.
I would also like to recognize some folks who are working
for the people in the 19th District. We have some interns who
are here at the hearing today, and we are glad to have them and
glad to have them up for this summer.
Without objection, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:50 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

July 23, 2015

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
