- THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE FINANCIAL STABILITY OVERSIGHT COUNCIL

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE FINANCIAL
STABILITY OVERSIGHT COUNCIL

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 17, 2015

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 114-34

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

96-995 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Chairman

PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina,  MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
Vice Chairman                        Member
PETER T. KING, New York              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BRAD SHERMAN, California
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
BILL POSEY, Florida                  WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
Pennsylvania                     DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        AL GREEN, Texas
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
ROBERT HURT, Virginia                ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio                  JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee       JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
MARLIN A. STUTZMAN, Indiana          TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        BILL FOSTER, Illinois
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              PATRICK MURPHY, Florida
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina     JOHN K. DELANEY, Maryland
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
KEITH J. ROTHFUS, Pennsylvania       DENNY HECK, Washington
LUKE MESSER, Indiana                 JUAN VARGAS, California
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
FRANK GUINTA, New Hampshire
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas
BRUCE POLIQUIN, Maine
MIA LOVE, Utah
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas
TOM EMMER, Minnesota

Shannon McGahn, Staff Director
James H. Clinger, Chief Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
June 17, 2015................................................     1
Appendix:
June 17, 2015................................................    65

WITNESSES
Wednesday, June 17, 2015

Lew, Hon. Jacob J., Secretary, U.S. Department of the Treasury...     4

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Lew, Hon. Jacob J............................................    66

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Hensarling, Hon. Jeb:
Written statement of the American Council of Life Insurers...    73
Lew, Hon. Jacob J.:
Written responses to questions for the record submitted by
Representatives Duffy, Garrett, Guinta, Hill, Hinojosa,
Hurt, Lynch, Neugebauer, Ross, Rothfus, Stivers, Wagner,
and Williams...............................................    82

THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE FINANCIAL
STABILITY OVERSIGHT COUNCIL

----------

Wednesday, June 17, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:07 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jeb Hensarling
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Hensarling, Royce, Lucas,
Garrett, Neugebauer, Pearce, Posey, Fitzpatrick, Westmoreland,
Luetkemeyer, Huizenga, Duffy, Hurt, Stivers, Fincher, Stutzman,
Mulvaney, Hultgren, Ross, Pittenger, Wagner, Barr, Rothfus,
Messer, Schweikert, Guinta, Tipton, Williams, Poliquin, Love,
Hill, Emmer; Waters, Maloney, Velazquez, Meeks, Capuano, Lynch,
Scott, Green, Cleaver, Moore, Ellison, Perlmutter, Himes,
Carney, Sewell, Foster, Kildee, Murphy, Delaney, Beatty, Heck,
and Vargas.
Chairman Hensarling. The Financial Services Committee will
come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
This hearing is for the purpose of receiving the annual
testimony of the Chair of the Financial Stability Oversight
Council (FSOC).
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes to give an opening
statement.
When Democrats first passed the Dodd-Frank Act, they
claimed that the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC)
was one of its crown jewels. FSOC, whose agency heads largely
failed in the last crisis, would now be able to clearly
identify risks to financial stability and take action before
these emerging threats metastasized into another crisis.
But a fatal flaw in this pipe dream was always the failure,
perhaps the deliberate refusal, of Dodd-Frank's supporters to
recognize that among the greatest threats to financial
stability are Washington policies themselves, including
policies of the very agency heads who sit on the Council. FSOC
simply refuses to look in the mirror.
In its report, it conspicuously omits any references to
specific government policies or agencies that are helping to
cause the systemic risk it identifies: ``Greater risk-taking
across the financial system is encouraged by the historically
low-yield environment,'' the Council reports. Yet, the Council
refuses to identify the obvious source of this apparent risk,
one of its own members, the Federal Reserve, and the Fed's
unprecedented loose monetary policy.
The Council warns of reduced liquidity in the capital bond
markets, yet never acknowledges that Dodd-Frank's Volcker Rule
and other regulations have drastically reduced liquidity.
The Council lists ``risk-taking of large, complex,
interconnected financial institutions'' as a threat. Yet,
again, it fails to mention that Dodd-Frank amplifies the threat
by empowering the Council to designate certain firms as too-
big-to-fail, thus enshrining the concept into law.
These designations will only make worse the profound threat
ignored by the Council but recently identified by the Federal
Reserve Bank of Richmond in their ``Bailout Barometer,'' that
threat being that hardworking taxpayers, implicitly or
explicitly, are now on the hook for a staggering 60 percent of
the liabilities of the entire U.S. financial system.
The Council turns a blind eye to other serious threats.
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, at the epicenter of the last
crisis, barely receive a mention.
And it gets worse. Our unsustainable national debt, $18
trillion and counting, as all can see, perhaps one of the
greatest existential threats that we face, with more debt
incurred under this Administration than in our Nation's first
200 years, is totally ignored. This is beyond negligent. It is
beyond egregious. It is dangerous and, frankly, it is
offensive.
Another glaring omission from the report is any meaningful
reference to economic growth or, rather, the lack of it. Along
with Obamacare, Dodd-Frank is at the center of the
Administration's economic policies. As we approach Dodd-Frank's
fifth anniversary, we see the slowest, weakest recovery in the
post-war era.
We see an economic recovery that has created 12.1 million
fewer jobs and has provided $6,175 less income for every
citizen compared to the average post-war recovery. Again,
compared to the average, we see an economic recovery that has
left 1.6 million of our fellow citizens mired in poverty, and
working middle-income families losing over $11,000 in annual
income that rightfully should have been theirs.
I find it stunning that in its report FSOC can find a link
between weak economic growth in Greece and stability in the
eurozone but apparently can find no link between economic
growth and stability on this side of the Atlantic.
Also nowhere to be found in the Council's report is the
threat posed to our stability, growth, and personal freedoms by
the erosion of the rule of law under this Administration. We
know that our President seemingly never tires of admonishing us
that he has a pen and a phone ready to enact whatever policy he
sees fit. Regrettably, he never seems to have handy a copy of
the Constitution.
As Americans become less governed by the rule of law and
more governed by the whims of Washington, fear, doubt,
uncertainty, and pessimism are sown. It is not lost on the
American people that increasingly, Washington decides what
credit cards can go in their wallets, what kind of home
mortgages they can receive, and whether, if they like their
bank account, they can keep it.
Truly, never before in my lifetime has more unchecked,
unbridled discretionary power been given to the unaccountable
and unelected. This includes the Financial Stability Oversight
Council, which operates largely out of public view, yet its
decisions have the potential to profoundly alter the lives and
livelihoods of every American. FSOC typifies not only the
shadow regulatory system but also the unfair Washington system
that Americans have come to loathe--powerful government
administrators, secretive government meeting, arbitrary rules,
and unchecked power to punish or reward.
Mr. Secretary, your Council and the rest of Washington need
to awaken to the obvious truth, and that is, when it comes to
systemic risk, Washington is a large part of the problem.
I now recognize the ranking member for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome back, Secretary Lew.
Today, we receive the annual report of the Financial
Stability Oversight Council, as required by law.
As we all know, this year marks the fifth anniversary of
the enactment of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer
Protection Act. It is hard to believe it was just 5 years ago
that we were coming to grips with the magnitude of the
financial crisis, which caused the greatest loss of wealth in a
generation. All told, the financial crisis cost our Nation more
than $13 trillion in economic growth and $16 trillion in
household wealth, not to mention the devastation of an
unemployment rate topping 10 percent in many States.
In the lead-up to the crisis, nobody in the private sector
or in government was looking at the stability of our financial
system as a whole. Nobody was looking at the big picture. And
nobody had the responsibility to deal with emerging threats
before they caused damage to our economy.
That is why we created the Financial Stability Oversight
Council as part of Dodd-Frank. FSOC filled that void, looking
at every aspect of our financial system for possible
weaknesses. And it serves as an advance warning system to
identify and address systemic risk posed by large, complex
companies, products, and activities before they threaten the
economy.
The Council has ensured for the first time that our
financial regulators are working collaboratively to identify
and respond to emerging threats to financial stability. And
with their February announcement outlining enhanced engagement
and opportunities for public input, they have doubled their
efforts to engage with the industry and Congress in a
transparent manner.
In its 2015 annual report, the FSOC noted substantial
progress to protect Americans from another crisis. And, indeed,
we have taken important steps to prevent another economic
disaster from happening, including making our large banks more
resilient through stronger capital, leverage, and liquidity
standards; covering oversight gaps in our financial system by
designating complex, interconnected nonbanks for consolidated
supervision; and reforming key markets like asset-backed
securities and money market mutual funds.
However, 5 years after Dodd-Frank became law, my Republican
colleagues remain fighting the battles of the past. They
continue to believe that if only we rolled back all of the
rules of the road, the financial system would magically unlock
growth and the market would suddenly police itself.
And they continue to ignore the lessons of the last crisis
by doing all they can to undermine FSOC under the guise of
oversight. By focusing merely on dismantling Dodd-Frank, my
colleagues on the other side of the aisle impede Congress'
ability to focus on the new emerging threats to financial
stability identified in FSOC's 2015 annual report.
Like the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB),
destroying FSOC has become a leading component of the
Republican deregulatory agenda. And while they waste countless
hours working to undermine it, engines of job growth and
American competitiveness like the Export-Import Bank face a
possible shutdown in just 5 legislative days. Rather than renew
a proven job creator like the Ex-Im Bank, Republicans are
spending their time bogging the FSOC down in countless document
requests and inquiries--an obvious effort to undercut its
ability to protect homeowners, consumers, and the American
economy.
So welcome, Secretary Lew, and thank you for your
resilience in the face of efforts to stop the Council from its
important work. I look forward to your insight on areas of
systemic risk the Council has identified and hope to learn more
about what FSOC is currently doing to monitor for such risk and
promote financial stability.
As we hear additional details from you, I will be
interested to hear whether Republicans believe FSOC should take
any action to address systemic risk or simply wait for another
crisis.
So I thank you, and I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentlelady yields back.
Today, we welcome the testimony of the Honorable Jacob J.
Lew, Secretary of the Treasury. Secretary Lew has testified
before our committee on previous occasions, so I feel he needs
no further introduction.
Welcome, Mr. Secretary. We are happy to have you back.
Without objection, your written statement will be made a
part of the record.
Mr. Secretary, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give
an oral presentation of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE JACOB J. LEW, SECRETARY, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY

Secretary Lew. Chairman Hensarling, Ranking Member Waters,
and members of the committee, thank you for having me today and
for this opportunity to testify on the Financial Stability
Oversight Council's 2015 annual report.
I would like to begin by recognizing that we are a few
short weeks away from the 5-year anniversary of the enactment
of Wall Street reform and the creation of the Council. As we
approach this milestone, it is clear that these reforms have
made the financial system safer and more resilient while
supporting long-term economic growth.
Wall Street reform has put important consumer, investor,
and taxpayer protections in place, supporting companies that
play by the rules and serve their customers, small businesses
that need access to credit to grow and create jobs, and working
men and women trying to save for their children's education, a
downpayment on a home, or their own retirement. Wall Street
reform has worked.
Five years ago, the Council was created to be a forum for
the entire financial regulatory community to come together to
look across the U.S. financial system to identify and respond
to potential threats to financial stability. Today, the Council
is doing exactly what Congress designed it to do, from asking
the tough questions that will make our financial system safer
to shining a light on emerging threats before they can evolve
into the next financial crisis.
Moreover, the Council's member agencies work
collaboratively to leverage the expertise that each regulatory
agency brings to the table. And the Council has also
established a track record of conducting its work in an open-
minded and deliberative manner, incorporating constructive
suggestions from stakeholders, including members of this
committee, who have made the Council more effective. The
Council asks hard questions and only makes judgments based on
facts and detailed analysis.
Before discussing this year's report, I want to emphasize
why each annual report is important. The annual report provides
transparency about the Council's work. Each report covers a
range of issues based on extensive data-driven analysis, and it
contains in one place the collective views of the financial
regulatory community about current risks and emerging threats
to financial stability, along with recommendations for specific
actions to mitigate those risks.
The findings and recommendations set down a marker for
action, providing clarity regarding the Council's priorities
and a roadmap to the year ahead. This provides Congress and the
public with a way to hold the Council accountable for making
progress.
The report highlights the Council's recent work and
demonstrates its continued commitment to openness and good
governance. For example, this year's report highlights a series
of important Council initiatives over the past year, including
enhancements to the Council's transparency policy, stronger
internal governance, supplemental guidance to our nonbank
designations process, and ongoing engagement with the public
regarding potential risks from asset management products and
activities.
Last month, at our 51st meeting, the Council released its
fifth annual report. This year's report focuses on 11 key
areas, many of which have been discussed by the Council in
prior annual reports as well as at its meetings over the past
year. These include the potential incentives for greater risk-
taking in a low-yield environment, the need for continued
progress to reform benchmark rates such as LIBOR, and the
continued reliance on short-term wholesale funding. For each of
these areas, the report highlights where progress has been made
and where more still needs to be done.
Cybersecurity remains a key area of focus for the Council.
The financial sector has been a leader of other industries
adopting cybersecurity measures, but still we have seen cyber
incidents affect the largest financial institutions and the
community banks that form the bedrock of the financial system.
That is why this Administration and the Council are
focusing on how to continue working with the private sector to
strengthen best practices, information-sharing, and incident
response. I commend the committee for focusing on the topic in
recent hearings, and we look forward to working with Congress
on this critical issue.
This year's report also identifies several new potential
risks coming into focus which the Council and its member
agencies will monitor over the coming year. For example, the
Council will pay heightened attention to ongoing regulatory
efforts to bolster the resiliency of central counterparties, or
CCPs. The Council also highlighted the ongoing evolution of
market structure across various asset classes and the need for
constant monitoring to ensure that markets function
efficiently.
The Council recommends continued vigilance to the
confluence of factors driving changes in market structure and
the extent of their impact on market functioning and the
provision of liquidity.
Promoting financial stability and protecting the American
public from the next financial crisis should be a common
objective that we all support. Yet, opponents of reform
continue to advocate rolling back these protections, including
the ability of the Council and its member agencies to respond
to future threats to financial stability. As the Council's
annual report demonstrates, threats to financial stability are
real and will evolve with the marketplace. We simply cannot let
our guard down.
I want to thank the other members of the Council and all of
the staff involved with the 2015 annual report for their hard
work and commitment.
As we approach the 5-year anniversary of Wall Street
reform, we will continue to work with this committee to
continue addressing these threats and promoting the strength
and stability of the U.S. financial system.
Thank you very much, and I look forward to answering any
questions that you have.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Lew can be found on
page 66 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hensarling. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
The Chair now yields himself 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Secretary, I alluded to it in my opening statement, but
by chance are you familiar with the ``Bailout Barometer''
report of the Richmond Fed? Are you familiar with this report?
Secretary Lew. I have seen it in the past. I am not sure
which one you are holding.
Chairman Hensarling. I'm sorry?
Secretary Lew. I have seen it in the past, but I am not
familiar with what you are holding.
Chairman Hensarling. Okay. So you have reviewed the
document. You are familiar with--
Secretary Lew. I am familiar with the--
Chairman Hensarling. Okay. So you are familiar with the
fact that it indicates that there has been a 61-percent
increase in the explicit Federal guarantees in our financial
system since the crisis. Is that correct?
Secretary Lew. I understand that is the analysis which is
in that piece of paper. I haven't read the piece of paper.
Chairman Hensarling. Okay. Do you have any reason to
challenge that analysis? Has FSOC come up with a contrary
analysis?
Secretary Lew. Look, I think if you look at the experience
we have had since the financial crisis, since financial reform,
we have seen--
Chairman Hensarling. No, I am just asking, Mr. Secretary,
has the Council--
Secretary Lew. I haven't looked at that piece of analysis,
so--
Chairman Hensarling. Okay. That is--
Secretary Lew. --I can give you my response to the idea,
but that is what I was--
Chairman Hensarling. Okay. Well, let me quote from the
report. There is $26 trillion, according to the Richmond Fed,
in explicit and implicit Federal backstop today. One of the
final conclusions of the report is that, ``It is essential to
restoring market discipline and achieving financial stability
to shrink this Federal safety net.''
Do you agree or disagree with their conclusion?
Secretary Lew. I don't want to comment on a report I
haven't read. I am happy to address the issue, Mr. Chairman--
Chairman Hensarling. How about their conclusion? Do you
believe, independent of their report, that it is important to
achieving financial stability to shrink the size of the
government Federal safety net?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I--
Chairman Hensarling. In our financial markets, is it
important or not important?
Secretary Lew. I think if you look at the financial
stability situation today versus before the Dodd-Frank Act and
Wall Street reform, we have a much--
Chairman Hensarling. Mr. Secretary, I would be happy to let
you have some context, but I would like for the question to be
answered. It is a fairly simple--
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I am happy to--
Chairman Hensarling. --question. Do you believe that for
the sake of financial stability, the extent of the Federal
safety net in our financial markets should be shrunk?
Secretary Lew. I think if you look at an issue that we have
talked about before, I very much believe that it would be a
good thing to enact reform in the area of GSEs. There was
progress on that on a bipartisan basis in the Senate last year.
It is something that didn't proceed to the Floor--
Chairman Hensarling. So can I take your answer as ``yes?''
Secretary Lew. Mr. Chairman, I am happy to look at that
report. I am happy to offer my views on this issue, but--
Chairman Hensarling. You don't have it to look at the
report, Mr. Secretary. I am just asking you about a conclusion.
Secretary Lew. Yes. I--
Chairman Hensarling. I don't sense I am going to get an
answer. Let me move on, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Lew. I would be delighted to answer the question
if you give me the time.
Chairman Hensarling. I think you have had plenty of time to
answer the question, Mr. Secretary--
Secretary Lew. Yes, I don't think I have gotten--
Chairman Hensarling. --and you haven't.
Under Dodd-Frank, FSOC is comprised of agency heads as
opposed to the agencies themselves, correct? We can both agree
on that?
Secretary Lew. Yes.
Chairman Hensarling. Okay. And we can also agree that of
the 10 voting members of FSOC, each was appointed by President
Obama, correct?
Secretary Lew. Yes, I believe that is correct.
Chairman Hensarling. Okay. I alluded to it again in my
opening statement. I have read excerpts of this report. I have
not read the entirety of the 150-page report. Have you read the
entire report?
Secretary Lew. I have.
Chairman Hensarling. Good. My staff read the entirety of
the report; I have read many excerpts. So, in identifying
emerging threats to financial stability, can you point to any
page in the report where FSOC identifies a current Federal
policy or rule as a contributing factor to an emerging threat?
Because we can't find it.
Secretary Lew. Mr. Chairman, we identified the threats that
we see as real. Many of those have a connection to Federal
policy. And I am happy to answer specific--
Chairman Hensarling. Okay. But under Dodd-Frank, you also
have the mandate to actually make recommendations. So how do
you make a recommendation if you can't cite a source?
Secretary Lew. It is not my view that Federal regulation is
a significant risk to financial stability. So I don't agree
with--
Chairman Hensarling. The last time you were here, Mr.
Secretary, there was increasing evidence that we are suffering
great illiquidity in our corporate bond market. You admitted
that. This report cites it. We know that when mid-market
companies hoard cash, they can't promote jobs and economic
growth. Many economists believe this will be the source of the
next financial crisis.
Somehow, the FINRA head can connect this bond illiquidity
to the Volcker Rule. SEC Commissioner Dan Gallagher has said
that the Volcker Rule has set the stage for a potentially dire
liquidity crisis. There has been similar testimony from CFTC
Commissioner Giancarlo. Even former Secretary of the Treasury
Larry Summers has said, ``There is a danger in their enthusiasm
for keeping each individual institution safe that regulatory
authorities will lose sight of keeping markets open and liquid,
and I think that is a legitimate concern.''
So, in your last testimony, you found no evidence that the
Volcker Rule contributed to the bond illiquidity. We have
incredible evidence that it has contributed. Do you still stand
by your previous testimony that there is no connection to bond
illiquidity in the Volcker Rule?
Secretary Lew. Mr. Chairman, I think that the question of
market liquidity is a very complicated one, and trying to
reduce it to one factor is never going to--
Chairman Hensarling. I said a contributing factor, Mr.
Secretary. Is it a contributing factor?
Secretary Lew. If you would allow me to answer your
question, this is a complicated issue. It is a very important
issue. It is an issue that I spend a lot of time thinking
about. It is not a 10-second answer. I will give you a--
Chairman Hensarling. Starting out with, is it a
contributing factor? Or is it not a contributing factor?
Secretary Lew. Yes. I think that it is not possible to say
what is the single cause. I do not believe that Federal
regulation is a significant factor--
Chairman Hensarling. I understand that, Mr. Secretary.
My time has expired. I now--
Secretary Lew. May I just ask to address this issue?
Because I think it is actually a very important issue.
Ms. Waters. Mr. Chairman? I will yield time to the
gentleman.
Chairman Hensarling. I would be happy to have the Secretary
answer the question.
Please. The Secretary is recognized.
Secretary Lew. Mr. Chairman, I think if you look at the
question of liquidity, there are a lot of people trying to
reach a simple explanation to a complicated question.
We are at a point in the business cycle where we are seeing
naturally a lot of volatility as we move out of the deepest
recession since the Great Depression. We are seeing an
expectation of some movement in interest rates. That is a
significant factor.
We are seeing market structure changing rapidly. We are
seeing the introduction of a high level of electronic trading,
including high-frequency trading, that is changing the
structure of markets.
We have also seen a tremendous increase in the volume of
issuance of bonds. That is having a big effect on market
structure--
Chairman Hensarling. I understand all that, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Lew. I think anyone who tries to point to a
single thing, like a rule, is not going to--
Chairman Hensarling. Mr. Secretary, I did not say it was a
single thing. I asked you the question, was the Volcker Rule a
contributing factor, and several minutes later you have still
refused to answer the question.
Secretary Lew. Well--
Chairman Hensarling. My only takeaway is that you don't see
it as a contributing factor, and so many other market--
Secretary Lew. I think that part of the issue--there was a
desire in financial reform for certain things that are high-
risk, highly leveraged investments to be less liquid. I don't
that is necessarily a bad thing.
That doesn't mean it is a good thing for there to be a loss
of market liquidity. I do not see a major impact--
Chairman Hensarling. Thank you.
Secretary Lew. --in terms of broad liquidity, but we are
constantly looking at this question of liquidity. And we are
open to asking the question as to what the impact of Federal
policy is. I just think it is a mistake to start there.
Chairman Hensarling. You could have fooled me, Mr.
Secretary.
I now recognize the ranking member for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, I would like to offer you the courtesy of
continuing your explanation, if you would like to have it.
Secretary Lew. Thank you very much, Congresswoman Waters.
I guess the thing I would add is that there has been a lot
of focus on this issue since October 15th, and there has been a
lot of telling of the story of what happened on October 15th
that is just not based on the analysis or the facts.
There was no breakdown in Treasury markets on October 15th.
That is not something that is supported. There was no liquidity
crisis. There was a moment, there was a blip, there were a lot
of things going on, but we don't see any evidence that
regulation contributed to that event.
There was a moment in time when there was a lot of off-risk
sentiment because of events going on in the world. There was a
huge amount of electronic trading going on. And there was a
blip in the market that, obviously, is very much worthy of our
attention. But people took from that, I think incorrectly, the
notion that somehow that was an event that was caused by a
rule. It wasn't.
And we are doing a lot of work on it and look forward to
issuing an analysis very shortly.
Ms. Waters. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
One of the largest and most frequent criticisms my
Republican colleagues have lodged against the Financial
Stability Oversight Council is what they deem to be a lack of
transparency with respect to nonbank systemically important
financial institution, or SIFI, designations.
And while I think many of their criticisms are merely
attempts to hamstring the Council under the guise of oversight,
I do appreciate that you and your staff have redoubled your
efforts to engage with Congress and with nonbank institutions
and to open up your deliberations for additional public
scrutiny.
Mr. Secretary, would you describe precisely what changes to
both the annual and to the 5-year designation processes FSOC
made in its February 2015 supplemental procedures announcement?
And please also describe how FSOC balances the need for
transparency against the need to protect sensitive market and
supervisory information.
Secretary Lew. Congresswoman, thank you.
We made a number of changes that were designed to respond
to concerns raised both by this committee, members of the
committee, and by stakeholders, which give a great deal earlier
notice and transparency to the process to parties that are
under review.
I want to just underscore that there was a lot of back and
forth even before. So this is not as radical a change as it may
sound like, but it is more formal. And I think it is something
that has led to a good deal of, kind of, recognition that the
system is more transparent, which is our goal.
The review process, by necessity, involves reviewing highly
confidential business documents that are commercially sensitive
under law where we have to protect the documents and the
information. We try our best, in the context of that
constraint, which is a reasonable constraint, and it is a
constraint shared by supervisors of these institutions as well,
to be transparent with the public and the committee at the same
time.
I think that the changes that we have made have helped, but
FSOC is a young organization, and we always remain open to
suggestions on how to improve the process.
Ms. Waters. Last month, the chairman of the full committee
and five chairmen of each subcommittee sent a lengthy and
onerous request for documents regarding the FSOC designation
process, which contained at least 13 different subparts. It is
my understanding that more than a week ago you responded to
that document request with an offer for an in-camera review of
1,400 pages of confidential business and bank supervisory
information.
Since you responded, my staff has begun a review of those
materials. To your knowledge, has the Majority availed
themselves of that opportunity?
And would you consider the production of such sensitive and
voluminous documents to be consistent with the Council's desire
to be transparent with the Congress?
Secretary Lew. Congresswoman, we did make that offer. We
appreciate that your staff has begun reviewing it. Unless it
has happened in the last day, I am not aware that the Majority
has reviewed it, but it could have happened in the last 24
hours.
That is the right way for us to make clear the commitment
to transparency while protecting very sensitive confidential
information.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much.
And, Members on this side of the aisle, would you please
allow the Secretary to answer questions and give him the
courtesy of not badgering him. This is complicated subject
matter that we are dealing with, and he deserves the right to
be able to respond in the time that it takes.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentlelady has
expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Garrett.
Mr. Garrett. I thank the Chair.
So, Mr. Chairman, you said at the outset, ``I would be
delighted to answer your questions if you would just give me
the time.''
Mr. Secretary, we gave you the time to answer some
questions that were submitted to you after the last hearing,
which was back in March, and, lo and behold, it took your
appearance here today before we got the answers to them. In
other words, at 11:18 last night, we got the answers.
That is March, April, May, and now halfway through June. So
we do give you a lot of time. But it is just a pattern, I
guess, of this Administration of ducking the questions and
evading the answers. And it is certainly a pattern of yours of
obfuscation in all these things and not giving a clear answer.
You have such disdain for the American public that we have to
bring you before this committee before you would simply answer
the American public's question?
Mr. Chairman, you asked a question, is it a factor, the
Volcker Rule, and the Secretary couldn't answer it.
And yet, Mr. Secretary, you were able to come up with a
litany of other factors. You said it was a factor with regard
to, the time that it was happening, high-frequency trading was
a factor, volume was a factor. So you ran off all those--
correct?--that those were all factors.
But then did you say that regulation and Volcker is not a
factor? Is that the final answer?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, what I said is complicated, and
we are open--
Mr. Garrett. It is complicated. I understand. And you
listed the other four factors.
All we want is a simple question. You did say that in the
blip, there was no evidence of regulation being a factor in
that blip. Correct?
Secretary Lew. That is certainly my understanding.
Mr. Garrett. Okay. So is it your understanding, further,
going forward, that Volcker, therefore, is not a factor in any
of this?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I think the Volcker Rule is a
very important protection against--
Mr. Garrett. Is it a factor?
Secretary Lew. --risk-taking. I can't give you--
Mr. Garrett. You listed four other factors. Is this one of
the factors?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I listed the factors that I
know are very much real--
Mr. Garrett. Do you know whether this one is a factor?
Secretary Lew. I am not able to say that I know the Volcker
Rule--
Mr. Garrett. So you knew the other factors, and you don't
know this factor. That is--
Secretary Lew. I--
Mr. Garrett. --the end of those questions.
Secretary Lew. I am trying to demonstrate an open-
mindedness that you are not giving me a chance to express.
Mr. Garrett. No. You are just--
Secretary Lew. I haven't ruled out--
Mr. Garrett. You were given the chance to answer the
question, Mr. Secretary.
Reclaiming my time, with regard to the FSOC and the FSB, I
appreciate that the FSOC has announced that it has a process
with regard to the listing of the potential risk associated in
going forward in the designations.
Is there such a process with FSB, as far as a due process
system in place there, that we are trying to get to with FSOC?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, the FSB is a very different
process than--
Mr. Garrett. I understand that.
Secretary Lew. --FSOC. There is no consequence to the
designation in terms of--
Mr. Garrett. I understand that.
Secretary Lew. So it doesn't have the powers that FSOC--
Mr. Garrett. I understand that.
Secretary Lew. Only FSOC has the power to impose--
Mr. Garrett. I understand that.
Secretary Lew. --a regulatory burden on--
Mr. Garrett. So is there a process, nonetheless, of due
process for the companies--
Secretary Lew. There is an open process where stakeholders
share their views and, certainly, governmental entities share
their views with the FSB, but it is a different kind of a
process. So I don't think the same kinds of due process issues
apply when you are not designating a firm with the
consequence--
Mr. Garrett. So it is not a due process, it is a different
process, is what you are saying?
Secretary Lew. I am saying you are comparing apples and
oranges. FSB and FSOC are very different. So there is an
appropriate set of due process concerns--
Mr. Garrett. Within that process right now, the FSOC is
asserting its authority with regard to new roles with their
disclosures to asset managers and the like, and I am sure you
are familiar with that.
Secretary Lew. Yes.
Mr. Garrett. And I know the FSOC had previously been
looking at that issue.
Until the SEC finalizes that, will you go to the FSB and
suggest that they make no final determination with the asset
managers?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I think there is a more basic
issue, which is that we are--
Mr. Garrett. I am not asking about the basic issue. I am
asking one question.
Secretary Lew. I don't think the FSB's process and our
process are at all identical.
Mr. Garrett. I understand that.
Secretary Lew. We have our own responsibility--
Mr. Garrett. You just said that. So what I am asking you
is, as a member of FSB, where you have told us repeatedly it is
done on a consensus basis, I am asking, when you go back and
try to get a consensus, will you say as your position is until
your regulator, the SEC, which is working on this, you would
ask FSB to stand down for now until this decision is made over
here.
Secretary Lew. What we are doing at the FSB is trying to
make sure that it is a thorough, complete review. They--
Mr. Garrett. I gotcha.
Secretary Lew. --are proceeding in a similar manner--
Mr. Garrett. I gotcha. I understand all that. You are being
thorough, diplomatic, and all the rest.
Simple question: Until the SEC finishes their process, will
you use your capacity to say the FSB should stand down in this
area? That is a simple yes-or-no question too.
Secretary Lew. I don't know the precise schedule at the
FSB, so I--
Mr. Garrett. I didn't think that you did. I am just asking
you, would you--
Secretary Lew. I don't think that the FSB can time all of
its actions around--
Mr. Garrett. I doubt that they can. But can you assert your
authority in that regard to try to do so?
Secretary Lew. Look, this consensus process, let's
understand what it is about. It is about trying to drive the
world--
Mr. Garrett. No, I am not asking about a consensus process.
I am trying to ask you whether you will use your authority as
the American Secretary--
Secretary Lew. I don't know. I would have to--
Mr. Garrett. --of the Treasury to represent the American
companies on their behalf?
Secretary Lew. I would have to look at where we were and
where they were and make a judgment at the time.
Mr. Garrett. Yes. Well--
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from New York, Ms.
Velazquez.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, we have held a number of cybersecurity
hearings this year both in this committee and in the Small
Business Committee to examine the toll of cyber attacks on
consumers and businesses. Many of the witnesses stated that a
clear, uniform set of rules was needed to address this problem.
Can you elaborate on FSOC's proposal for a national plan to
respond to cyber threats that you mentioned in your testimony?
Secretary Lew. Thank you, Congresswoman. This is a hugely
important issue in every sector of our economy and our country
because, truly, there are exposures to cyber risk everywhere.
The financial sector, I think, has been a leader in taking
it seriously. And the largest firms are putting enormous
resources into trying to put systems in place that are
effective.
One of the things that we have done as a government that I
think is very important is our National Institute of Standards
(NIST) has put out best practices. We have encouraged the
private sector to use best practices. I have certainly
encouraged other financial regulators to have the same view.
I think that we are at kind of a moment where it is not
just a question of what does a firm do itself, but you have to
ask what are the policies a firm has with regards to who it
will do business with. A lot of the exposures come not directly
at the firm but when a third party connects to the firm.
Ms. Velazquez. Right.
Secretary Lew. So those firms do not just have to worry
about what are they doing, but do they have good standards as
to who they will do business with. And our goal ought to be to
bring all of those parties to the highest standard.
I think it is premature to talk about having a single
national standard that is mandatory. We have put it out as a
voluntary standard. I think many are going and using that
standard. And I think it is something we have to continue to
look at.
Ms. Velazquez. The cost is an issue, especially for small
businesses. Do you have any type of interagency working
relationship on this matter like the Small Business
Administration (SBA)?
Secretary Lew. We do work across agencies in many areas. In
particular, there are connections between, say, the utility
sector and the financial sector, because if your power goes
out, you are obviously going to face a risk.
I am not familiar with what the SBA's program on this is.
In the financial area, one of the things that we have focused
on is the need for smaller financial institutions to be able to
work together or through organizations so that they can pursue
best practices together, because the burden for any individual
firm would be too high. That is one of the reasons it is so
important to have legislation in this area, to make the
collaboration between firms easier and less risky for them.
We have been very much supporting the enactment of cyber
legislation, but even pending the enactment, we have put out
Executive Orders to try and pave a way for firms to work
together.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you.
As you mentioned, lending standards have decreased as
financial institutions try to find profitability in the current
low-interest-rate environment. While the loosening of credit
markets since the recession is beneficial for small businesses,
too much risk-taking could again lead to problems.
If interest rates were to rise, what impact will this have
on the markets overall and specifically on access to capital
for small businesses?
Secretary Lew. Congresswoman, I think that there is at some
point a tradeoff between access to credit and risk-taking. We
have raised concerns over the last couple of years that in some
cases there may by an overadjustment, where--if you look at the
FICO scores for home mortgages, the averages have gotten very
high. There are a lot of not very risky potential borrowers who
are having access-to-credit issues.
Some of that requires a clarification of some of the
policies put in place. It is why some of the agencies have been
addressing the issues like put-back risk.
Now, why am I answering a question about small-business
lending with housing issues? I think we all know, for a lot of
small businesses, the pathway to credit, in part, is through
their personal home equity, their home mortgages.
Ms. Velazquez. Sure.
Secretary Lew. So the two are related.
We have done a lot through our programs to reach out, both
through the SBA and through programs we at Treasury run, to
make credit available to small businesses. We work with the
community banks and local lenders to encourage that lending. I
think it is an important question.
I do think, as we come out of the--through the financial
crisis into a period of calmer macroeconomic circumstances,
that is an important time for more lending activity to be
appropriate.
The question isn't, do financial institutions have no risk,
but do they take reasonable risks, and are they not overly
leveraged?
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentlelady has
expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Luetkemeyer, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And good morning, Mr. Lew.
Secretary Lew. Good morning.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I was kind of taken aback by your report.
This morning in the Washington Times, there is a report that
CBO put out, I think yesterday. I don't know if you have seen
the article yet with regards to--
Secretary Lew. I haven't seen the article. I know the
report.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. Thank you.
And they make the comment here that--the headline is, ``CBO
Warns of Financial Death Spiral from Debt.'' The first line
says, ``Rising Federal debt threatens to choke off economic
growth in a decade, beginning a death spiral that will sap
revenue from government programs even as demand grows, forcing
the government to borrow even more.''
And one of the things--in your testimony here, your second
paragraph, the first line says, ``The Council was created to
identify and respond to vulnerabilities in the U.S. financial
system and provide a mechanism for agencies to talk to each
other and take collective responsibility for addressing
potential threats to financial stability.''
And yet, in your report, I don't see anything about debt.
Am I missing something?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I think if you look at the
risks to our economy from Federal spending and debt, we are in
a much better position now than we were 6\1/2\ years ago. We
have reduced the deficit as a percentage of GDP and in dollars
at a historically quick rate. And that very report makes clear
that over the next 10 years, we are in a pretty stable place.
I think the thing in that report that people are concerned
about is the long term. And, obviously, there are still--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. That is not what it says, Mr. Secretary.
That is not what it says here. It says the long-term outlook
for the Federal budget has worsened dramatically--
Secretary Lew. No, I said over the next 10 years. That
report goes out far longer than 10 years. And I think that the
issue of--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. So we have just a little blip in the
screen here--
Secretary Lew. No.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. --and then we go back a little lower part
of the curve, and then we go back up again?
Secretary Lew. I think if you look at where we were in
2008-2009, we were careening towards a very treacherous place.
We have stabilized it, and it is improving. We still have long-
term challenges, and--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Mr. Secretary, if you just quote the
President and use his analogy of a car in a ditch, we are not
out of the ditch yet, we are still trying to struggle to get
out of there. We are bumping along here with an annual growth
rate of what? Less than 2 percent, 1 percent, something like
that, of our GDP?
And here CBO says--and the point I am trying to make is,
CBO points out the debt is a problem for our economy, and yet
your report does nothing, says nothing about it. And you are
supposed to be an agency that points out these problems.
My question is, why did you not point out that debt is a
problem for our economy?
Secretary Lew. Our report appropriately looks at the
threats to financial stability, and--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. So you don't consider it a threat?
Secretary Lew. I think that if you look at where we are
today versus 6 years ago, the Federal deficit has been brought
under control for the next decade.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Yes, but part of--
Secretary Lew. We are in a period where we need to get the
economy growing; I totally agree with you. Our conversation
should be about what can we do to grow the economy.
And we know there are things we could do. We could have an
infrastructure program in place. We could have immigration
reform. There are lots of things we could do to grow our
economy.
I don't think, right now, the debt 20, 30 years from now is
the thing that is holding our economy back.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I think you have missed the boat, quite
frankly. CBO points it out. There is nothing in here. I think
we are missing the boat. We have dropped the ball on this.
Next question. One of the concerns I have, as the chairman
of the Housing and Insurance Subcommittee is that we have a
situation where we have designated some insurance companies as
SIFIs. And one of the things is, that is fine if you feel there
is that much risk there. We have asked before, quite frankly,
to give us the criteria on which you based your analysis, and
we have never gotten it. We had an Under Secretary who was here
not too long ago who actually did a very good job of getting me
the analysis on this.
But I think part of your job, also, is to figure out how to
de-risk things. You pointed out there is a problem. Okay, how
do we get the problem solved? And I think that is also what is
in your report. In your first line here, it talks about
addressing potential risks to find ways to get back to
financial stability.
So how do we de-risk your--do we have criteria in place yet
to de-risk a SIFI, an insurance SIFI?
Secretary Lew. The analysis that led to firms being
designated is laid out clearly in the record that is quite
public. And I think each of the firms understands why they were
designated.
The question of how they--you are really asking how could
they exit, because de-risking would mean they would no longer
be.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Right.
Secretary Lew. We have made clear that we are going to
review regularly, annually, the status of the firms. We have
done that with the firms that have been designated. And--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay.
Secretary Lew. --if a firm changes its business model and
has less risk, it would no longer be designated.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I see my time is up. I will yield back.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Meeks.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, I want to go somewhere else, but I just have
to say, I think, from what you were talking about, how we are
better off than we were 6 years ago--and I wish my colleagues
had talked about the person, and when they had the opportunity
to stop the person who drove the car into the ditch in the
first place, that caused us to have this debt and all this
problem. So then when someone else comes along and says, okay,
I am going to help you get out of this ditch that I didn't
drive you in--but I am going to get you out of the ditch now.
And you start pushing them to get them out of the ditch. Now,
you might not be going 100 miles an hour yet. You are going
maybe 50 miles an hour. But now you are no longer in that
ditch. You are out the ditch, and you are moving in the right
direction.
But yet you want to blame the person who is getting you out
of the ditch instead of the one who put you in the ditch in the
first place. And that is where we are today. We were in a ditch
in 2008, and now we are driving ourselves out of the ditch.
That is where we are today.
Let me go to where I really want to go to, Mr. Secretary,
dealing with asset management. That is what I have been looking
at, dealing with FSOC and the work-around, the asset management
and that industry. And I know they don't assume all of the risk
as banks, that we look at them differently.
But I did see in one of the reports, however--and I am
concerned about herding. I think that was in an FSOC report, or
OFR, et cetera. And we have a lot of investments there. Should
we be concerned about this process of herding?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I think that, obviously, asset
management has grown as a sector, and there are a lot of
individual and institutional assets there. We have been looking
carefully at this question for some time. The risks are not
necessarily just firm-specific. That is one of the reasons that
we are looking across the industry at activities to ask, are
there activities that are particularly risky?
We have not reached a conclusion. I am reluctant to give a
view until we have reached a conclusion. Because, frankly, we
have entered the process, as have regulators around the world,
trying to understand and learn about a growing and somewhat new
industry. We have identified that as a question. I can't
prejudge what the answer is.
What I can tell you is that it is important that we
complete the process and that it be driven by facts and by
analysis. And if there is action that needs to be taken, the
appropriate regulatory body should do so.
I think the notion that you cut these questions off because
you think you might not like the answer or because you think
you know the answer is exactly what got us into trouble in 2007
and 2008. We have to be willing to ask the questions and, even
if the answers end up being hard, follow them to a logical
analytic conclusion. I think that is what FSOC is doing, and I
look forward to that process being completed.
Mr. Meeks. So let me ask--and I know on some municipal
levels and State levels where we have multibillion-dollar
pension plans that have tried to benefit from a greater
diversification of asset management by using more emerging and
diverse asset managers, which are generally smaller asset
managers. And some are minorities and women who have selective
investment strategies. However, I am finding that these small
managers face real barriers that prevent them from gaining more
market shares.
Has the Treasury or FSOC looked into how we can get more
diversification of managers in this industry?
Secretary Lew. I don't know that FSOC has looked at it. As
Treasury Secretary, I have looked at it. And I think that if
you look at the performance of the smaller and minority-owned
managers, there is not a huge difference. Some are successful,
some are not. The same is true with the large managers. Some
are successful, some are not. Some have good years, some have
bad years.
I think one of the problems is that there is a tendency to
bulk things up because it easier to deal with a few rather than
a lot of managers, and we need to push back on that. We need to
make it clear that the door has to be open to new participants
in this space.
And we have tried through a number of things we have done
to have that be the approach, both in terms of how we have
managed some things within Treasury and through other
intergovernmental efforts we have had. I think we are making
progress, but there is more progress that needs to be made.
Mr. Meeks. Okay. Because as these asset managers get bigger
and bigger, they play more and more of an important role in the
sourcing of capital to businesses that create jobs in various
communities. And so, that is one of the reasons why with banks
we had to go to the Community Reinvestment Act in the 1970s.
So don't you think we should be looking into some policy
that can ensure that we have more inclusion in the asset
management industry so that we can also make sure that they are
investing or reinvesting in some of our other communities?
Secretary Lew. I think it is important for there to be
broad participation and for the process to be open. I don't
know that I would think you should have, kind of, mandatory
targets. But I would be happy to follow up with you. And it is
a matter I have a great deal of interest in and would like--
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Huizenga, chairman of our Monetary Policy and Trade
Subcommittee.
Mr. Huizenga. Right over here, Secretary Lew.
Secretary Lew. Everybody has moved around. I don't know
where to look.
Mr. Huizenga. Sorry about that.
So, unfortunately, I have 5 minutes, not 15 minutes, so I
am going to try and quickly and respectfully move through a
number of things.
I, too, received the email at 11:18 last night and the
answer to my questions on a few things from 3 months ago.
Congratulations. You were actually very clear on one of my
questions regarding financial services trade negotiations. I
asked for you to explain why Treasury continues to oppose
including financial regulatory matters in TTIP. This is the
most clear answer that I think I am aware of and I think the
committee has seen. You say TTIP is not, however, an
appropriate or necessary vehicle for addressing financial
regulatory cooperation. You claim that it is already happening
at the Financial Stability Board, international standards-
setting bodies, and a number of others.
I disagree with the answer. I think it should be included.
But I appreciate your clarity. However, it does lead me to
another question, which has to do with local storage data
requirements that many in Europe are starting to push.
And it is my understanding that the Administration has
highlighted the free flow of information across the digital
world as sort of a centerpiece of the negotiations for both TPP
and TTIP, which is, again, a provision I fully support. I am
confused as to what that difference without a distinction might
be, as to why you are going to be doing that, since it is--it
makes a tremendous amount of sense to have us negotiate with
our partners in this if it is bad for American business. But,
again, you exclude financial services.
And I am curious, is it the Administration's position that
we are seeking to prohibit local storage requirements for
everything except for financial services?
Secretary Lew. No. We have been very firm on the issue of
putting nontariff barriers in place where you have a local
storage requirement for electronic data.
I think the distinction is easy to make, and I have tried
to be clear in this committee before. We view prudential
regulation as something that ought not to be brought under
trade negotiation or a trade process. And that is the
difference. It is not prudential regulation to say that there
shouldn't be a nontariff barrier--
Mr. Huizenga. So you are willing to have the financial
services sector treated differently than any other sector of
the U.S economy in the trade negotiation?
Secretary Lew. In general, trade agreements do not bring
prudential matters or--
Mr. Huizenga. We have the Europeans--
Secretary Lew. We said ``no'' to the Europeans on this.
Mr. Huizenga. Yes, the Europeans would like to do it. And
it seems very odd and, I think, a huge mistake.
Secondly, I do want to quickly move on to the IMF and
Greece. Would you agree or acknowledge that the decision to
bend the rules, shall we say, if not ignore the rules regarding
Greece on the exceptional access framework, which was done with
Treasury's concurrence, was a mistake?
Secretary Lew. I think that the actions taken in 2010, 2012
to avoid an economic crisis in Greece were the right thing for
the IMF and the right thing--
Mr. Huizenga. So it was not a mistake?
Secretary Lew. --for the United States.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. But just so I am clear, it wasn't a
mistake?
Secretary Lew. At the time, Greece said--
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. So now, looking back, do you think it
was a mistake?
Secretary Lew. No. And if I could just take--
Mr. Huizenga. I will take ``no'' as your answer. That is
fine. Because there is a discussion of putting those rules back
in place at the IMF. That is something that the IMF board is
interested in. And I am curious why the Administration, from my
understanding, is opposed to that. Why?
Secretary Lew. So, look, I think that there are occasions
when it would be important for the IMF to have flexibility--
Mr. Huizenga. So the rest of the IMF board, excluding us,
wants to put those rules back in place because they believe
that what happened with Greece was a mistake . But you--
Secretary Lew. I think that is not exactly where the
conversation in the IMF is. There is a serious conversation--
Mr. Huizenga. I have had a number of conversations with
folks from the IMF and involved with the IMF, and I am not sure
that is an accurate portrayal--
Secretary Lew. Congressman, there is a range of issues, and
I think it is important to distinguish them. There is the
exceptional access issue itself, and there is a question of how
to proceed into a new world of debt reprofiling. We have tried
to--
Mr. Huizenga. We also have the temporary new arrangements
to borrow. And I know that the Administration has been trying
to use that as a reason to not necessarily go into IMF quota
reform. But it seems to me, if we are not going to address this
exceptional access framework--
Secretary Lew. Congressman, if I could just take--I know
you are running out of time, but if I could take half a minute
to respond--
Mr. Huizenga. I am happy to take a private meeting later
about this, but--
Secretary Lew. I would be delighted to--
Mr. Huizenga. --we can only get you up here twice a year,
so--
Secretary Lew. This is a hugely important issue. Obviously,
quota reform is critical to the U.S. place in the world, and we
are working very hard to get quota reform enacted.
I think exceptional access has serious questions. I have
never pushed back on the kinds of questions you are asking, and
I am open to a serious conversation about it. I think, looking
forward, finding a way for the IMF to avoid having to use tools
like that is in all of our interests, and I would be happy to
have a conversation.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Massachusetts,
Mr. Capuano.
Mr. Capuano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Hello, Mr. Secretary. How are you doing?
Secretary Lew. I am fine.
Mr. Capuano. Are you familiar with Major League Baseball?
Secretary Lew. I have heard of it.
Mr. Capuano. Are you familiar with the team called the
Boston Red Sox?
Secretary Lew. I have.
Mr. Capuano. So you purport to be an expert in baseball.
Mr. Secretary, can you tell me what is wrong with the Red Sox
right now?
Secretary Lew. That is a long--
Mr. Capuano. No. Then you refuse to answer that question. I
need to know, is it the pitching? Is it the fielding? Is it the
hitting? Come on, Mr. Secretary, answer the question.
Secretary Lew. I am--
Mr. Capuano. I can't believe you refuse.
If you won't answer that question, can you answer me why
the Republican baseball team can't seem to beat the Democrats?
Come on, Mr. Secretary, answer the question. You have plenty of
time.
Oh, well, okay, if you refuse to answer the question, I
guess I will have to move on to some other areas. Because I
just wanted to show that I guess badgering is not the exclusive
realm of some of my colleagues. We can badger, too. But it
doesn't produce much. So--
Secretary Lew. As a Mets fan, I am showing great self-
control, though.
Mr. Capuano. Mr. Secretary, for everybody's sake, in your
next FSOC report, can you put a chapter in there on debt? You
have a great story to tell. I think my colleagues actually
raise a good point. Debt, in theory, could be a risk to the
economy, and you have a good story to tell. It would satisfy
everyone, including me.
Secretary Lew. I understand. And, look, we could discuss it
and say why we don't think it is a risk. The report focuses on
the things that we think are risks.
Mr. Capuano. But I--
Secretary Lew. It is a fair point.
Mr. Capuano. Yes. Just, if you do it the next time, at
least you take one of their arguing points away and you make
some good points.
Secretary Lew. Yes.
Mr. Capuano. And I think it is a fair thing to discuss.
With that, I am going to move on to a couple of things that
are not directly related to FSOC but indirectly related to it.
First of all, I would like to talk about Fannie and
Freddie. Have Fannie and Freddie paid back every penny of the
money that they borrowed from the American taxpayers?
Secretary Lew. They have, I believe, just--
Mr. Capuano. The answer is ``yes.''
Secretary Lew. I believe the answer is ``yes,'' but--
Mr. Capuano. I know it is. I am asking a question I know
the answer to.
And, by the way, haven't they also paid back billions upon
billions of dollars above what they borrowed?
Secretary Lew. Yes. I think I understand where you are
going, Congressman.
Mr. Capuano. I hope so.
Secretary Lew. And I think what they have not done is they
have not removed from the Federal Government, the Federal
taxpayer, the risk that goes with those institutions having the
backing of a Federal backstop.
Mr. Capuano. I understand that. But the money that they are
paying now above and beyond the money they borrowed, where does
that money go?
Secretary Lew. It goes to the Treasury.
Chairman Hensarling. It goes to the general Treasury. So,
basically, homeowners who have a mortgage--
Secretary Lew. And so does the risk--the support that goes
behind the risk--
Mr. Capuano. I supported all that. I am not--I totally
agree with everything that was done up until they paid back
their loans.
Secretary Lew. Yes.
Mr. Capuano. My problem is they paid it back, they are
stable, they are heading in the right direction, and it is time
to get back to more business as usual. Because, like everybody
else, I want to keep homeowners keeping their own money, to the
best of our ability. Yes, there are interest rates, and, yes,
there is some risk. But their dollar-for-dollar risk--right now
they are simply contributing to the Federal Reserve--to the
general Treasury account, and that doesn't seem fair to me.
It strikes me that if we are going to have a general
Treasury account, either we should tell people we are charging
you extra because you have a service or we are increasing your
taxes--neither one of which, it seems to me, is fair. But, in
this case, you are charging them through their mortgage for
something that is unnecessary at this point in time.
Secretary Lew. Yes. That is not the way I look at it. I
see--the GSEs are still in conservatorship, which means the
Federal taxpayer is directly standing behind them if they fail
in the future.
Mr. Capuano. They have done that from day one, and you
weren't--
Secretary Lew. Well, no. From day one, there was an actual
denial that there was a backstop. It is now clear there is a
backstop.
Mr. Capuano. Who denied that?
Secretary Lew. It was in law.
Mr. Capuano. I would respectfully and strongly disagree,
and I think facts pointed out that I was right.
Secretary Lew. No. I think that we have seen over the last
several years the estimates of the potential risk of a problem
in the GSEs is still quite large. So--
Mr. Capuano. I understand. But if the money were going to a
separate account to sit there and build up some kind of capital
reserve, I think you would have a fair argument.
Secretary Lew. But the liability is borne generally.
Mr. Capuano. But the money going into the general Treasury
doesn't bear up, in my estimation.
Secretary Lew. The liability is borne generally, yes.
Mr. Capuano. Number one, they deserve their money back now
that they are stable. Number two, homeowners deserve lower
interest rates unless they are being told what the money is
used for. And right now some of their money is being used to
support something other than Fannie and Freddie. So I guess we
will have to disagree on that.
And I guess with the last few seconds, I wanted to follow
up with something that I brought up with Mr. McRaith, who I
think is also doing a great job. However, it strikes me that
FIO and possibly FSOC is pursuing a backdoor way to take over
regulation of U.S. insurance companies via international
agreement.
Now, that may be a little overstatement, and I am not a
``black helicopter'' guy, I kind of overstated it to make the
point. But it certainly strikes me that some of the agreements
we are about to make with some our international friends may be
pushing a little too far.
With that, I will have to yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr.
Duffy, chairman of our Oversight and Investigations
Subcommittee.
Mr. Duffy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, Mr. Lew. Obviously, you are the Treasury
Secretary, not the coach of the Red Sox, and therefore we are
not going to ask you questions about their failings. We would
note that they are doing better than the Brewers, which says a
lot about the Brewers.
But if you were the coach, we would expect you to answer
the questions that we have about baseball. And when we asked
questions, we would hope that you wouldn't give us answers
about the history of baseball and how it came to be and you
could talk about the history of Fenway. But you would actually
answer the question of what is wrong with the Red Sox.
You had a lot of questions today about the liquidity in the
bond market. And I think the chairman brought out, is this
related to Volcker or other rules and regulations that have
caused banks and traditional market makers to leave the space.
And I want to give you a chance to answer that question. Is
this something that you are looking at? Do you think the rules
and regulations that have come since the crisis have had any
part in the lack of liquidity in the bond market?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I think that to answer the
question fully would take quite a long time, because it is a
very complicated issue.
Mr. Duffy. The Red Sox are complicated too.
Secretary Lew. And I had tried to indicate that we are open
to looking at any of the possible costs.
Mr. Duffy. This is not a ``gotcha'' game at all. You
identify risk in the markets, right? That is your job. And you
do come in, and you talked about cyber, and you talked about
other things that are very complicated, that we can't wrap our
heads around, but you tell us where you see those risks.
And so it is a very simple question, because a lot of the
commentators will say: Listen, it is complicated. There are a
lot of reasons why there is a lack of liquidity in the bond
market. But they will unanimously point out that one of the
causes could be the new regulatory regime and its impact.
The commentators can talk about this, but you are not
willing to answer that question today?
Secretary Lew. In fairness, Congressman, I am offering a
much more detailed answer than the commentators. Most of the
commentators that I have heard, with some self-interest, have
jumped to one explanation.
Mr. Duffy. You do this really well. So I ask you about
liquidity in the bond market, and I mention commentators, then
you will start to talk to me about commentators and the history
of commentating and the articles that are written.
Listen, are you unwilling to answer this question because
the do-gooders who are looking for risk are actually the ones
who are potentially creating the risk in the market? And so, if
you tell us, yes, this could be a cause of the lack of
liquidity in the bond market, you have to look at yourself. You
have to look at the regulatory regime that has taken place
since the financial crisis, and you don't want to admit that
today.
That is not badgering. I think that is a fair question. And
to say that it is too complicated to answer, I don't understand
that, Mr. Lew. Give us a straight-up shot. What is it? Yes or
no?
Secretary Lew. I think that if you look at the many factors
that are at work right now that are having an impact on
liquidity, it is not my view that financial regulation is the
principal thing that requires our attention. I have not said we
shouldn't look at it, and I think these other factors are very
clear.
Mr. Duffy. I don't know whether you were a tap dancer when
you were young. I didn't ask if it was the principal. This goes
back to what the chairman was saying. You are playing with
words. Is it a contributing factor, which goes back to the
point the chairman made, is it a contributing factor, the rules
and regulations? Are you looking at that? Is it a contributing
factor? Not the main factor, not the only factor, but a
contributing factor? Yes or no?
Secretary Lew. If you look at liquidity, you have to look
at different parts of the market.
Mr. Duffy. I know. I know.
Secretary Lew. And if you are looking at Treasuries, it is
different than if you are looking at high-risk bonds.
Mr. Duffy. I am going to ask you a yes-or-no question. Are
you looking at FSOC, yes or no, at whether the rules and
regulations are having some impact on the lack of liquidity in
the bond market?
Secretary Lew. We are looking at all of the factors that
could contribute.
Mr. Duffy. So you are looking at that?
Secretary Lew. We are looking at all of the factors that
could contribute.
Mr. Duffy. So this is one?
Secretary Lew. I am saying that as Secretary of the
Treasury, it is something that many of the members of FSOC in
their own agencies are looking at as well.
Mr. Duffy. Mr. Lew, this isn't complicated stuff. We ask
you simple questions and I think we are entitled to get
straight answers from you. And I think if you think, listen,
the rules and regulations that come have no impact, the
commentators are wrong, banks and market makers have left the
space, but that has no direct correlation with the lack of
liquidity, tell us that.
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I think that the financial
reform has made our system safer and sounder than it was. We
have a stronger economy because of it. Liquidity is still deep.
Mr. Duffy. Is it creating a risk too?
Secretary Lew. And I think that when we look at the issues
related to liquidity, we should look at all potential factors.
I identified the things that I am aware of.
Mr. Duffy. One quick question: Do you support TPA like the
President?
Secretary Lew. I do, very strongly.
Mr. Duffy. Duly noted.
I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from New York, Mrs.
Maloney.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
And I am very pleased to welcome one of the favorite sons
of the great City of New York. It is very good to see you.
Secretary Lew. Thank you.
Mrs. Maloney. And I regret I had to chair another meeting
and I just got here. But I want to follow up with something
that was raised by Ranking Member Waters earlier. And while my
good friends on the other side of the aisle have criticized
FSOC for not being responsive to their document request, I
would like to point out that FSOC did make 1,400 pages of
confidential documents available to this committee. And my
staff and I believe the staffs of many other Members on this
side of the aisle have been over there to Treasury and reviewed
these documents.
And these were confidential documents laying out the
detailed reasoning behind the FSOC's decision to designate
individual companies as systemically important, which was
exactly what the Majority asked for. So I think supplying 1,400
documents for review is being responsive, and I just want to
make that very clear.
Now, I would like to ask you, Mr. Secretary, you said
earlier that the issue of bond market liquidity is a legitimate
one, but we should be very careful about assessing the causes
of the lack of liquidity. And I agree with you. I don't think
we have any definitive answers yet, but I think it is an
incredibly important issue.
I think it is also important to focus on potential problems
in the Treasury market rather than other markets, because the
Treasury market is a $12 trillion market that determines the
borrowing costs in so many other key markets as well.
You mentioned the huge swing in the Treasury market on
October 15th of last year and said there was no evidence of a
breakdown in the market that day. And I agree with you. On
October 15th, trading was continuous and trading volume was
heavy. So was it really a lack of liquidity driving the wild
price swings or was it something else?
Can you give us some more context for what the FSOC has
found so far as it has looked into this issue?
Secretary Lew. Thank you, Congresswoman.
We have worked at Treasury, together with other agencies
that look at the market carefully, and tried to follow the
transactions that day to understand what actually happened. And
there was a huge amount of volume, and there was this 15-minute
period when there was a price spike. But there was not a
breakdown in the market. It is something we have to ask what
happened then and what do we learn from it going forward.
There was a huge amount of electronic trading going on.
Market structure has evolved, and one of the things with
technology is you never go back. So we have to deal with the
reality. And there are many positive things about electronic
trading, so I don't say that critical of the development of
electronic trading. But that changes the structure of a market.
We are looking at that. I can't sit here today and say I
have a clear answer. We are hoping over the course of the next
few weeks to complete our analysis so that we can offer a more
definitive view.
But what I was trying to say before is that there was a
desire to jump to a conclusion that somehow financial reform
caused October 15th. We see no link between financial reform
and what happened on October 15th. Maybe others will find it.
But it is why we have to be so careful when we ask these
questions about liquidity to treat a very complicated issue the
way it should be treated.
I have not ruled out looking at any of the contributory
possibilities from any policy area or market condition. But we
also ought not to jump to a conclusion, which many did very
quickly in a way that I can understand why they did, but it
doesn't mean it is right.
And the Treasury market remains the deepest and most liquid
in the world. There are other areas of the market where there
are some questions about liquidity that are quite legitimate,
where they are not electronically traded, so that is different,
where the huge volume of corporate bond issuances raises some
questions about would there be a good liquid market if there
were a very stressed day. We are looking at all those
questions. We take them very seriously.
One of the things, you have to separate the different kinds
of liquidity, because if it is a question of institutions
keeping high-risk proprietary investments on their balance
sheet or not, that is not something we should go back to. We
have a system that is safer and sounder because we have moved
away from that.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you. I look forward to your report, and
I hope you will personally brief Members of Congress.
Secretary Lew. I would look forward to it.
Mrs. Maloney. I think it is critically important.
And my time has expired. Thank you very much.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentlelady has
expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
Mr. Fitzpatrick, chairman of our Task Force to Investigate
Terrorism Financing.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary, for your time here.
We have had a couple of hearings of the Task Force to
Investigate Terrorism Financing. And I have a series of
questions here, which I would like to sort of make part of the
record rather than go through them today and ask that the
Secretary give us a timely response.
Secretary Lew. Sure. I would be happy to respond.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. I will submit them to the Chair.
I actually wanted to follow up on some questions and your
quick responses from my friend, Mr. Capuano of Massachusetts,
with respect to the national debt.
It was being referred to as the national debt, which is not
in the FSOC report, it is not even identified, that, number
one, the national debt is a good story, it is a good story to
tell about the national debt, and, number two, it is not a
threat to our economy. And I think that you answered both in
the affirmative. Do you agree with that?
Secretary Lew. Again, it is a complicated question. I was
OMB Director 3 years with a surplus. I believe in having a
fiscal policy that lasts for the long, long term. I think if
you look at what we inherited, the stability that we now have
is a world of improvement, and there is still work to do 30, 40
years from now.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. But, Mr. Secretary, the question is the
debt itself, which in 2008 President Obama referred to as a $10
trillion national debt is unpatriotic and immoral. Today, there
is a debt clock, it is right above us at the hearing, $18
trillion, $159 billion--it is going up a million dollars a
minute.
Secretary Lew. It has come down.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Is it a good story?
Secretary Lew. It is a good story. The deficit has come
down as a percentage of GDP faster than at any other point.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. That deficit started coming down, there
was a new Administration, a new Speaker who took office in
January of 2011, and because of fiscal restraint, restraint of
Federal spending and growth of the economy, the annual
operating deficit is coming down. But it is not zero yet and
the national debt continues to rise. Is that a good story?
Secretary Lew. I don't think it would be good for our
economy if we were to have a balanced budget today. Right now,
we have an economy which many of you have said isn't growing
fast enough. We need to continue to look at keeping the economy
growing and keeping an eye on the long term. Having a stable
fiscal posture for 10 years is huge progress.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Mr. Secretary, a couple of years ago the
then-Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff described the
national debt as the greatest threat to our national security.
Is an $18 trillion debt a threat to our national economy?
Secretary Lew. At the time, our deficit was in double
digits. It is now coming below 3 percent of GDP.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. I am not asking about the annual operating
deficit. I am asking about the national debt.
Secretary Lew. The debt as a percentage of GDP has
stabilized for this period of time. We have made enormous
progress. It was climbing and it is has stabilized.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Mr. Secretary, last month you referred to
a proposed amendment to combat currency manipulation in the
Trans-Pacific Partnership as a poison pill. But also last
month, the President said he was opening new efforts to combat
currency manipulation abroad.
Can you describe what efforts or what ideas the
Administration might have, what the role of the Treasury would
be, and whether you think they could be effective?
Secretary Lew. Sure. The President and I personally take
this extremely seriously. We put in enormous effort through our
multilateral and bilateral engagements to use the tools we
have. And we have had considerable success. We have helped push
China into a different policy and Japan into a different
policy. So I think we are using the tools, and we are using the
tools well.
In the trade legislation that is moving through Congress,
there are additional tools. One is that there is a negotiating
instruction that says in TPP currency issues are a high
priority. And we are working with our TPP negotiating partners
to arrive at agreements that will give us more visibility and
more ability to use the consultative process and the public
disclosure to get them to do the right thing.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. But can you identify the ideas the
Administration was referring to last month?
Secretary Lew. And then I was going to say there is an
amendment that we support that Senator Hatch and Senator Bennet
put in, in the Senate, which puts new tools in place, which
requires that we do an evaluation based on objective criteria
as to whether or not countries are violating what we would
consider fair currency practices. If they are in violation, it
puts us in a position where there are several new tools,
including not being able to be in trade negotiations with
countries that are violating. So I think we have important new
tools in the trade law.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. I want to get a question on Treasury's
budget. The President identifies the budget as a compilation of
our Nation's priorities. FinCEN and the Office of Terrorism and
Financial Intelligence (OTFI) have been relatively flat-funded.
Congress has met, probably even exceeded the President's
request, specifically on FinCEN. I want to say that the
organizations within the Department of the Treasury do an
outstanding job with the resources that they have.
Secretary Lew. Thank you.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. But we see terror growing, the challenges
globally every single day, new organizations coming to light
every single month. What can you tell us about--
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I couldn't be prouder of our
offices that work on threats.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Do they have sufficient resources?
Secretary Lew. They do have sufficient resources, and they
punch way above their weight. But if we thought we needed more
resources to do the job, we would ask for them.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Massachusetts,
Mr. Lynch.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, I think you are doing a great job, Mr.
Secretary. And I know we had a disagreement last week on TPA,
but never in my time knowing you have I ever heard you address
Congress or the American people with disdain. That is something
not in your makeup or character.
Secretary Lew. Reverence would be more like it.
Mr. Lynch. That is right. And a desire to serve. So I
appreciate that. You are a good man. We don't always agree, but
I honestly believe you have the best interests of the American
people at heart, and the Administration is lucky to have you.
I want to focus on a situation here. When a bank is
convicted of a felony or a bank pleads guilty to a felony, we
have laws in place. Congress has put forth some laws that say,
when they are guilty of these crimes, we remove some privileges
that they have.
One of those privileges that they have is that of a well-
known seasoned issuer (WKSI). And so we had a recent bout of
guilty pleas by big banks, both in connection with LIBOR and
also with the FX manipulation of dollar-euro exchange rates.
Normally those banks should be penalized by removing that
WKSI designation, which allows them off-the-shelf registration
and other privileges. But what has happened is that--I believe
Labor Secretary Perez is the one who grants these waivers--I
will give you a for-instance. In the latest round of SEC
waivers, Barclays just received their third WKSI waiver since
2007. Citigroup has triggered a disqualification 5 times in the
last 9 years, and every single time we give them a waiver. We
don't penalize them. So there is no difference in how they
operate, because we give them a waiver after they plead guilty.
UBS just received a seventh WKSI waiver since 2008. So they
broke the law, criminal conviction, all pled guilty. JPMorgan
Chase received its sixth WKSI waiver since 2008. And the Royal
Bank of Scotland received its third WKSI waiver since 2013.
And UBS, going back to UBS, their last WKSI waiver occurred
while they were still under a nonprosecution agreement from
LIBOR. So they immediately failed.
So the penalties that Congress has put in place don't
happen because the SEC has given them waivers. And I am just
wondering if giving these waivers continually and not punishing
these banks is a moral hazard, is causing them to behave just
as they always have been, because it seems that way to me.
Secretary Lew. Congressman, let me start by saying I think
we have made clear as an Administration that no individual and
no firm is above the law, and we will prosecute and we will
enforce regardless of who has broken the law.
Secondly, the violations of law that are behind these
actions are very serious. They get to the heart of the
integrity of our system, things like tax fraud, things like
terrorist financing facilitation.
I think that if you look at the prosecutions, if you look
at the settlements, the numbers have been very large, and there
is no question but that firms are being held accountable.
Mr. Lynch. But the penalty falls on the shareholders. The
penalty doesn't go to any of the individuals who were involved
here, and these banks continue to operate. Yes, you are right,
there was $2.5 billion in fines, but they just keep on doing
what they have been doing. And I have people in my district who
are convicted of far smaller crimes, and they do serious time.
Is there another set of penalties that we could put in
there that you would actually agree to enforce?
Secretary Lew. If I could answer your first question, then
I will come back and answer that last question.
I think if you look at the approach the prosecutors have
taken, they have wanted to make sure they could hold
accountable financial institutions and the individuals in them
and not have unintended consequences that they can't control.
Mr. Lynch. But these are intended consequences. That is my
point. We intended them to be penalized, and they are not.
Secretary Lew. And I would leave it to the regulators to
decide the right way to respond. But prosecutors need to know
that they are not going to create an unintended consequence.
Mr. Lynch. No, that is not the point here.
Secretary Lew. I think on your last question, there are a
lot of things we could look at in terms of what the practices
within the industry are and how you hold individuals
accountable that are worthy of consideration.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Neugebauer, chairman of our Financial Institutions
Subcommittee.
Mr. Neugebauer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Lew, it is good to have you back. I want to
refresh your memory a little bit. Back in March, you and I had
a conversation a little bit about U.S. regional banks and
whether or not they were a systemic risk. And you and I also
discussed a little bit, the OFR report in February where they
used, I think, five of the Basel standards to analyze a number
of banks.
And if you recall, that analysis showed that $50 billion
banks were not a systemic risk. In fact, it went pretty far up
the asset chain before it reached a point where they felt like
those financial institutions were a systemic risk. Yet, Dodd-
Frank says that the trigger is $50 billion.
And so I guess my question to you is, as the Chairman of
FSOC, is the framework of Basel in conflict with Dodd-Frank?
Secretary Lew. I don't think it is a question of in
conflict. The question is, do banks of all size pose the same
risk and require the same exact treatment? The answer is no.
And we have been very careful in designing rules to try and
distinguish different levels of treatment for different firms
of different size.
That doesn't mean we have it perfect. There certainly is an
openness to looking at issues there. But I have to say that the
debate recently has taken on a kind of odd character. There has
been discussion of exempting banks of $500 billion or less.
Do you know how many banks there are that are between $500
billion and the biggest banks? There are six banks, the largest
financial institutions in the country and the world. So we have
to be careful not to ask questions as if a $2 billion bank is
it like a $50 billion bank, or a $50 billion is it like a $500
billion bank.
I would be happy to have this conversation. We are open to
ideas of how to tier the treatment appropriately.
Mr. Neugebauer. And I guess that kind of leads me into the
other discussion that you and I had, and that was about Section
115. I think one of the things is that when Dodd-Frank was
passed, it was passed in a pretty hurried manner and not in a
very transparent manner, but somebody just picked $50 billion.
But then in Section 115 they said, you know what, you all can
establish--it gives you the latitude to establish a different
trigger or trigger mechanism if you choose to.
And I think, if I go back and look at our conversation, you
said that you all had not formally looked into it. You
mentioned that you had informally looked into it. But there is,
in fact, a process where there can be a formal process where
Treasury could go through that process and recommend to FSOC to
change that. And I am a little confused.
Secretary Lew. There could be a formal process. But I think
if you look, there are a number of regulators taking a look at
this issue to see what they can do with their regulatory
flexibility. And I think it is a question of when you raise it
to the level of a formal review.
I will give you an example of the kind of issue that we
have looked at, the frequency of the examination cycle. There
is a reasonable case that the frequency should be different for
a small institution and a very large institution. So there are
ideas here that could be pursued.
The fact that it is not a formal Section 115 review doesn't
mean that people aren't asking these questions. If you look
within the regulatory bodies, they are looking at them, and we
are obviously looking across the landscape.
Mr. Neugebauer. Mr. Secretary, I think it is important to
get their input, but the truth of the matter is that under
Section 115, those other regulators do not have that authority.
Section 115 authority resides in the Secretary of the Treasury,
and last I checked, that is you.
I think it is kind of a little confusing here, that we have
one entity, OFR, using these Basel standards, saying this is
what the world looks like from a systemic risk standpoint, and
then we have Dodd-Frank. I think from a banking perspective, it
is a little confusing as to what standards should be in place.
And I think it is really kind of time for you to take on that
leadership role and exercise Section 115 and bring some
certainty to the marketplace.
Secretary Lew. I would be happy to continue this
conversation with you, Congressman. To be clear, OFR expresses
independent views. It doesn't express the views of the Treasury
or of FSOC. I am expressing my own views. And they won't always
be identical. You wouldn't want them to be identical with OFR,
because OFR was put in place to be an independent institution
expressing its own analytic view.
Mr. Neugebauer. I see my time has expired, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Lew, it is good to have you here. You are doing a
great job.
Secretary Lew. Thank you.
Mr. Scott. I want to keep the conversation for a moment on
liquidity. It is a very serious issue. I am very concerned
about it. A number of experts are registering great warnings
about it. Liquidity, to me, is the key to protecting our
financial system. It is also the key to being able to ascertain
potential risks to our system. It sort of like provides us with
a way to be able to not just look down the road for problems,
but see them before they turn that corner.
So I also realize, and I think you would agree, you too are
concerned about liquidity, correct?
Secretary Lew. I have said so, yes.
Mr. Scott. Yes. And so the issue becomes, will this
liquidity worsen as the economy worsens? And specifically, tell
me what if there were another crisis? We don't want another
crisis. After they finished the Depression, they said they
didn't want another crisis. But as surely as we have a free
enterprise system, it is free to go up, sideways, down,
whatever.
So if we had another crisis, would the financial system, in
your opinion, have the liquidity to be able to come to the
assistance of our financial system the way it did in 2008 when
healthier institutions, it helped us a lot, they had the
liquidity, they were able to buy up institutions at IndyMac,
Washington Mutual, Countrywide, and Lehman Brothers, rather
than the government having to wind them down?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I think when we talk about
liquidity in the markets we are not talking about institutions
that merge or don't by other institutions or not. I think what
we are talking about is, is there a market for buying and
selling bonds in a quick way with stable prices?
So obviously the capital and the depth of the balance sheet
of institutions will affect, potentially, both questions. But I
think they are severable.
Let me make a couple of comments. One, I think that as we
came out of the financial crisis, there is undoubtedly going to
be some more volatility. When I started testifying as Treasury
Secretary everyone was concerned there was no volatility in the
market. Now there is a concern that there is volatility in the
market. It shouldn't be a surprise that as we see a return to a
more normal economy, there is more volatility.
I think that the institutions themselves are stronger than
they were going into the crisis. They have more of a capacity
to come through a period of economic stress in a healthy way,
and that is a good thing.
And I think in our FSOC report, we look at the risks that
we see to the broad financial system, and we do include
liquidity on the list, but it is not the single factor that we
are looking at. And I think it is also going to separate the
different parts of the market, because Treasuries are very
different from high-risk bonds.
Mr. Scott. Let me ask you this other question. I don't have
much time. But do you believe that there is any link between
our anemic United States growth rate and the fact that our
financial institutions have to hold so much capital in reserve
rather than putting that capital back into the economic system
to good use?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I think that there is a lot of
money that is on the balance sheet of businesses they don't
even need to borrow to get access to. And yet, there is a more
fundamental question, why are they not investing more? I think
it has to do with a sense of confidence that they are looking
for that the continued economic growth will be strong.
Mr. Scott. But do you see a link? Is there a causal--
Secretary Lew. Yes. I don't think there is a lack of access
right now to capital that is the problem. I focused earlier on
things like housing and small business, because I think that is
where the questions are real as to whether individuals or small
businesses are having trouble accessing capital. Large firms
right now are not having trouble accessing capital.
Mr. Scott. Do you feel that these companies should have to
hold as much capital in reserve as they are, and is that
helping or damaging?
Secretary Lew. I think that the fact that our banks now
have the ability to see themselves through a difficult period
makes our system safer and sounder. They did not have the
capital, they had too much leverage, and we saw in the
financial crisis what the result was. We can't go back there.
Mr. Scott. All right. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Missouri, Mrs.
Wagner.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
There seems to be so much interest in this issue of
liquidity, so I just can't help myself. And perhaps I will ask
a question that will help put this to rest for all of us.
In going back to your March 2015 testimony, Secretary Lew,
on the issue of liquidity you said, and I quote: ``So I think
that this is something that requires a lot of analysis. We are
doing it. And I would be happy to share with you a more
complete analysis when we complete it.''
Now, this was March of 2015. I didn't get anything at 11:18
last night. What is the plan here?
Secretary Lew. As I have indicated earlier, our hope is
that in the next few weeks, that analysis of October 15th will
be completed, and we look forward to sharing it with the
committee. It has been a complicated analysis. It has required
a number of agencies working with very different bodies of
data, and I am very anxious to get it completed.
Mrs. Wagner. So within the next 3 weeks, we will receive--
Secretary Lew. I can't say 3 weeks; over the summer is the
schedule we are working on. I have been pressing people very
hard to finish it as soon as possible, and as soon as it is
finished, we will share it.
Mrs. Wagner. And you believe that will come this summer
then?
Secretary Lew. That is the schedule we are working on, yes.
Mrs. Wagner. And that should answer all our questions about
the importance of liquidity or lack thereof?
Secretary Lew. No, I wouldn't say that any single analysis
will answer all the questions. It will help us understand
October 15th much better. And in the FSOC report, we noted that
there is a broad range of factors.
I must say that I have taken a lot of questions today which
want me to comment on regulation. In the FSOC report we added
regulation to the list of things that we need to look at. So we
are open to looking at all the causes. I identified the things
that I am confident are things that we need to be looking at.
Mrs. Wagner. I have several more questions here. We look
forward to your report this summer.
To date, FSOC has designated four nonbank financial
companies as systemically important financial institutions, or
SIFI, essentially signaling to market participants that the
government considers them too-big-to-fail. As a result,
Richmond Fed President Jeffrey Lacker stated that shareholders
and creditors of those firms can't expect the government to
shield them from losses during periods of distress, ultimately
putting the taxpayer on the hook for a future potential
bailout.
For that reason, I am interested--and I think others on
this committee also have mentioned this today--in how these
companies can ultimately de-risk and shed their designation
status from FSOC and remove the implicit government support
that such a designation carries with it, knowing that the
primary goal for FSOC is to reduce risk in the financial
system. I think that you also would share that sentiment.
I know that Senator Mark Warner has told you before that
there was never any intention of creating a ``Hotel
California,'' I believe were his words, with the designation
process where you were able to check out any time you like but
never leave.
Secretary Lew, in the absence of any practical guidance
from FSOC on how to exit SIFI designation, is it really
possible for designated firms to know what they are supposed to
do to reduce systemic risk?
Secretary Lew. Yes, Congresswoman. I think that the process
is clear, that we review the designations annually. If the
business of the designated company has changed and it no longer
presents risk, they know what the risks are, we have identified
the risks very clearly. And right now, it has been in the news
that GE Capital has changed its business plans for reasons that
have nothing, I believe, to do with the SIFI designation, but
that will cause there to be a review, and we will have to see
whether that changes their character.
So we are open to, if firms change their structure, if they
change their business--
Mrs. Wagner. They specifically, though, know how they can
reduce risk, have you have given them guidance on this, how to
change their business model, their structure?
Secretary Lew. They know what it is about their business
that created the designation in the first place. They know what
the transmission mechanisms are.
Mrs. Wagner. Do they know from you specifically?
Secretary Lew. There is a very long analysis that goes to
the companies when they are designated that identifies for them
the basis of determining the risk. If the basis, then,
changes--
Mrs. Wagner. So you have a list--because I have limited
time here--of specific information on what firms can do to
remove this designation?
Secretary Lew. It is not a question of take steps A, B, and
C. It is a question of what are the risk factors, and if they
no longer present those risk factors.
Mrs. Wagner. So you don't have a list of how these--
Secretary Lew. The risk factors are quite clear.
Mrs. Wagner. The risk factors are quite clear to whom?
Secretary Lew. To the firms that are designated. They
understand what it is.
Mrs. Wagner. Have you provided them with those risk
factors?
Secretary Lew. Yes. It is in the analysis that is available
to the public.
Mrs. Wagner. I have run out of time, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentlelady has
expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding these
hearings. I hope that we get the other members of FSOC to also
testify. ``Chairman'' is a lofty position, but if you were to
interview the chairman of this committee, I am not sure you
would get the views that would reflect every member. And I am
glad that Secretary Lew is here, but I look forward to hearing
from the others.
You have litigation on whether, I guess, it is MetLife,
perhaps Prudential, is a SIFI. You have filed your reasons to
dismiss their lawsuit under seal. You are the client. This is a
document filed on your behalf. Could you just put it on your
website, because it is of public policy interest, of course
redacting any proprietary information about the individual
company? Why would the reasons for arguing the dismissal of the
lawsuit be under seal?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, obviously it is a matter under
litigation. I am not going to comment on the substance or the
process of pending litigation. We have tried in all of the
designations to be as transparent as we can be while protecting
legitimate commercial information that we need to protect.
Mr. Sherman. I would hope that you would make that document
available for members of this committee since it is a public
policy document as much as anything.
Lehman Brothers didn't go under because it had too many
assets. It went under because it had too many liabilities,
particularly contingent liabilities. And I am confused as to
how there is discussion of mutual funds being listed as SIFIs.
Now, obviously if the markets dropped by thousands of
points, that is terrible for the economy. It is terrible for
me, because I have my individual accounts. It would be just as
terrible if that same money was in a mutual fund.
Why would an unleveraged mutual fund be classified with a
SIFI knowing that it has no liabilities?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, in a review of asset managers
we have made the judgment that the area that we need to spend
considerable time on is looking at activities that asset
managers engage in and whether or not there is risk associated
with those activities. We haven't completed the review yet, so
I am not in a position to--
Mr. Sherman. Are you looking at whether the asset
management company would go bankrupt, whether the mutual fund
would go bankrupt, or whether the economy would suffer not
because the SIFI wasn't able to pay its liabilities, but rather
because a big company was doing this or that in the stock
market?
Secretary Lew. Ultimately, the questions of looking at
financial stability involve looking at what the losses would be
to creditors and associated businesses, not so much of an issue
here, what the run risk would mean in terms of the potential
spread to the economy and markets, whether or not it locks up
access to one or another kind of essential services.
We are looking not just at firms. We are looking at
activities to see whether--
Mr. Sherman. So an entity could be designated as SIFI not
because their inability to pay their liabilities would cause a
problem, but just because their activities cause a problem?
Secretary Lew. No. The question is, are there activities
within asset managers that if there were, under a stressed
situation, a series of bad events. These things don't happen in
good situations. They usually happen when there are a lot of
bad things going on.
Mr. Sherman. Okay. I want to go on.
Secretary Lew. And we have to understand, are there
activities in those asset management firms that present the
kinds of risks we need to be concerned about. I don't know the
answer to it. We have asked this question--
Mr. Sherman. I need to move on to another issue.
Secretary Lew. We have asked the question knowing that the
answer could be yes or no. So I don't sit here today with a
firm view.
Mr. Sherman. We are of course faced with this trade deal.
We are told that there are enforceable standards, but they are
usually enforceable only if the Executive Branch of our
government is willing to take action. With regard to China
currency manipulation, we passed a law requiring the Executive
Branch to do things. You explained to this committee last time
I asked you about it that, well, the law is really bad policy
and so will not be followed.
If the Executive Branch won't enforce U.S. laws because our
trading partners would find that offensive, it is difficult to
see how any provision of any trade agreement would be
enforceable if that enforcement required the Executive--
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr.
Lucas.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, it is good to see you again. In the working
order with which we work through members on this side, we have
worked through the subcommittee chairmen, we have worked
through the underclassmen who didn't have a chance to ask you
questions the last time, that is appropriate, and now you are
back to the old guys on the back row.
I share some of the concerns of my colleagues on both sides
of the aisle that there is a real problem with this liquidity
issue on the Financial Services Committee. And I find it seems
very hard to argue that this reduction of liquidity has nothing
to do with the cumulative impact of new rules and regulations
and the capital requirements.
And while we of course continue to work to improve the
safety and soundness in the system, it is just as important
that we don't lose sight of that big picture of course, that
aggregate impact of all these factors, and be ever mindful of
unintendedly creating risk and harming the ability of end users
to drive this economy and create growth.
I have a particular issue that I would like to focus on for
this moment, though, and that is on the leverage ratio rule as
it applies to the treatment of segregated margin. This is an
issue that increases costs for end users and impacts their
ability to hedge risks. And as you know, Congress required that
margin received from customers for clear derivatives belongs to
the customers and should remain segregated from the banks'
affiliated members' accounts.
However, under the leverage ratio rule, this client margin
is treated as something the bank can leverage and treated
punitively by requiring higher capital requirements for
clearing. If end users don't have the ability to hedge their
risk, more risk is introduced into the system, customers pay
more, and economic growth is harmed. And I think this is an
example of the leverage ratio rule and higher capital
requirements when applied, I believe, inappropriately, in my
opinion, where it actually harms liquidity and increases risk.
As a prudential regulator, can you tell me, why does the
rule treat customer margin as something the bank can hedge?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, the leverage rules apply to all
assets. It even applies to Treasuries and cash. So it is a very
inclusive rule. And I think it is reasonable to ask questions
as to whether or not there are unintended consequences. And
certainly you distinguish it, say, from the Volcker Rule. The
Volcker Rule exempted Treasuries. A lot of the questions I got
earlier were trying to tie liquidity to the Volcker Rule. The
Volcker Rule obviously doesn't affect Treasury holdings.
I would have to look at the specific issues related to the
margins.
Mr. Lucas. But I hope you agree it would seem to have the
effect, by requiring extra capital to cover these margin
accounts that are segregated, it would have the net effect of
increasing the costs to the end users. I hope you see where I
am coming from on that.
Secretary Lew. Yes. Look, as I say, I haven't focused on
the margin issue. I have focused on the Treasury and the cash
issue. And I think if you go back to the purpose of the
leverage rule, it is a very solid objective, which is to make
sure institutions don't get overextended. And I think that what
the percentage is makes a big difference in terms of whether or
not it is the binding constraint or not.
Mr. Lucas. Segregating the money makes very good sense, and
I think we did the right thing there, but the net effect.
Let me ask you this then. Regulators have been focused on
removing risk from the banking system through the capital
requirements and the additional regulations such as the Volcker
Rule. Risk is going to exist somewhere within the system. If we
remove it from the banking system, Mr. Secretary, where does it
pop up next? If the banks can't play this role of playing a
market, somebody will. Will it be more of a danger to the
overall economy than, for instance, the banks?
Secretary Lew. I think it is an overstatement to say the
banks aren't playing that role. Banks are still doing their
core business. And even under the Volcker Rule, they are not
prohibited from market making and holding inventory for market
making.
You are asking a question that I am asking as well, with
the evolution of the markets, are there questions of financial
stability that we need to ask that are different? So you look
at some of the newer players in the market, where the volume of
trading is, I think it does raise questions, both about the
kind of plumbing of the system, but also about implications on
liquidity.
Mr. Lucas. Historically, the banks in making these markets,
it would seem to me, historically have had a perspective of
evening things out, consistency, stability being boring. But
the entities who are winding up taking their place have
historically made their money off of volatility. If we take it
away from the people who like to take the wave out, yet give it
to people who have made and make more the more intense the
waves, it just doesn't seem logical.
Secretary Lew. I think one can overstate the tradition of
banks doing things that weren't in their economic interest to
maintain markets. But clearly having inventory has been real.
I also think that if you look at what the definition of
liquidity is, it may not be reasonable to think that there
should be no price fluctuation even if there are dramatic
things going on.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Cleaver, ranking member of our Housing and Insurance
Subcommittee.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, thank you for being here.
We are moving toward the fifth anniversary of the passage
of Dodd-Frank. Many of us were here during those turbulent and
troublesome days, and we know that great care was taken in
dealing with the creation of this Act. And we think that we
made significant progress. And I think you, apparently, agree
with us as well, that we have made tremendous progress. And
regulators have moved toward implementation. Some of the
rulemaking I agree with, some of it I, along with my
colleagues, have challenged. But overall, we have made great
progress.
But when you think about Dodd-Frank as a whole, what do you
think is the most significant thing left undone? What would you
want to see right now completed so that we would have the full
strength of Dodd-Frank at work preventing another collapse?
Secretary Lew. That is a very good question. Obviously
there are pieces that need to be completed, and that is not
really what you are asking. You are asking, what is the kind of
area that we haven't addressed?
Mr. Cleaver. Yes.
Secretary Lew. I would have to say GSE reform is the area
we haven't addressed. And it would be a good thing if we would.
I am not sitting here today optimistic that is going to happen
legislatively. But it is why we engaged so much in the Senate
in the bipartisan discussion to try and work through an
approach to GSE reform.
Mr. Cleaver. Mel Watt, who was a member of this committee--
you mentioned the GSE reform and Mel Watt, of course, is now
over at FHFA and doing a great job. Some of the work he is
doing is going to help in some of the housing needs we have
with money put into the Housing Trust Fund. But one of the
things that you might be able to help me with is what do we do
to enable private money to move back into the market?
Secretary Lew. To back mortgages, you mean?
Mr. Cleaver. Yes.
Secretary Lew. I think there have been some small steps
taken, but there needs to be an active effort to look at what
can we do to have a more active private securitization
industry. The notion that most mortgages are backed by either
FHA or a GSE that is backed by the Federal Government is not a
great place for the industry and that part of the market to be,
which is why I said GSE reform, which is a path towards an
active private marketplace.
The experiments that I think have been useful have been
things like putting first-loss protection in place apart from
the GSE. It has been small. But we have seen that there are
ideas there that you can insulate the public from the first
risk and start to bring private money back into place. That can
be through mortgage insurance. It can be through capital market
products. I think more thought has to be put into that area to
develop it further.
Mr. Cleaver. But you do believe that there is a need for a
secondary market?
Secretary Lew. I'm sorry?
Mr. Cleaver. You do believe that we do need a secondary--
Secretary Lew. Yes. I think it would be good if there were
more private, nongovernmentally backed.
Mr. Cleaver. So the GSEs would be a hybrid?
Secretary Lew. Yes. Or they would have competitors.
Mr. Cleaver. I think in this committee there is some
suggestion from time to time that the GSEs are not even needed.
And one of the things that I am wondering about, when some
prefer that it be completely private, is whether you believe
the private market has an appetite to fully either take over
or, what I would prefer, reenter the market.
Secretary Lew. Look, I think right now the structure of our
mortgage industry makes the continued operation of Fannie and
Freddie necessary. The idea behind GSE reform was to be able to
chart a path where there would be a different kind of
marketplace in the future. So we live in the present, we live
in a world with FHA and Fannie and Freddie, and we have to try
to make that world better absent legislation.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Royce, chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee.
Mr. Royce. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And for the record, Mr. Secretary, one of my colleagues
earlier asked if the GSEs have repaid the money that they have
borrowed from the American taxpayer. The simple answer that my
colleague tried to elicit, I think, was that the payments they
have made to the government now exceed the rescue funds they
received.
Mr. Secretary, I think you agree here this is not the real
answer nor the real question. The real question is, have they
repaid their debt to the American taxpayers?
And for that answer, I think we can go to the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York that was asked that question. And they
put it this way. They said, ``Should these figures be
interpreted to mean that the Treasury, and therefore the
taxpayers, have been `repaid' by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac,
and that the two firms should now pay dividends to their
regular shareholders again? The answer to that is no.''
The New York Fed said that taxpayers are entitled to a
substantial risk premium, government support has lowered
funding costs and boosted profits, and the government has never
collected the commitment fee that the government is owed from
Fannie and Freddie.
So the false scenario that is perpetuated is that taxpayers
have been repaid, it is time to end conservatorship and return
the GSEs to control of the shareholders. From your comment
earlier, I assume you disagree with this narrative and agree
with the conclusion of the New York Fed that failing to work to
wind down the GSEs and give space for private capital to come
in would be a colossal missed opportunity to put the U.S.
residential mortgage finance market on a more stable long-term
footing?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I totally agree, and I was
trying to indicate in my response earlier that the risk is
being borne by taxpayers on an ongoing basis and the
conservatorship is not over.
I would only add one additional thing to what I said
earlier, which is that the damage done to our economy by the
housing crisis was far more than the simple amount of money
that was put into the GSEs. And I think Americans are still
healing from the pain of that financial crisis.
So I think that the right thing is to do GSE reform and to
get on to a new restructured system, but it is not the right
time to be talking about ending the conservatorship or paying
dividends.
Mr. Royce. And I think we can move forward together on that
GSE reform concept. I have publicly endorsed reforms that would
increase private sector participation in the secondary housing
market, that would decrease taxpayer exposure to future losses,
and that would limit disruption to the housing market.
But I think, if you look at the particulars, more risk
sharing is something that can be done to create a lot of space
here. A common securitization platform is something that works
for the GSEs and then brings in private capital to use that
platform. A common residential mortgage-backed security would
be a good start for Congress, I think, to pass this year. If I
could have your thoughts on that?
Secretary Lew. Look, I think the items that you just
mentioned are the kinds of things we have been talking about
and thinking about. Obviously, there is a common security
platform being built. It is something that could be expanded
beyond the GSEs and be available more broadly. I think the more
we are able to lay a foundation that a private securitization
market can be built on, the better off we would be.
Mr. Royce. If I have a minute here, I am going to quickly
push--Last week, the Treasury Department announced its
deliverables for the upcoming Strategic and Economic Dialogue
with China. One of the issues a few years back was that
ownership caps were raised there from 33 to 49 percent. But
this is largely symbolic because it doesn't really provide
further benefit to firms operating in China. When Chinese
institutions invest in the United States, they face no
ownership cap or activity restrictions. And this is just one of
many impediments that our financial services firms face when
operating there.
I did want to raise that issue with you. And also, I raised
with you earlier that on this technology restriction, we have
China agreeing to delay implementing a certain restriction on
its draft antiterror laws that would require foreign companies
to hand over their encryption keys. Clearly, our banks and our
financial services firms, technology firms, cannot operate
under those conditions in China.
Recently, we were in Shanghai, and they were pushing that.
It is still on the third reading. The peoples' Congress has
adjourned until next year, but that still hangs out there. And
so, we need to have greater pushback.
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I agree with you totally. I
have pushed back with China's most senior leaders on this issue
and have made it clear to them that it is a very significant
issue here and it is something that in the context of both the
S&ED and the leaders meeting we need to see movement on.
Mr. Royce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Wisconsin, Ms.
Moore, ranking member of our Monetary Policy and Trade
Subcommittee.
Ms. Moore. Thank you so much for joining us today,
Secretary Lew.
I can't resist asking some questions about liquidity as
well, since that has come up several times, but I want to take
a different approach, as opposed to the required capital
standards. In your testimony you mentioned that it has been a
year now since we have floated the NAV for institutional
investors, and at least your executive summary was not very
descriptive of how that has been working.
I am wondering if we have seen less use or about the same
of assets which are typically a little bit more liquid than
other investments in the money market mutual fund space?
Secretary Lew. Congresswoman, first, I don't believe the
rules are effective yet. They were put in financial form with a
future effective date.
I think we have seen a continued reduction in the reliance
on short-term wholesale funding, which is a good thing, but we
still have very large amounts of investment in money market
funds. And we saw in the financial crisis that there was run
risk there, and the reason that the rules were put in place by
the SEC was to create a safer path forward.
I certainly will keep an eye on that as it is implemented
to make sure it works as designed. But we have made clear that
we have to keep attentive to whether or not they are sufficient
or whether there is a need for additional policy.
Ms. Moore. But it would not be a good thing if we were to
close down or essentially shut down the money market mutual
fund--
Secretary Lew. No.
Ms. Moore. --or stagnate it in some way, prevent those
institutional investors from having that liquidity. That would
be something you would be watching out for?
Secretary Lew. Right. The problem is the connection between
the money market funds and the rest of the financial system.
What we saw during the financial crisis was that the risk of
money market investors, institutional investors, leaving,
selling their position, was creating the risk that the
overnight funding that the largest financial institutions
relied on would evaporate. And that could have caused the
entire implosion of major financial institutions.
We are in a much better place because there is less
reliance on wholesale funding, and we now have rules in place
to try and make it safer.
Ms. Moore. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
You mentioned also that the threat of migration of
servicing from banks from nonbanks, such as the recently
announced algorithmic lending that Goldman Sachs, for example,
wants to do, really demonstrates there is a change in market
structure, that there is more risk-taking incentive.
I am wondering, in that context, how nonbank SIFIs--do you
think it is more important to focus on a few industries, fewer
institutions? Or what do you see? Do you see an expanded role
for the FSOC given the change in the market structure?
Secretary Lew. Look, I think that we have tried to be very
careful and analytic in the approach and not to overreach and
go into spaces that we don't need to be in or belong in. The
institutions that have been identified are market utilities
that have crosscutting exposures, and the largest kinds of
firms that are nonbank firms, where the determination was made
that the risk is there.
So it is not that we are looking to regulate more firms for
the sake of regulating more firms. We are going to continue to
go through the criteria, and we are obviously getting to
smaller firms as we get down the list.
Ms. Moore. Thank you, Secretary Lew.
I was stunned at some of your comments to Mr. Cleaver about
GSE reform, and also your declaration in your testimony that
negative equity has declined. That hasn't been my experience at
all. And I think homeowners are in a lurch after this
recession, a lot of housing in my district is deteriorating
because you can't lend for needed improvements in the home, I
mean, basic things like roofs, plumbing, and so on. I think we
need some sort of product.
I only have 10 seconds. I guess I just want to get your
insight about help for the homeowner in this environment.
Secretary Lew. I would be happy to follow up. I don't have
the time now. But I have tried in a few instances to express
the concern that creditworthy borrowers should have access to
the market, and there are a number of things that we are
looking at in that regard.
Chairman Hensarling.The time of the gentlelady has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Posey.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, in October of 2013, the online publication
RepealFATCA.com submitted a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
request for documents concerning the intergovernmental
agreements with the United Kingdom, Switzerland, and Canada.
The Department promptly acknowledged the request, and on
October 24, 2013, stated that, ``Expedited treatment has been
approved.'' It is a letter from your agency. However, since
then there has been no response from the Department despite
repeated follow-up inquiries from the requester.
On January 27th of this year, 15 months after the initial
request, I sent you a letter asking for prompt action on the
request and to keep me informed on the response that would be
forthcoming. Despite additional inquiries, the only answer I
have received so far is, ``We are working on it.''
It has now been 20 months, almost 2 years since their
simple initial request under the Freedom of Information Act,
and 5 months since my letter inquiring about the status of that
request. Is this the Treasury standard for expedited treatment?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, in general our performance on
FOIA is better than that. I am not familiar with this specific
matter. I am happy to look into it.
Mr. Posey. It is just hard to believe that there is some
reason that the Department is stonewalling that one.
Secretary Lew. I will have to look into the matter and get
back to you.
Mr. Posey. On another matter, I would like to bring to your
attention that the Fiscal Year 2012 Financial Services
appropriations bill included report language directing the
Secretary of the Treasury to submit a report to Congress
regarding the potential risks to the U.S. financial markets and
economy posed by financial terrorism and economic warfare.
I subsequently met with Treasury Assistant Secretary
Fitzpayne in August of 2012 and was told that the Treasury
would work on that. The report language also included in Fiscal
Year 2013 and 2014 appropriations bills.
In July of 2013, my staff sent nearly a half-dozen emails
to the appropriate Treasury staffer for a status update, but
those emails went unanswered. Finally, in the Fiscal Year 2015
CR/Omnibus bill that became public law, the actual bill
language was included to the same effect.
``The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the
appropriate agencies, departments, bureaus, and commissions
that have expertise in terrorism and complex financial
institutions, shall provide a report to the Committees on
Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate,
the Committee on Financial Services of the House of
Representatives, and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and
Urban Affairs of the Senate not later than 90 days after the
date of enactment of this act on economic warfare and financial
terrorism.''
Obviously, Congress felt the issue was important enough
that it has included language in an appropriations bill dating
back as far as Fiscal Year 2012. However, it is apparent the
Department isn't giving this matter the same attention. I was
hoping you could provide us with some information about your
progress on the report.
As the Secretary provided his report to the relevant
committees in Congress, given the Department has had knowledge
of this issue for over 3 years, I would have thought the
Department would have prepared to meet that 90-day threshold
set by Congress. And so ultimately the question is, when can we
expect the report?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I will have to check on the
report.
But in the area of economic warfare and terrorism, there is
no agency in any government in the world that does a more
effective job than Treasury, and I am happy to defend the
record that we have here. We really are the global leaders in
making progress in this area. And I think it is an area of
great bipartisan consensus and we looking forward to working
together.
Mr. Posey. Just doing the report as the law requires would
be a great way to kind of boast or toast what you are doing.
Secretary Lew. I will check on the report. I am quite
familiar with what we are doing. It takes a great deal of my
attention and the world's attention. The report I will have to
check on.
Mr. Posey. So, will you have someone get moving in the next
week on these two issues about the FOIA request so we don't
have to wait another 2 years for that one?
Secretary Lew. We will get back to you.
Mr. Posey. And let me know the status of this report within
the next week, would that be asking too much?
Secretary Lew. We will get back to you.
Mr. Posey. I heard you say ``yes'' a little while ago to
somebody on the other side. I was just hoping we could maybe
get the word ``yes'' twice in one meeting in the 3 hours. But
can we expect that maybe in a week?
Secretary Lew. I don't know what the status of the issues
are. We will get back to you promptly.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Green, ranking member of our Oversight and Investigations
Subcommittee.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank the ranking
member. Of course, I also thank the witness for appearing
today.
Mr. Secretary, in your annual report you cite some concerns
about cybersecurity. Ironically, yesterday the Subcommittee on
Oversight and Investigations held a hearing on cybersecurity
styled, ``A Global Perspective on Cyber Threats.'' One of the
things that I took away from this hearing is that there appears
to be clear and convincing evidence that cyber threats and
attacks pose a clear and present danger to our financial
system.
And I am pleased to see that you have addressed this, and
you need additional assistance pursuant to what I am reading.
You indicate that you would like for Congress to provide the
financial regulators with the authority to oversee third-party
vendors. And I believe I have some sense of why, but I think
that the record should reflect your thoughts on why this is so
important.
Secretary Lew. Congressman, this issue of cybersecurity is
obviously a relatively new issue, but it has gone right to the
top of the worry list and priority list that we have, and as I
talk to CEOs, it is the top issue that many of them have. The
challenges are many. It is hard to protect a system, it is hard
to have individuals in the system operate in a way that makes
it as safe as possible.
I think the financial sector is actually at the lead and we
have a lot of work to do in the financial sector. There are
many other areas where the exposure is even greater and some of
them overlap. I mentioned earlier the connection between
utilities and financial up here. Power and phones are not
there, it is very hard to run a modern financial institution.
I think that it is very much in the mind of both the
regulators and the industry, and the more tools we have to work
together, the more tools there are for them to work
collaboratively and to share information and best practices,
the more likely we are to be successful. A threat that shows up
in one place, if you know about it, you can then look for it as
opposed to being blindsided by it.
And we are making progress. There is much better sharing of
information than there was. But I wouldn't suggest that we are
ultimately where we need to go. And I think the passage of
legislation to enable the greater sharing of information would
be very helpful.
Mr. Green. I want to concur with you. The witnesses who
appeared yesterday all indicated, I believe, that you are at
the top of the game as it were, that you are doing better than
most.
Secretary Lew. I don't take much comfort in that, though.
Mr. Green. They didn't say that we have absolute security
and I understand this. My concerns have to do with the need for
authority. What would you have us do immediately to give you
this authority? I know that it is in broad terms here. Are
there some specifics that you can call to our attention?
Secretary Lew. The cybersecurity legislation that is
pending would take down some of the barriers for sharing of
information and collaboration in the private sector. I think
getting that in place would be quite helpful.
We are doing things now on a voluntary basis where there
are risks that firms have to balance which would be very much
eased if the legislation were to pass. We have Executive Orders
that go as far as Executive Orders can.
I would be happy to follow up with you on more specific
issues in the financial space that could be helpful.
Mr. Green. Thank you.
And finally this: You have indicated that you believe that
you should be allowed to coordinate a national plan, as it
were, to deal with these responses to cyber threats, and you
would like to coordinate this with law enforcement, Homeland
Security, as well as regulators. How far along are we with this
concept of your having this opportunity to coordinate a
national plan?
Secretary Lew. Obviously, within the Federal Government, we
collaborate quite a lot, and DHS plays the lead on
cybersecurity. But I will tell you, in the financial space we
have a regular meeting amongst the agencies that work most
closely together and we are looking at what we can do to be
more prepared. And obviously, that gives us the ability to
reach out more effectively and develop a plan.
Mr. Green. Thank you for your service.
And I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from South Carolina,
Mr. Mulvaney.
Mr. Mulvaney. I thank the chairman.
Mr. Lew, in October 2013, you went to the Senate Finance
Committee and had a hearing concerning prioritization of
payments. And you told them at the time that, and I am quoting:
``The systems are automated to pay because for 224 years the
policy of Congress and every President has been to pay our
bills.'' You went on to say it wouldn't be easy to pay some
things and not others, they weren't designed that way, et
cetera.
And then in May of 2014, you gave this chairman a letter
saying something slightly different. You said, ``If the debt
limit were not raised and assuming Treasury had sufficient cash
on hand, the New York Fed systems would be technologically
capable of continuing to make principal and interest payments
while the Treasury was not making other kinds of payments.''
I will ask you, Mr. Lew, when did you come to learn the New
York Fed was technologically capable of making the payments you
set forth in your letter to the chairman of May 2014?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I don't remember the exact
date, but I can tell you the statement I made at the Senate in
October 2013 and the statement to this committee are entirely
consistent. What I said in October 2013 is that we make tens of
millions of payments and we don't have the capacity to pick and
choose amongst all of them.
I didn't address specifically the question of, is there the
technical capacity to pay principal and interest. I did
indicate to this committee that we do have the technical
capacity, but it would be a terrible thing to do because if you
chose to pay principal and interest, you would be defaulting on
something else. You would be defaulting on a Medicare payment
or on a veteran's payment or on something else.
The only solution is to raise the debt limit and to not put
any President in the position where they have to make the
decision, do they pay one thing but not another?
Mr. Mulvaney. Mr. Lew, that was a really good answer the
first three times I have asked it. I asked you that same
question, sir, in May of 2014, and you told me you would have
to check. When you came back before us in March of 2015, you
told me you had checked but you had forgotten it and you didn't
remember it on that day, but you would look into it again. I
sent you a set of written questions and asked you the exact
same question. I got two pages with no answer in them.
So I am not going to ask you any more questions, Mr. Lew. I
feel like I have given you enough chances to answer that
question. My question was very straightforward, when did you
know? It is an answer you should know. And if you don't know
it, you are right, you should go back and be able to look it
up. In fact, you told me one time you did go back and look it
up and you knew it at one point but you had forgotten it before
you got here.
Mr. Lynch asked you a question, sir, earlier today about
whether or not you felt like your answers to this committee
were disdainful, and you said that, no, you thought that they
were reverent. And I kept waiting for the laughter after that,
Mr. Lew.
I have asked you some really serious questions. We have
asked you some really serious questions. By the way, the other
questions I asked you, not the first time, go deeper. This not
an empty question, Mr. Lew, this is not a question that was
designed to just ``gotcha,'' to try and make you look bad so we
would get on television. That is not the point. We are
interested in answering the questions because of the market
turmoil that always raises its head as we come up against the
debt ceiling.
So in addition to the question I asked you about when you
knew, I also asked you, ``In the event we reach the debt limit
and exhaust extraordinary measures and Congress does not raise
the debt limit, can the Treasury Department continue to make
principal and interest payments on the debt, yes or no?'' You
didn't answer that. You have had, by the way, 6 months to
answer these questions.
I also went on and asked you, ``Will you commit that in the
event we reach the debt limit and exhaust extraordinary
measures and Congress does not raise the debt limit, the
Treasury will continue to make principal and interest payments
on the debt?'' You didn't answer that either.
What are we to infer from your refusal to answer now for a
year-and-a-half these types of questions, that the answers--no,
you had your chance. I did what very few people here did today;
I let you go until you stopped. In fact, I was going to even go
until I had a minute-and-a-half left. You had your chance. It
is my turn.
We are interested in asking these questions because we are
concerned about what happens in the markets. We would hope that
the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States would be
just as concerned. Your name is on the money, Mr. Lew. We have
given you the chance to calm the markets. You have refused to
do so. We have given you the chance to give this committee
information. You have refused to do so.
One implication is that you don't want us to know the
information we ask for because it is harmful to you or the
Administration. And the other implication that we are
completely within our rights to make is that the answers
regarding payments are not being given to us because you want
the chaos, because you think it is preferable to you and your
Administration, this Administration, to have the chaos, that it
will help you achieve politically what you want to achieve.
So I am done asking, Mr. Lew. All I will say is that when
the chaos comes, it will not be on the shoulders of the people
on this committee on either side of the aisle, it will be on
you, because you have had the chance to calm the markets and
refused to do so.
Secretary Lew. Mr. Chairman--
Mr. Mulvaney. No, sir. Not on my time.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Minnesota, Mr.
Ellison.
Mr. Ellison. I would like to thank the Chair and the
ranking member for the time.
And I would actually like to thank you, Mr. Secretary, for
answering some of the written questions that I gave you. I know
it is not easy to do that, you are busy doing a lot of things,
but you did give us some answers, and they were answers that we
can use. So I extend my thanks and appreciation for that.
As you know, Mr. Secretary, you are probably going to get a
question from me about Somalia. I know you are shocked. And
what I would like to just ask you is if you have any
information on the bill that we passed last year into law.
There was a bill that we passed last year that was called
the Money Remittances Improvement Act and the goal of the bill
was to improve oversight of State-licensed nondepository
financial institutions. Now that the law is in place, all well-
supervised entities like the money services business should
have their license status recognized and respected.
And I just want to know what you know. And if you don't
know anything, I understand, because I didn't tell you I was
going to ask you that. But if you do know, I would be happy to
get a report.
Secretary Lew. Congressman, thank you. As we have discussed
many times, this issue of remittances is a very important one,
and we are very concerned about the problems that families are
having in making payments.
We are working on the implementation of the legislation.
And I am happy to get back to you with a more detailed response
on the status of the implementation.
But we are more broadly working on this issue of how to
deal with remittances in Somalia.
Mr. Ellison. Right.
Secretary Lew. As I think you know, we are very involved
with the World Bank to develop solutions to the problem, and
that really means building up some capacity in the Somali
financial system.
Mr. Ellison. I agree.
Secretary Lew. Because right now there is not a real
financial system to engage with. We have had meetings at a very
senior level in Somalia, at the political level, at the central
bank level. And I know that our Under Secretary will be
traveling to your district to have some meetings on this issue.
Mr. Ellison. I appreciate that. And I just want to say
again that I am foursquare with the Administration's effort to
stop terrorist financing. I am on a task force to help achieve
that.
But on the other hand, we can get so successful at that
effort that we close off all the money, and that, I think,
would be unfortunate because it would actually serve the
interests of Al Shabaab and terrorists over there to see the
collapsing of the Somali economy which depends upon remittances
to the degree about 40 percent.
So I would like to talk with you more about the
implementation of that program. I know that you all are doing
some technical assistance to Somalia. I talk with political
leaders there and try to give them my best perspective on how
they can improve their system.
Could you talk a little bit about the work that you all are
doing in the technical assistance area and what sort of message
that you would like them to receive in order to develop that
solid banking system that I think they are going to need?
Secretary Lew. Right. There is not an easy answer to that
question. It is hard to exaggerate how little they are starting
with in terms of building a functioning financial system. And
the tragedy is that there are legitimate transactions, like
family remittances, that should be able to go forward, but it
is very hard to know that the money isn't going to go into
hands that will do real harm.
And trying to figure out how to build that system is why we
are working with the World Bank. We can't go into Somalia the
way we go into some countries, because of the security
conditions. So we have people come out of Somalia into other
countries for training. It is not the most efficient way to do
it. Our OTA people are great when they can go in and work with
people side by side. We just can't do that in Somalia. But we
are trying to do it offsite to help them build the skills.
It is a process. It is not something you can just kind of
hand over and have a functioning system. They are trying, we
are going to work with them, and we have to be creative in
finding the ways to start that building process.
Mr. Ellison. I just want to urge you on behalf of the
people who live in the Fifth Congressional District of
Minnesota and many other parts of this country.
We actually, me and Mr. Emmer, are going to start a Somali
caucus because we have constituents who live in both districts
and definitely want to see that country get stable and strong
and not be a haven or an attractive nuisance for bad people. So
we try do our good part, and we hope you will continue to push
with that technical assistance.
Secretary Lew. We will do so and we will continue to work
with you and try to find a solution to this.
Mr. Ellison. Thank you.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlemen from Tennessee, Mr.
Fincher.
Mr. Fincher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here today.
I am going to go back to an issue you and I talked about a
few months ago, liquidity. I know it has been a pretty hot
subject today. In recent comments from Larry Summers, former
Treasury Secretary under President Clinton, who later served as
adviser in the White House during the creation of Dodd-Frank,
he warned, ``Regulatory authorities have made a mistake when
they looked at each institution and they said, `You will be
safer if you withdraw from the markets a bit,' and then forgot
that if all institutions withdraw from the markets a bit, the
markets will be less liquid, the markets themselves will be
less safe, and that will in the end hurt all of the
institutions. I think there is a real issue there. Frankly, a
lot of the effort that is going into macro prudential should be
into making sure we have liquidity.''
What is your reaction to his comments about the role of the
regulations, not just Dodd-Frank, but layered capital and
liquidity mandates are having on fixed-income markets?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, as I have said in response to
several questions today, I think this liquidity issue requires
our very serious attention. I think there are a number of
factors that have been at work. It ranges from the point we are
at in the economic cycle and the volatility that is natural at
that point, to the emergence of new market mechanisms that are
different and present different risks, to the volume of
corporate bond issuance.
I have also said that we have our eye on whether or not
there are regulatory issues, it is in the FSOC report, that it
is one of the things we need to look at. So I am not
approaching this from the point of view that we know exactly
what it is. Frankly, I don't think anyone knows exactly what
the answer is.
Mr. Fincher. But you think it could be a possibility that
it could be overregulation?
Secretary Lew. But I think the factors that I described I
know are at work. I think that the question of regulation is
much more speculative. And I think people have jumped
prematurely to a conclusion about regulation which I think
would take our eye off of where the real risks lie.
Mr. Fincher. Would you say that we need more regulation?
Secretary Lew. Look, I think that we have come a long way
since the financial crisis. Our system is safer and sounder. We
have the ability for our institutions to withstand a bump in
the road that they didn't have before. That doesn't mean that
we should ever stop. We have to keep looking forward.
Mr. Fincher. So you think more is needed?
Secretary Lew. I didn't say more or less. You can't take 50
years between looking at these questions, that didn't turn out
so well. We need to keep our eye on the future, and we have to
be open to the possibility that there are multiple different
factors that are at the core of an issue.
And on something like liquidity, it is of fundamental
importance that we have a deep and liquid market here. You
still have to separate out Treasury markets from corporate
markets to high-risk markets. They are not all the same.
Liquidity issues aren't all the same.
Mr. Fincher. Let me follow up. Secretary Summers' comments
have been echoed by everyone from the Bank for International
Settlements, Mr. Ketchum at FINRA, SEC Chair White, CFTC
Commissioners Bowen and Giancarlo, and many overseas
regulators, such as Mark Carney at the Bank of England. We
talked about you issuing a data-driven analysis, and I think
you have said there is going to be a White Paper coming out.
Secretary Lew. Hopefully. Our goal is to get it this summer
and we will share it as soon as it is completed.
Mr. Fincher. Okay. It seems like every time we have a
hearing, we talk about the problems that we face and more
regulation. I know I am just going to differ with you, and I
know you haven't said.
Secretary Lew. I didn't say anything--
Mr. Fincher. I know. But it sounds like that you are
inclined to be for more regulation.
Secretary Lew. We have to be open to less also. I didn't
say more.
Mr. Fincher. There are you go, and that is good.
Secretary Lew. We have to be open to more or less.
Mr. Fincher. What seems to be happening is the more liquid
that is tied up in the markets, it is not the bigger
institutions that pay the price here, it is the small guys. It
is the guys back in States like Tennessee and Arkansas, Mr.
Hill, that end up paying, the folks at the bottom. And we need
to make sure that when something does happen, there is enough
liquidity available to take care of these issues.
So thank you, Mr. Lew.
And with that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman, which is rare,
the balance of my time.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Colorado, Mr.
Perlmutter.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary, for staying cool under the
withering cross-examination of my Republican colleagues.
So I just really have a different view than the chairman
and than Mr. Duffy, as to what is going on in the economy. We
might as well start with all the records being set by Dow
Jones, it is up from 6,500 at the end of George Bush to 18,000.
The S&P from about 700 to 2,100. The NASDAQ is 3 times what it
was. Foreclosures are down very low. There has been a
tremendous improvement across pretty much all sectors, from
manufacturing, to hotels, to whatever.
So when they are talking about calming the markets and you
are causing them to roil, I want to thank you for rebuilding
the markets from the recession that we were in at the end of
George Bush. I don't know if you have your report in front of
you, but there are some very important graphs that I would like
you to take a look at, if you have your report in front of you.
So let's take a look, just at easy ones, starting with
4.1.4. Under the Obama Administration, we see oil imports drop
and oil production increased like we haven't seen in decades.
Do you see that one?
Secretary Lew. I do.
Mr. Perlmutter. How about 4.1.6, civilian unemployment rate
dropping like a rock--this is on page 20 of the report--after
the 2007-2008 recession. Do you see that? All right.
But now let's talk about FSOC. So if you would turn forward
in your report to pages 62 and 63. I want to look at graphs
5.3.16 and 5.3.19. Do you see those?
Secretary Lew. Yes.
Mr. Perlmutter. So can you tell us what graph 5.3.16 is?
Secretary Lew. I have read the words. I am looking at some
of these graphs for the first time.
Mr. Perlmutter. All right. So let me tell you what it is
and then you can expand on it if you like.
As the recession took place starting in 2008, 2007-2008, we
saw loan loss reserves fall so that banks couldn't withstand
one more loss. But since FSOC was created in 2010, what do you
see in terms of the loan loss reserves? They have almost
tripled.
Secretary Lew. Yes. And we are seeing performing loans
doing better and we are seeing the foreclosure issue settle
down.
Mr. Perlmutter. Okay. Now let's look at the one that is
really quite telling, and that is 5.3.19, FDIC-insured failed
institutions. Do you see that?
Secretary Lew. Yes.
Mr. Perlmutter. And my friend the chairman was talking
about this recovery and why isn't it bigger, other than the
fact we have 13 million new jobs. We see pensions at an all-
time high. But under Republican Administrations, and I think
between 1980 and 1990 we had the Reagan Administration and the
first George Bush Administration, look at the number of failed
institutions. Do you see that?
Secretary Lew. I do.
Mr. Perlmutter. Okay. Then it falls off to virtually zero
under the Clinton Administration. There were almost no bank
failures. Do you see that?
Secretary Lew. Yes, sir.
Mr. Perlmutter. Then under the second George Bush we see a
tremendous spike in failed institutions. Do you see that? So
now, it has fallen off precipitously.
We are here to talk about the FSOC and about Dodd-Frank and
putting some structure back into the market so that we don't
have a failed banking system. Would you like to comment on
that?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I think that you have talked
about the improvement in the economy in a very compelling way.
Obviously, the graphs illustrate it, but so does the number of
people working every day.
I think that there is no doubt but that the steps we have
taken through Wall Street reform and FSOC have made our system
safer. We also have an economic recovery underway, which is why
everything is also getting better.
What I don't think we can do is kind of rest comfortably
that there is no problem out there to worry about, because what
will happen is we will get to the down point of a business
cycle, there will be stress on the system, and we owe it to the
American people to make sure we are in a position when times
get tough that we don't go back to the 2007-2008 kind of
situation. That is exactly what we are doing in FSOC.
Mr. Perlmutter. I completely agree with you, and that is
why you need the loan loss reserves, so that you can withstand
a downturn. That is why we take into consideration these
precautions.
Secretary Lew. It is why you need capital.
Mr. Perlmutter. If I were my Republican friends, I would be
grasping at this liquidity straw too, given the overall
recovery of the economy. But I want to thank you and I want to
thank the President for putting this economy back on track.
And I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Ross.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, it is a pleasure to have you here again.
I want to talk about the ultimate goal of FSOC. FSOC's goal
is to reduce risk in the market, is it not?
Secretary Lew. Yes, it is to reduce. It is to make sure
that we have financial stability always on our minds and we
reduce the risk of a financial crisis.
Mr. Ross. And financial stability could be accomplished
with the elimination of risk too, which I don't think that is
the ultimate goal, because without risk you have no return of
course.
Secretary Lew. No, no. It is why I focused on stability.
Mr. Ross. Thank you. And let's talk about stability,
because in gaining stability we need to make sure that our
institutions have a proper road map. And right now we have a
designation of a SIFI that leads to an institution now trying
to find out how they get out. And I give you credit for what
happened in February with some of the transparency rules that
you promulgated and an opportunity every 5 years to try to get
a decertification, if you will, of being a SIFI.
My concern is, why don't we have in place a road map, a
precautionary measure to prevent them from ever being
designated as a SIFI?
Secretary Lew. The process is not one where we assume that
everyone could be a SIFI. It is to go through the firms that
present themselves because of their size, complexity, and
structure.
Mr. Ross. True. True. But are we not focusing on more of a
treatment for the cure instead of giving the prevention of the
problem.
Secretary Lew. I think the reality is that no two firms
present themselves in an identical place. And the way we go
through the analysis looks at each firm and the risk that it
presents through a--
Mr. Ross. And it should be done--
Secretary Lew. --consistent set of questions.
Mr. Ross. It should be done that way. But, again, in a
proactive way, if these firms being looked at were given some
guidance to prevent them from ever going over the cliff, we
wouldn't have to have--
Secretary Lew. Right.
Mr. Ross. --the designation.
Let me move into something really quickly here on asset
managers, because I think asset managers are pretty important,
and I have some concerns about them being declared SIFIs.
For example, in Dodd-Frank, it says that some of the
criteria to include are leverage, the extent and nature of the
off-balance-sheet exposure of the companies, the amount and
types of liabilities of the company, including the degree of
reliance on short-term funding.
Let's talk about leverage. What is a leverage ratio that
you would consider to be worrisome? 30 to 1?
Secretary Lew. Yes, I don't want to give you a single
number. Obviously, the larger it is, the--
Mr. Ross. So smaller would be better.
Secretary Lew. Yes.
Mr. Ross. And knowing that, 5 to 1 may even be a little bit
of a concern.
Secretary Lew. And it depends on what the investments are
in.
Mr. Ross. Correct.
Secretary Lew. It is a combination of leverage and risk.
Mr. Ross. When asset managers will not--they won't have a
greater than 1\1/2\-to-1 risk--in fact, I think Vanguard has
1.04-to-1 risk, which is about almost minuscule--it would seem
to me that should be a consideration that would prevent them
from even being considered a SIFI. Would you agree?
Secretary Lew. It is certainly a factor that you would have
to consider. And we have made our focus for this last period of
time looking at the activities that contain the most risk,
because we don't--
Mr. Ross. But they don't really contain risk. Asset
managers don't contain risk. They are basically--they don't
even have any collateral as such to have risk.
Secretary Lew. First, asset managers have different
business models. Some of them are leveraged; some of them are
not leveraged.
Mr. Ross. But the leverage is very minuscule.
Let me just go into this, if I can. Once you are a SIFI,
then you become jointly and severally liable for all SIFIs, do
you not? If one fails, then everybody that is a SIFI bears the
brunt of that?
Secretary Lew. I am not sure what you mean by joint and
several. It--
Mr. Ross. The SIFIs themselves will bail out the SIFIs.
Secretary Lew. I am just--I am not sure what you are
referring to.
Mr. Ross. Okay.
Let me move on, then, to what the impact is if an asset
manager were to be deemed a SIFI. You, of course, realize the
cost of compliance, but, most importantly, asset managers deal
in mutual funds, they deal in 401(k)s, they deal in investments
that deal with people's retirements and pensions.
And there is a study out there by the American Action Forum
that indicated that the capital requirements necessary if an
asset manager was deemed a SIFI could raise the cost as much as
25 percent, that over the life of that program for the retiree
could be over $100,000.
Will that not be taken into consideration when trying to
determine whether or not they are a SIFI?
Secretary Lew. Obviously, those same retirees have an
interest in making sure that they have access to their savings
when they need them and that they--
Mr. Ross. But it is having a significant impact--
Secretary Lew. Yes. So--
Mr. Ross. --on the mom-and-pop--
Secretary Lew. --I don't start out with the presumption
that firms should be or shouldn't be designated. I think we
have to complete the analysis and come to a conclusion of what
risk factors we are looking at and if those risk factors
warrant any kind of action. So--
Mr. Ross. I agree with you. I just think it would be a good
preventive measure to do it in conjunction with the institution
so that they can prevent that risk from ever being taken--
Secretary Lew. Yes.
Mr. Ross. --and ultimately continue in a very stable
financial environment.
Secretary Lew. My sense is that the asset management
industry is very much offering its views as we go through this
process.
Mr. Ross. Very strongly. Yes, sir.
I see my time is up. I will yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from Maryland, Mr. Delaney.
Mr. Delaney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here.
I want to associate myself with the comments that
Congressman Ross just made, because I have a similar view on
asset managers, but I don't want to take up my time to talk
about that.
When I walked in, I thought I heard my colleague asking you
about the prioritization of our debts, but I might not have
heard that. And I know you weren't able to answer it, so I do
want to make a comment on that.
It seems to me that is a really misguided idea, because the
best credits in the world, which, obviously, we should view the
United States as certainly one of them, never prioritize their
debts. Right? Berkshire Hathaway, ExxonMobil, all these
terrific credits, all their debts are treated the same, and
they have great flexibility as a result, whereas weak credits
are forced by the market to prioritize their debt so that
people know exactly what they have and when they get it paid.
So it strikes me it would be a really misguided idea to
force the United States Government into a position where it was
somehow signaling to the world that we are weak credit. I don't
know if you agree with that. Very quickly, if you don't mind.
Secretary Lew. I couldn't agree more.
I think that the reality is the technical question of could
you pay principle and interest misses the point, which is that,
if you pick and choose what you pay, you are going to default
on something.
Mr. Delaney. Right. And you are going to present very
differently than the way we want the United States--
Secretary Lew. Even if you reach the conclusion that you
had to do that because it would be disastrous not to, it is a
terrible place to be because you are still in default.
Mr. Delaney. Right.
Secretary Lew. So the only thing that solves the issue is
to raise the debt limit.
Mr. Delaney. So the second question is about the liquidity
crisis, and I know you have talked about this a lot.
And it is interesting, when you think about the role of
banks, which have been very important to our economy for a long
period of time, which is why the government has supported them,
which is why we also try to regulate them in ways that make
sense, right now banks are not all that important when markets
are good. There are a lot of other alternatives for liquidity.
But they are really, really important when markets are bad
because there is no incentive for market-based participants to
really participate in markets when they are bad, other then if
they are kind of vulture investors and trying to get really
good deals.
And I do worry that what has happened with liquidity has
put these banks in a position that, if there were some kind of
a crisis, they wouldn't be able to respond as well. And I know
there are a lot of reasons why this liquidity data is emerging,
but it seems to me--and this is coming from someone who is
supportive of the regulatory response that we have had,
supportive of Dodd-Frank. I think all the things we did we
obviously had to do.
But it seems to me the notion of having very high minimum
liquidity standards for banks, coupled with not looking at
risk-weighted assets from a capital test and having this kind
of overlay where you still risk-weight assets but you need a
minimum amount of capital, which inevitably puts a lot of
capital against really low-risk-weight assets like Treasuries,
it seems to me those create very big incentives for banks not
to be liquidity providers in a crisis.
Do you agree with that assessment?
Secretary Lew. I think that the liquidity rules, the theory
behind them was you look at the overall exposure of the firm,
and they didn't make distinctions between different kinds of
assets.
I obviously think that Treasuries and cash have a degree of
safety that is different--
Mr. Delaney. Right.
Secretary Lew. --than almost any other asset in the world.
But that is a different approach than saying everything is
treated the same.
Mr. Delaney. Right.
Would you support changes to the regulatory framework that
actually eliminated disincentives for institutions to hold
Treasuries and cash so that they are actually in a position to
do their job in a crisis?
Secretary Lew. I don't think we have any evidence that they
are not in a position to do their job. The Treasury markets
remain deep and liquid. And as I have said a couple of times
today, I don't think that what people looked at on October
15th, in terms of the movement on Treasuries, had to do with a
lack of--it wasn't the effect of any kind of regulatory
environment.
Mr. Delaney. But the people running these institutions seem
to think they have a disincentive to hold liquidity in cash.
Secretary Lew. Yes.
Mr. Delaney. So sometimes perception becomes reality.
Secretary Lew. I will give you an example. I have heard a
lot of them say as if it affects the Treasury market, that
Volcker is the reason, but Volcker--
Mr. Delaney. That has nothing to do with it.
Secretary Lew. --Volcker doesn't cover Treasuries.
Mr. Delaney. I agree. I am talking about Treasuries.
Secretary Lew. Yes. So, in Treasuries, I think you asked
the right question, is it something in the leverage rules,
because the other rules didn't--
Mr. Delaney. Because it used to be, no matter how many
Treasuries you had, you didn't have to have, really, capital
against them.
Secretary Lew. Right.
Mr. Delaney. Now you kind of do. So, in my mind, if I was
running an institution, that would make me have less of them.
Secretary Lew. Right. I think that it is very important for
us to maintain the deep and liquid Treasury markets. It is
something that is part of what makes our dollar the world's
reserve currency. It is part of our economic backbone. I don't
see a weakness in the Treasury market right now, but I can
assure you that--
Mr. Delaney. You are looking at it.
Secretary Lew. --a day doesn't go by when I don't ask
questions about it.
Mr. Delaney. Right. Sure.
Last question, Ex-Im Bank. I have talked about ideas where
institutions like Ex-Im are required to sell off some of their
portfolio on a regular basis so there is better transparency as
to how their assets are priced. Do you support approaches like
that?
Secretary Lew. I am not familiar with that proposal. I
would be happy to look it.
I think the Ex-Im Bank does enormously important work in
leveling the playing field for U.S. exporters. It throws off
a--
Mr. Delaney. Right. And I agree with that position. I just
think additional transparency around how they price their
assets is useful--
Secretary Lew. I just haven't looked at that. I would be
happy to look at it.
Mr. Delaney. Yes.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair wishes to alert Members that in order to
accommodate the Secretary's schedule, we anticipate clearing
three more Members in the queue. Presently, that would be Mr.
Stivers, Mr. Pittenger, and Mr. Barr, depending on whether or
not somebody else walks in on the Democratic side.
The gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Stivers, is now recognized.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Right here, Mr. Secretary. How are you?
Secretary Lew. I am well. How are you?
Mr. Stivers. Good.
So you have already answered questions from Mr. Duffy and
Mr. Ross and Mr. Fincher about liquidity. I want to ask a
couple of things about that.
You have said you don't think there is a problem, and, to
you, the world is rainbows and unicorns and everything is good
with liquidity.
Secretary Lew. I don't think that is what I said.
Mr. Stivers. You said there wasn't a problem with
liquidity, didn't you?
Secretary Lew. No. I said I think the Treasury market--we
haven't seen problems in the Treasury market. I think there are
issues about liquidity that require a lot of attention, and I
went through at some length the kinds of issues that I think we
need to pay attention to.
Mr. Stivers. Great. Okay. Well, then, let's talk a little
bit about that.
So you do believe that we need to give it a little
attention. In your role of Chair of the FSOC, have you directed
the Office of Financial Research (OFR) to study this problem
and how the policies that are completed and proposed might come
together to cause a problem? Or have you asked them anything at
all?
Because some of us would love to see them do a study. I
wrote them a letter asking them to do a study. And I am just
curious if you have asked them to do a study on it, on
liquidity and--
Secretary Lew. They are doing work in this area. And they
have obviously issued some analysis, and I know they have other
work that is ongoing.
And I think it is not just an OFR question. It is a
question that we have to ask in domestic finance in Treasury,
securities and banking regulators have to ask. So I think that
there is a serious conversation in this area.
What I have tried to make clear is that it would be a
mistake to jump to conclusions about what the relationship
between the safer, sounder world after financial reform and
liquidity is. We have to be open to it but not assume that is
the whole explanation.
Mr. Stivers. I don't disagree with you, which is why I ask
you if you would ask the OFR to do a study.
And so you just indicated there is some work going on. When
can we expect to see a study from OFR around--
Secretary Lew. I would have to get back to you on the
workstream.
Mr. Stivers. Please do. Because that is their job. Their
job is--it is called the Office of Financial Research. So it
seems to me that they are the most logical place to look at it.
Secretary Lew. They have been doing a lot of analysis on
October 15th, for example, to understand what happened on that
day. And they are very much in the space of helping to make it
possible to look between the data that different regulators
have and do the analysis.
Mr. Stivers. Which is their job. And I am just asking you--
Secretary Lew. Yes.
Mr. Stivers. --to have them do their job and make that
available to us. Because, as policymakers, we would love to see
that, and it may impact some of the policies we decide to make.
And as somebody who enforces those policies that are made by
Congress, obviously you have some ability to change the way you
do your job too.
But we would love to see that information. And the sooner
we can see it, the sooner we can make an informed decision, as
opposed to either one of us, maybe me assuming that it is a
problem and you assuming it is not. Let's look at--
Secretary Lew. I couldn't agree more that we have to
understand things before we act.
Mr. Stivers. So please ask them do a study that is detailed
with regard to this. Because I think, when you see what is
going on between the Volcker Rule and what is going on with the
Department of Labor and what is going on in the private sector
separately from regulation, where a lot of people are
simplifying their business model, getting out of some risky
businesses, those three come together in a way that could
really cause a liquidity crisis in the future. And I just want
to make sure we look toward it and try to anticipate it and
head it off. So, please, I would urge you to do that.
The other question I have, really quickly, is with regard
to designating systemically important institutions. Has anybody
talked to you about that? Because I didn't hear whether anybody
had talked much to you about that.
Secretary Lew. There were quite a number of questions
earlier.
Mr. Stivers. So--
Secretary Lew. I am not sure what question--
Mr. Stivers. Okay. Well, do you think the $50 billion--
let's talk about banks for a second. The $50 billion level--
many folks, including folks at the Federal Reserve, have said
that is an inadequate and artificial number. How do you feel
with that number in the law?
Secretary Lew. I think that it is important that we use the
flexibility we have to treat institutions of different size
differently. And we have tried to do that, and we need to
continue to ask, is it being done as well as we can do it.
I think it is a mistake, though, to think that a $2 billion
institution is the same as a $50 billion institution or a $100
billion or a $500 billion institution. So I think some of the
suggestions that I have heard about drawing the line, say, at
$500 billion are very bad policy. That would take the next six
largest institutions out of the heightened supervision.
Mr. Stivers. Let me suggest an alternative approach. Have
you looked at nonbank assets, the assets that are not under the
covered institution--I would ask you to look at that, because
that is where the systemic risk is created.
I know my time is gone, but please look at that. I will
follow up in writing.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina,
Mr. Pittenger.
Mr. Pittenger. Secretary Lew, there has been some
discussion today, a considerable amount, regarding the debt.
From what I understood, you seemed to be somewhat dismissive of
this concern and of the threat. Do you see it as a threat?
Secretary Lew. I--
Mr. Pittenger. Do you see it as an economic--
Secretary Lew. I have spent most of my professional life
trying to control our spending and have revenue to cover our
expenses, so I don't dismiss it at all.
Mr. Pittenger. Okay. But do you see it--
Secretary Lew. I think we have made enormous progress--
Mr. Pittenger. Do you see it as a level of concern as much
as Iran--
Secretary Lew. I don't think--
Mr. Pittenger. --in terms of national security and economic
security?
Secretary Lew. I think--
Mr. Pittenger. How would you place it?
Secretary Lew. --if we had stayed on the course we were on
in 2008--
Mr. Pittenger. No.
Secretary Lew. --I would say that--
Mr. Pittenger. Sir--
Secretary Lew. --we have made progress since then. I
don't--
Mr. Pittenger. --with all due respect, let me ask you--this
is the question I am asking. How do you view the threat? Do you
view it as important as the concern we have with Iran and the
security threat there?
Secretary Lew. I--
Mr. Pittenger. The economic threat that we have with the
debt--
Secretary Lew. Look, I--
Mr. Pittenger. --do you sense that? Is that as compelling
to you?
Secretary Lew. I think they are, obviously, very different
kinds of--
Mr. Pittenger. They are.
Secretary Lew. --threats. We have made a lot more progress
on our fiscal position than we have in terms of moving Iran.
Mr. Pittenger. I understand that.
You heard the statement from Admiral Mullen earlier, and
you hear it from Peter Orszag still today, the former budget
writer for Mr. Obama, still talking about the trajectory of
spending and the concerns over the debt.
I was with Erskine Bowles over the weekend. I have known
Erskine for 25 years. He made a statement publicly this last
fall regarding the spending levels and the debt and where that
is headed.
There are a lot of people who give a clear focus on the
debt and see it as a major priority and a concern. And what I
am asking you, do you see the same level of concern--when you
put your head on a pillow at night, does that keep you awake as
much as Al Qaeda?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, we have made enormous
progress--
Mr. Pittenger. No, no, no. That is not the question, with
all due respect.
Secretary Lew. But it is the reason why my answer is what
my answer is. If you had asked me this question in 2009, I
would have given you a different answer than I am giving you
now because--
Mr. Pittenger. I am asking you today.
Secretary Lew. --we are not in the same place.
Mr. Pittenger. Is it a vital concern to you today?
Secretary Lew. I don't think it is the most pressing
concern today, because we have controlled the rate of growth--
Mr. Pittenger. So $18 trillion, that is not a concern to
you?
Secretary Lew. As a percentage of GDP, we have stabilized
the deficit and the growth of the debt.
Mr. Pittenger. And the trajectory of spending is going up--
Secretary Lew. I think--
Mr. Pittenger. --not leveling off.
Secretary Lew. --for the next 10 years, we have a stable
debt and deficit situation.
Mr. Pittenger. Here is Erskine Bowles--
Secretary Lew. It does not mean--
Mr. Pittenger. Excuse me. Here is Erskine Bowles, October
2014: ``The deficit is projected to return to an upward path
over the rest of the decade and beyond.''
Sir, a lot of smart people disagree with you. A lot of
smart people are concerned about the trajectory of spending and
the imploding debt and the fiscal crisis that is going to put
us in. And what I am asking you is, do you not share that
concern?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I am telling you I do have a
concern about our fiscal policy. We have to maintain a
responsible fiscal policy. We also have to maintain growth, and
we have to--
Mr. Pittenger. Do you think it is enough to talk about, to
bring it to the American people?
Secretary Lew. We have done more than talk, Congressman. We
have reduced the debt--
Mr. Pittenger. Sir, in all due respect, the man that you
work for, that you report to, has he ever brought it up in an
inauguration? Has he ever brought it up at the State of the
Union address? He came here to the Capitol this week to talk
about TPA. Has he ever come to talk to the Members of Congress
about the debt and the--
Secretary Lew. Congressman, when he took office--
Mr. Pittenger. The man that you advise, do you advise him
to address this debt concern?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, we have reduced the deficit as
a percentage of GDP from 10 percent--
Mr. Pittenger. That is--
Secretary Lew. --to under 3 percent.
Mr. Pittenger. I am talking about the future.
Secretary Lew. That speaks to what we are doing and what we
have done.
Mr. Pittenger. There are a lot of smart people who
proceeded you in your job who have serious concerns about it.
Let me go on to another issue, and that deals with FATF.
There are 34 countries, as you know, committed to the 40
recommendations of FATF in going after terrorism, terrorism
financing. What capabilities do we have of going after those
countries that are not in compliance?
We have Turkey, we have Qatar. Clearly, they are complicit
with terrorism financing. What role can you play as enforcer,
in that FATF is not an enforcer? They merely have the
standards. And yet, clearly, we see the infractions by those
who, in some measure, like Turkey, is a member of NATO.
Secretary Lew. FATF has been a very important process to
bring the world community together behind high standards to
control bad practices and bad activity.
We are very much engaged on a bilateral basis with any
country that we see doing things or not doing things that they
need to do to control--
Mr. Pittenger. Have you called out Turkey on the matter?
Secretary Lew. I have talked with our counterparts in
Turkey about what they need do in their banking system, and--
Mr. Pittenger. Have you called out Qatar?
Secretary Lew. I have talked to people in most of the world
about this issue. And when we talk, they actually respond and
they move.
So it is not an easy process where you can just kind of
turn a switch and have everybody doing everything they need to
do, but we are engaged very deeply at a very high level around
the world.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you for your service.
I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
Our last questioner will be the gentleman from Kentucky,
Mr. Barr. He is now recognized.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, thank you for your patience and for staying
with us here.
Since we have talked a lot today about market liquidity,
let me bookend our discussion here today with that subject.
The Center for Financial Stability has found that market
liquidity has declined 46 percent since its peak in March of
2008. And a recent article in the Wall Street Journal provides
this analysis: ``Talk to almost any banker, investor, or hedge
fund manager today, and one topic is likely to dominate the
conversation. It is the lack of liquidity in the markets and
what this might mean for the world economy and their
businesses. Market veterans say that they have never
experienced conditions like it. Banks have become so reluctant
to make markets that it has become hard to execute large
trades, even in the vast foreign exchange and government bond
markets, without moving prices.''
So I want to address my question to your skepticism that
regulation has played a part in this liquidity issue.
Have you heard from bankers, many of your former colleagues
on Wall Street, and bankers that I have heard from as well,
that they are less likely today to engage in market-making
activities as a result of Volcker and other regulatory
pressures?
Secretary Lew. Look, I have heard people say things, some
of which are supported by facts and some of which are not. So--
Mr. Barr. But, clearly, as Secretary of the Treasury, you
have--
Secretary Lew. I talk to people all the time.
Mr. Barr. Yes, and they have given you that feedback. But
what is it that leads you to doubt their sincerity, or do you
not--
Secretary Lew. I am not doubting anyone's sincerity. I
think people see the world the way they see it. Sometimes it is
right, and sometimes it is wrong.
I think that--you just cited at the end of the piece that
you read that people are saying they are having trouble moving
blocks of bonds in any size they want without any movement in
price. I think that has something to do with market structure.
You have different players in the market now. It may mean that
to maintain liquidity you have to do multiple transactions.
Mr. Barr. I understand, but--
Secretary Lew. That is different from not being able to
transact.
Mr. Barr. Yes. I understand. But would you acknowledge that
when banks become reluctant to engage in market-making that
impacts liquidity?
Secretary Lew. I think there are different kinds of market-
making going on. There is a lot of market-making going on, and
you can't roll back the clock. The fact that you have the
emergence of, say, electronic trading and high-frequency
trading, there is a lot of activity taking place in that space
that isn't the traditional broker-dealer model.
Mr. Barr. Let me take one example, and that is the
collateralized loan obligation marketplace: $350 billion of
senior secured commercial and industrial loans that provide
financing for very dynamic job-producing companies, many of
which are actually in my own district.
Would you acknowledge that the Volcker Rule has forced
banks to take pretty significant losses in AAA and AA CLO
paper?
Secretary Lew. Obviously, the Volcker Rule is still taking
effect. It hasn't--
Mr. Barr. There are already banks being forced to divest
AAA and AA CLO paper.
Secretary Lew. Banks are going to have to not have
proprietary investments that they had in the past.
Mr. Barr. Right, but let me ask you--
Secretary Lew. That means that they are going to have to
sell some assets.
Mr. Barr. Sir, do you know how many AAA or AA tranches of
CLO notes defaulted over the last 20 years? The answer is zero.
The Volcker Rule is forcing banks to divest in very safe
investments. And you have to acknowledge that has a
destabilizing impact on the financial stability of these
institutions.
Secretary Lew. But I think you also have to acknowledge
that the exposure to risk on proprietary investments was a
significant--
Mr. Barr. What risk is there with AAA or AA CLO notes that
have never defaulted over 20 years and performed well during
the financial crisis?
Secretary Lew. The objective of the Volcker Rule was to
reduce the level of risk exposure of firms by getting them out
of proprietary investments. I think that we will be better off
when that is implemented. And I think the markets will adapt--
Mr. Barr. You don't dispute the fact that Volcker forces
banks, which haven't defaulted in 20 years, to divest of AAA
paper?
Secretary Lew. With the exception of Treasuries, it is a
pretty tight rule in terms of--
Mr. Barr. Let me conclude just really quickly with one
other point, and that is community banks.
Community banks in my district, the bankers tell me that
Dodd-Frank and the avalanche of compliance costs and red tape
has really impacted their bottom line. And the numbers bear
this out. The number of community banks $10 billion or below
has shrunk from 7,700 in the second quarter of 2010 to only
6,300.
Meanwhile, there is consolidation in the industry. So the
big banks, the SIFI banks, are larger. And too-big-to-fail is a
bigger problem now because we don't have diversity and we don't
have as much competition in the system.
Can you respond to that financial stability issue?
Secretary Lew. Look, I think the consolidation was going on
before Wall Street reform was enacted, and I am not sure that
consolidation is leading to the SIFIs taking over. It is mostly
smaller banks combining. And it is an issue that--we have a
real shared interest in making sure communities have access to
community banks--
Mr. Barr. And I would encourage FSOC to look at
consolidation, industry consolidation, as a problem, because it
is exacerbating too-big-to-fail.
Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. Although there are other Members in
the queue, they will not be recognized today.
I would like to thank Secretary Lew for his testimony.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this witness, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to this witness and to place his responses in the record. Also,
without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days to
submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in the
record.
Mr. Secretary, we would ask that your office respond as
promptly as you are able. And I mean this most respectfully and
sincerely: We would ask that Treasury cease the response dump
at midnight before your appearances. That is a sincere request
to you, sir.
With that, this hearing stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:13 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

June 17, 2015

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
