- THE FUTURE OF HOUSING IN AMERICA: EXAMINING THE HEALTH OF THE FEDERAL HOUSING ADMINISTRATION

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE FUTURE OF HOUSING IN
AMERICA: EXAMINING THE
HEALTH OF THE FEDERAL
HOUSING ADMINISTRATION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
HOUSING AND INSURANCE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 11, 2016

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 114-72

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

23-567 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Chairman

PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina,  MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
Vice Chairman                        Member
PETER T. KING, New York              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BRAD SHERMAN, California
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
BILL POSEY, Florida                  WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
Pennsylvania                     DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        AL GREEN, Texas
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
ROBERT HURT, Virginia                ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio                  JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee       JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
MARLIN A. STUTZMAN, Indiana          TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        BILL FOSTER, Illinois
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              PATRICK MURPHY, Florida
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina     JOHN K. DELANEY, Maryland
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
KEITH J. ROTHFUS, Pennsylvania       DENNY HECK, Washington
LUKE MESSER, Indiana                 JUAN VARGAS, California
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
FRANK GUINTA, New Hampshire
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas
BRUCE POLIQUIN, Maine
MIA LOVE, Utah
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas
TOM EMMER, Minnesota

Shannon McGahn, Staff Director
James H. Clinger, Chief Counsel
Subcommittee on Housing and Insurance

BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri, Chairman

LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia, Vice  EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri, Ranking
Chairman                             Member
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
BILL POSEY, Florida                  AL GREEN, Texas
ROBERT HURT, Virginia                GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio                  KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
KEITH J. ROTHFUS, Pennsylvania
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
February 11, 2016............................................     1
Appendix:
February 11, 2016............................................    31

WITNESSES
Thursday, February 11, 2016

Golding, Edward L., Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary, Office
of Housing, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development...     3

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Golding, Edward L............................................    32

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Luetkemeyer, Hon. Blaine:
Chart entitled, ``Financial Status of the FHA Mutual Mortgage
Insurance Fund FY 2015''...................................    43
Written statement of the National Multifamily Housing Council
and the National Apartment Association.....................    44
Beatty, Hon. Joyce:
Article from The New York Times entitled, ``As Banks Retreat,
Private Equity Rushes to Buy Troubled Home Mortgages,''
dated September 28, 2015...................................    46
Ellison, Hon. Keith:
Table entitled, ``Manufactured Home Eligibility Requirements
for FHA Title I and II Programs''..........................    55
Golding, Edward L.:
Written responses to questions for the record submitted by
Representatives Luetkemeyer and Ellison....................    56

THE FUTURE OF HOUSING IN
AMERICA: EXAMINING THE
HEALTH OF THE FEDERAL
HOUSING ADMINISTRATION

----------

Thursday, February 11, 2016

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Housing
and Insurance,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:30 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Blaine
Luetkemeyer [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Luetkemeyer, Royce,
Garrett, Pearce, Posey, Ross, Barr, Rothfus, Williams; Cleaver,
Clay, Green, Ellison, Beatty, and Kildee.
Ex officio present: Representatives Hensarling and Waters.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The Subcommittee on Housing and
Insurance will come to order. And without objection, the Chair
is authorized to declare a recess of the subcommittee at any
time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``The Future of Housing in
America: Examining the Health of the Federal Housing
Administration.''
Before we begin, I would like to thank the witness for
appearing today. We look forward to your testimony, Mr.
Golding.
I now recognize myself for 4 minutes to give an opening
statement.
The statutory mission of the Federal Housing Administration
(FHA) is admirable. There is a purpose for the agency. Some
qualified first-time and low-income individuals and families
need assistance securing their first home.
But FHA has suffered a case of mission creep, and the
unfortunate truth is that the lack of sound underwriting and
risk management puts both homebuyers and U.S. taxpayers at
risk.
This committee had a similar conversation last year and the
years before that. And while the most recent independent
actuarial report showed some signs of a modestly healthier
agency, the bottom line is that FHA is still in a precarious
state.
FHA's shaky principles were not born out of the 2008 crisis
alone. In fact, since 2000 FHA has hit the target economic
value for the Mutual Mortgage Insurance Fund (MMIF) only 3
times. Most recently, it was because the agency experienced a
dramatic uptick in the value of its reverse mortgage or Home
Equity Conversion Mortgage (HECM) portfolio.
We should take little comfort in FHA's assertion that a
long-awaited positive actuarial report means that all is well
and only getting better. With all due respect, we have heard
that story for years and it has never proven to be entirely the
case.
In 2009, then-HUD Secretary Shaun Donovan said FHA would
reach the capital requirement in the next 2 to 3 years. In 2011
and in 2012, he said FHA would hit the target by 2015.
Today, FHA reports that the target has been hit--just
barely--but only because of the upswing in the HECM portfolio.
This is a portfolio that was a negative 1.2 percent in Fiscal
Year 2014, now up to 6.4 percent. Meanwhile, the single-family
ratio improved from 0.56 percent to a modest 1.63 percent.
The underlying problems at FHA--high volatility and
questionable underwriting--have existed for years and continue
to pose, in our judgment, a threat to all Americans.
To make matters worse, the agency decided last year,
despite poor performance, to cut its income stream by lowering
premiums by 50 basis points. Anyone who understands the
fundamentals of lending and insurance knows you can't cut your
income stream when you are in need of capital.
The bottom line is that FHA keeps trying to grow itself out
of a problem and has, in terms of the 2015 actuarial report,
backed into a win. We need to continue to focus on common-sense
reform and creation of a more stable housing market and housing
finance system.
I look forward to hearing from our witness today.
With that, I yield 5 minutes to the distinguished gentleman
from Missouri, the ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr.
Cleaver.
Mr. Cleaver. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Today, I think the news about the FHA is significantly
better than it has been in the past, and I think we have
convened this hearing, ``The Future of Housing in America:
Examining the Health of the Federal Housing Administration,''
at a good time.
It was 1 year ago that we held a hearing in this room on
FHA, and we now have the opportunity to again examine and
conduct oversight to the current state at FHA. Throughout my
political career, first as a city councilman, next as a mayor,
and now as a Member of Congress and the ranking member of this
subcommittee, I have passionately advocated for increasing home
ownership. Home ownership does things that I am not sure most
people even realize, because it brings the ``somebody-ness''
out of folk.
And I speak experientially. Moving out of public housing
after my father bought a home, all of a sudden--and I am always
pleased to say my father started getting the yard of the
summer. He would get a photograph of his yard in the newspaper.
He would walk out and pick up cigarette butts down the
street. The neighbors all know that when you walk around Mr.
Cleaver's house, you have to be careful. He doesn't even want
you to breathe too heavily. He might go out and water the lawn
if you do that.
So I know what the pride of home ownership does. I have
seen it.
And like many in this room, I purchased my first home with
the help of FHA. I continue to support the invaluable role that
the FHA plays in helping first-time and low-income individuals
purchase homes.
In Fiscal Year 2015, 82 percent of FHA purchases were from
first-time homebuyers. Nearly a third were minority buyers,
with Hispanic homebuyers accounting for 17.4 percent of
purchases and African-Americans accounting for 10.4 percent.
And it is no secret that there is a wealth gap in our
country, a wealth gap that must be fully addressed, and the FHA
plays a significant role in promoting home ownership and
narrowing this gap.
It is also important to note that overall health of FHA and
the Mutual Mortgage Insurance Fund (MMIF)--last year the FHA
announced that it would cut annual--it was projected that this
move would bring an additional 83,000 new borrowers in a year
into the market.
In the first year since that change, the goal was exceeded
by 106,000 new borrowers purchasing homes. That ought to be an
excitement for the people of this country. The capital ratio is
now 2.07 percent, and the net worth of the MMIF is up $19
billion in Fiscal Year 2014.
I would like to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this hearing.
And I would like to also express thanks to our guest for
being here.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. I thank the gentleman for his
statement.
With that, we welcome Mr. Golding. He is the Principal
Deputy Assistant Secretary, Office of Housing, U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development.
Mr. Golding, you are recognized for 5 minutes to give an
oral presentation of your testimony. And without objection,
your written statement will be made a part of the record.
You are probably aware of the lighting system: green means
go; yellow means you have 1 minute left; and red means we are
going to stop and try and give Members a chance to ask
questions.
So with that, you are recognized for 5 minutes. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF EDWARD L. GOLDING, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY ASSISTANT
SECRETARY, OFFICE OF HOUSING, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND
URBAN DEVELOPMENT

Mr. Golding. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Chairman Luetkemeyer, Ranking Member Cleaver,
and members of the subcommittee. I appreciate the opportunity
to testify about the status of the Federal Housing
Administration.
FHA is just as critical today as it was when it was founded
in the midst of the Great Depression. So I am proud to say that
as a result of policy changes and prudent risk management,
FHA's Mutual Mortgage Insurance Fund is strong and improving.
For Fiscal Year 2015, the independent actuarial report
shows FHA rebuilt its capital reserve to the 2 percent standard
and is expected to continue to accrue a reserve this year at a
somewhat faster rate than initially projected in 2015.
We endorsed more than 1.1 million single-family loans in
Fiscal Year 2015--loans for hardworking, everyday Americans who
are able to experience the benefits of home ownership for the
first time or refinance into a more affordable mortgage.
With an average loan size of $190,000 and an average credit
score of 680, we are demonstrating our commitment to expand
credit for responsible borrowers and those impacted by the
Great Recession. Though strained by the crisis, FHA has been on
a strong upward track, gaining $40 billion in value over the
last 3 years.
Improved underwriting requirements have significantly
increased the credit quality of the portfolio of the last few
years, including the fund's value and reducing the impact of
the crisis years 2007 and 2008. Early payment defaults and
serious delinquencies continue to decline to pre-crisis levels,
and improved recoveries have added over $3 billion to the fund
since 2013.
Last January, FHA lowered its annual mortgage insurance
premium by 50 basis points. Around 1 million families were able
to benefit from an average reduction of $900 in annual
premiums. It also resulted in more than 160,000 additional
responsible American families with credit scores below 680
becoming first-time home owners over the last 12 months.
This adjustment was an important step in continuing to help
underserved borrowers, and it did not harm FHA's ability to
build the capital reserve. I am proud to oversee FHA at a time
when we are making such important strides.
However, I also embrace the need for continuous improvement
and risk management across all of our programs. Of particular
interest to me is our Home Equity Conversion Mortgage (HECM)
program, due to the challenges involved in projecting future
values.
The ability to age in place is critical for seniors and
their families, especially as that segment of our population
continues to grow. And FHA's HECM program makes this possible
for many seniors.
FHA has made a number of changes to make the program more
sustainable so we can manage the risk to the fund while better
meeting the needs of today's seniors. Changes include:
requiring financial assessment to ensure sustainability; and
reducing the amount of equity seniors can take out up front.
I do want to thank the committee for the help they provided
with the Reverse Mortgage Stabilization Act in 2013, which made
many of these changes possible. The HECM portfolio's value now
stands at $6 billion and it is projected to continue to improve
in Fiscal Year 2016.
Looking ahead, FHA is committed to pursuing positive
improvements across all our programs, changes that support our
role as a partner in opportunity for the American people. FHA
is eager to work with Congress and this committee to better
understand the benefits and risks of all our programs and to
ensure that FHA can continue to support housing, as it has for
the past 82 years.
Thank you, and I look forward to your comments and your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Principal Deputy Assistant
Secretary Golding can be found on page 32 of the appendix.]
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Golding. I appreciate
you being here this morning.
And with that, I recognize myself for 5 minutes and begin
the questioning.
In January of 2011, the Administration issued a report to
Congress entitled, ``Reforming America's Housing Finance
Market.''
Within that report, there are three statements that were
made.
First: ``FHA has also implemented important changes and
reforms over the last 2 years, including strengthening
underwriting standards, improving processes and operations, and
raising premiums to improve its financial condition.''
Second: ``As Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac's presence in the
market shrinks, the Administration will coordinate program
changes at FHA to ensure that the private market, not FHA,
accepts that new market share.''
And third: ``As we begin to pursue increased pricing for
guarantees at Freddie and Fannie, we will also increase the
price of FHA mortgage insurance.''
If we look at that statement, and we look at the last
year's actions to date, it is a dramatic 180-degrees
difference. We are lowering premiums instead of raising them.
You look at the private market share--FHA's market share is now
at 40 percent; private market share is 35 percent, according to
figures that I have, and a lot of the growth is basically
probably as a result of the lowered premiums.
How does that--the statement made in that report in 2011?
Mr. Golding. Thank you for your question.
Times have changed considerably since 2011. The simplest
measure of our market share is in 2010, we were about 30
percent of the purchase market by loan count. We have reduced
that; that has been reduced to about 17.8 percent last year. So
you have seen other players step into the market since the 2010
period, when that statement was made.
We did raise in the crisis--I can't remember the exact
number; it may have been upwards of 8 times--the mortgage
insurance premium. But as the fund stabilized, times change,
and we try to set the mortgage insurance premium looking at the
strength of the fund, how it is projected to grow, and the
needs of the housing market.
And I would also mention that while we did reduce the
insurance premium to meet the market needs in the face of an
improving insurance fund, we still are well above the historic
level of insurance premiums for the FHA program.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Can you answer the question with
regards to your basically absorbing more of the market versus
the private sector? It looks to me like you are buying your way
into the market with lowering your premiums. Is that a fair
statement, or how would you refute that?
Mr. Golding. As I said, by one measure we are down
considerably from the 2010 period. Our market share is much
closer to where it historically is. So historically, it is in
the mid-teens.
You referenced some numbers relative to, I think, the
mortgage insurers in particular. I have read a few of their
investor reports. I think their estimates of the effect of the
MMIF reduction on their business was less than 5 percent.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Okay. I have a couple more questions,
quickly.
What is the profitability on your regular portfolio versus
your reverse mortgage portfolio? What is the difference?
Mr. Golding. I didn't hear the--
Chairman Luetkemeyer. What is the difference in
profitability between your--your loss ratio between your
regulator home owners portfolio and your reverse mortgage
portfolio?
Mr. Golding. The easiest number that I have in my head--
Chairman Luetkemeyer. And do that prior to 2014. Last year,
2015, you got all these new mortgages on the books, which is
going to skew your figure. Do you remember what it was prior to
that, like at the end of 2014?
Mr. Golding. No, I don't remember the exact number. But
there is no doubt that--
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Can you say just a rough difference?
Is it more profitable with the regular homes versus reverse
mortgage?
Mr. Golding. Yes. The profitability or the negative subsidy
rate for the forward market is about 4.5 percent; for the
reverse mortgage the subsidy rate is about--negative subsidy
rate is about 0.5 percent.
So for every dollar of the forward market that we insure,
we are expecting to bring in--or for every $100, $4.50 of extra
income. That is for the reverse mortgage, or HECM, that number
is a half a dollar.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. So your profitability, your portfolio
has increased significantly with reverse mortgages, which is a
less profitable and more risky part of the business for the
gains that you had with regards to the lowering of the
guarantee fees and absorbing part of the market. Is that a fair
statement?
Mr. Golding. The HECM portfolio, reverse portfolio, can--is
the riskier one. It was the one that grew greater in value last
year.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. So we took on more risk even though--
and more volume. The volume you took on is more risky. That is
the point we are making, and that is what you just said.
Mr. Golding. The volume of HECMs actually, because of many
of the risk management improvements, is down significantly to
about 60,000.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. My time is up. Thank you, Mr.
Golding.
With that, we will go to the ranking member of the
subcommittee, Mr. Cleaver, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
During my opening statement, Mr. Golding, I spoke about my
own family situation, and I did so because home ownership is an
emotional kind of a thing for me. So I was somewhat disturbed
when the Urban Institute reported that tight credit standards
had prevented over 5.2 million mortgages between 2009 and 2014.
Do you have any ideas on what we can do now to expand the
access of home ownership with those kinds of staggering
figures? What can we do?
Mr. Golding. Thank you for the question.
Home ownership is important. My father also had his first
house financed by an FHA mortgage, having been returning as a
World War II veteran, U.S. Army Air Corps. And I do remember
that first house when I was age 4.
So it is important. We are striving to fill that. I think
the Urban Institute, now there is an estimated almost a million
missing borrowers that are not out there.
Some is obviously--I would think of on the demand side. The
household formation hasn't been there, although there are good
signs that that has improved last year.
What FHA is doing is we are trying to make it a program
where it is easier to do business and to offer the FHA product.
And that really comes back down to offering greater clarity in
our programs.
We, for the first time in the history of the single-family
business, put out a handbook that has all the rules in one
place so you can look it up, so you can search it. That
handbook was a big achievement.
We have also been working on improving our risk management
supplemental performance metric. So we are continuing to try to
bring in new lenders who will be willing to offer FHA products
to the American consumer, make it without--while still holding
them to very high standards, making it easier to do business
with FHA.
Mr. Cleaver. I may come back to that later, but I am going
to try to get a lot in.
I have heard almost all my life that when people die--to
grow, and probably generations keep passing it on. The same
thing as parents say, ``My kid had a sugar rush.'' Scientists
all agree there is no such thing as a sugar rush, yet people
believe it.
And then likewise, people continue to say that FHA is doing
subprime loans. That is no different than the hair growing in
the grave.
So can you deal with that? Have you heard any of those
three?
Mr. Golding. Yes, I have heard all of them. I have said a
few myself, except I have never said--FHA is definitely not in
the subprime business. I have been in the mortgage business a
long time. I was the damage done by subprime.
FHA has always been a fully underwritten mortgage. We
verify income. We make sure it is a sustainable mortgage for
that usually first-time homebuyer.
It is so far away from subprime.
I think there is a tendency for people just to translate
credit score into subprime. There are lots of reasons why our
fellow citizens have a 660 credit score. It is medical
expenses; it is unemployment; it is--there are things that
cause you to be late a payment or two and have your credit
score at 660. That doesn't mean that you shouldn't have a place
to live and an opportunity for home ownership.
Mr. Cleaver. Yes. I do think it is probably related to the
credit score. But, as you said, that shouldn't be the only
factor.
Hopefully we will get--I will get a chance to raise the
additional questions along those lines.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back.
With that, we go to the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Ross,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Golding, for being here. I am going to
address some issues with you with regard to proposed
administrative fee for administration, support, and IT.
The President's budget in the HUD request has indicated
that they are seeking to charge an administrative support fee
on FHA lenders. And I think that has been rejected by Congress
several times.
I am glad to see that it at least has a sunset provision so
that this proposed fee won't be in perpetuity. But my concern
is that I believe your budget document states that the fee will
be charged on a prospective basis, and yet the budget request
says that the fee would be calculated based on mortgages that
were insured under this title during the previous fiscal year.
That seems to be a disparity. It is almost as though it is
retroactive. Could you explain that?
Mr. Golding. Yes. Thank you for the question, and thank you
for the opportunity to clarify.
This is one of the cases I did a lot of math on in my youth
when I was a student. It is easier probably to put down the
algebra than the English words, which often fail us. But let me
tell you what we think that means and how it actually would
work.
Basically--and we will go out for public comment and
feedback however we would implement it, were it to pass. But it
would be after the date. You would basically say for loans
endorsed after the date of this public comment--
Mr. Ross. So it would still be going forward.
Mr. Golding. It would still very much be forward--
Mr. Ross. For example, small lenders who have a small book
of business, all of a sudden they can't plan based on this
complex formula and suddenly they have received a fee for
retroactive. You are telling me that wouldn't happen?
Mr. Golding. It would not happen.
Mr. Ross. At all?
Mr. Golding. It would basically be at the end of the year
you would then look back--
Mr. Ross. Okay. But--
Mr. Golding. --so it is not as--
Mr. Ross. But they would have to anticipate that fee in
writing that mortgage.
Mr. Golding. They would--basically the comment would
already say this is the rate, so it would be--
Mr. Ross. Okay.
Mr. Golding. --a simple multiplication of--
Mr. Ross. Would it not be easier just to do--as we have
been, as we put in the chairman's bill for the USDA--a nominal
fee right at the time of lending?
Mr. Golding. What we were giving some flexibility on the
amount of the fee, but that would be another alternative--
Mr. Ross. Okay. And on the amount of the fee, I understand
that there has been a request--I think that you indicate that
you may need about $30 million, but the language for the
proposed fee says the fee could be as much as four basis
points. And in light of $200 billion in business next year,
those four basis points could equal $80 million. Why would you
need that much when it is--it looks like you don't need that
many basis points to assess--
Mr. Golding. Yes. If volumes were projected still to be
$200 billion you would need closer to the--or the two basis
points, not the four basis points, correct.
Mr. Ross. Right. But I guess my concern is keeping you
within your requested amount of $30 million, as opposed to the
potential of $80 million that--what would you do with the
additional funds raised?
Mr. Golding. As I think it was written, it would be any
additional funds would not go to FHA, as the proposal was
written on that--
Mr. Ross. Let me talk to you--
Mr. Golding. --but volumes do vary, so it depends on the
origination and volumes.
Mr. Ross. Let me talk to you quickly about risk-share
transactions. Congratulations on being at 2 percent for your
capital requirements. We would love to get you to the minimum
industry standard of 25-to-one in capital requirements.
But I think that in order to do this appropriately, to
transition to what I believe is sufficient capacity in the
private markets you have to be able to do some risk-share
transactions. What efforts have been made by the FHA to enter
into risk-sharing transactions where each one takes a certain
portion, either the front end, back end, or however it is
structured?
Mr. Golding. Yes. We have been risk-sharing on the multi-
family side.
On the single-family side we have had very preliminary
discussions. With risk-sharing, it is one where it is very
dependent on being able to change your systems, tracking
things, and we would--one of the advantages of having
additional resources--
Mr. Ross. But there aren't any programs available yet?
Mr. Golding. No. No programs are available.
Mr. Ross. Do you anticipate any any time soon, meaning
within the next year?
Mr. Golding. No, I do not.
Mr. Ross. Do you think it is an idea that ought to be
continued to be pursued, or are you suggesting that maybe there
should be no risk-sharing?
Mr. Golding. There can be lots of value for risk-sharing.
There are many ways that the private sector can help the FHA
program. As I said, multi-family has highlighted some of it,
and I think it has demonstrated that it can be very valuable.
Mr. Ross. Finally, with regard to FICO scores--and Mr.
Cleaver was talking about this--look, I have to suggest that I
think everybody should have the opportunity for home
ownership--that is as a matter of right, no; as a matter of
opportunity, yes, to earn, absolutely.
But the low FICO scores were--a private lender would never
lend, and yet FHA is. Is not that indicative of a higher risk?
Mr. Golding. Yes, it is a higher risk, but it is an
insurable risk.
Mr. Ross. By us.
Mr. Golding. Pardon?
Mr. Ross. Insurable by us, by taxpayers.
Mr. Golding. Even the private sector will do unsecured
lending--
Mr. Ross. But not to the level that--
Mr. Golding. --typically this has been FHA's role.
Mr. Ross. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back. His time
has expired.
With that, we go to the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank the ranking member, as well.
And I thank the witness for appearing today.
A word about FHA: 80 years of service, and I might add
outstanding service; 34 million first-time homeowners; low-
income Americans have the opportunity to fulfill the American
dream, have a place to call home. And FHA was in the business
of lending when banks would not lend to each other.
When we hit the crisis in 2008 and moved over into 2009 and
other years, banks refused to lend money to each other. That is
how frozen the market was. But FHA was still in business.
That countercyclical function has served this country well,
and we ought to salute FHA for the outstanding job that it has
done. I do so.
Your capital ratio is currently above 2 percent. If it were
below 2 percent this hearing would be about that, but it is
above 2 percent. Thank God for you and what you do.
Now, you put a lot of emphasis in your statement on first-
time homebuyers. I am going to read a little bit here. You
indicate that by making sure borrowers, particularly first-time
homebuyers, have access to affordable credit to purchase homes.
And further in your statement you indicate that over the
course of your 81-year history, FHA has funded approximately 13
percent of total market mortgage originations, but more than 50
percent of all first-time homebuyer market purchase mortgages.
That is on page three of your statement.
I am focusing on this because I believe that there are
people who pay light bills, gas bills, water bills, phone
bills, cable bills; people who have other credit but they have
what are called thin files. And they are currently making rent
payments for some years that would exceed what a mortgage would
be. If given the opportunity, they would have a monthly payment
for housing that would be less than what their current payment
is for rent.
They have sound credit, but they don't have a fat file. It
is my opinion that we should look at light bills, gas bills,
water bills, and phone bills. Don't look at it in such a way as
to only add to your score, but also cause your score to
depreciate if it is negative. But we should look at this and we
should do so in an automated fashion.
It is my opinion that if we should do this, we will accord
other persons the opportunity to own a home, who can pay the
mortgage.
I am interested in talking to you about this very briefly,
with my 1 minute and 47 seconds left. Tell me, dear friend, do
we find that this circumstance actually exists, first, where
there are people who can afford a mortgage--thin files, not fat
files--and they are paying rent that exceeds a mortgage
payment?
Mr. Golding. Thank you for your question. Absolutely, yes.
There are a lot of people for whom rent is, in fact, over
half of their income sometimes, and they are still paying. And
as we know, the rent burden is even growing, so where home
ownership may very well be the right answer and lower cost on
that.
And today, we strive to address those thin files. We use a
scorecard but we also use manual underwriting if you do not get
an ``accept'' on the scorecard. And it is those exact type of
documents that we encourage lenders to look at.
Mr. Green. With my 50 seconds left, let me intercede and
say this: What we need is an automated process. We are doing it
manually--and by the way, other lenders do it manually, too.
They look at these things. But we need an automated process
that will allow us to help more people in a much more
expeditious fashion.
Do you concur, my dear friend?
Mr. Golding. Yes, is my second sentence. There are good
things happening out there. People are starting to grab some of
that data and we are looking to see how we can incorporate it
into how--what we do in terms of underwriting FHA mortgages.
Mr. Green. With my final 11 seconds, let me just say to you
that I want to work with you to develop the automated process.
I am working with my colleagues here in Congress, and there are
many on both sides who favor this; we just haven't reached a
proper conclusion yet.
But I want to work with you to get this done. It really is
a good thing for not only the people who will benefit, but also
for the American economy.
I yield back the balance of my time, and I thank you for
the extra 17 seconds.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
We now go to another gentleman from Texas, Mr. Williams,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Golding, thank you for your testimony today. We
appreciate it.
I am a small business owner. I am from Texas, as you heard.
I want to echo some of the statements made by my colleagues
so far.
In my mind it is simple. In my business, the car business,
we do it all the time: If I want to gain a customer and prevent
them from buying an automobile from a competitor, I will lower
or cut their rates. We give the customer the best deal we can,
just like what the FHA is doing.
Now, lowering premiums--for example, rates--gives FHA a
greater share of the market, a competitive advantage, we will
say, over the rest of the industry. But the only difference is,
we talked about earlier, is unlike the private market, which I
am in, the taxpayer is providing the backstop. It is taxpayers'
dollars, and fairly substantial ones, as we have already
discussed.
So a greater share of the market equals a greater
liability. We see this with Fannie and Freddie; we see it with
the National Flood Insurance Program, and on and on and on.
Frankly, discouraging private sector participation is what the
Federal Government is good at.
So my first question is simple: Could we consider requiring
that borrowers show that private mortgage insurance is
unavailable before being able to obtain FHA mortgage insurance?
Mr. Golding. Thank you for the question.
I don't think that type of standard would be very easy to
implement. As I mentioned earlier, if you look at some of the
M.I.s, they said--they told their investors that under 5
percent of their business was affected by the mortgage
insurance premium--some overlap and some tension between the
two.
Mr. Williams. It is no. ``No'' would be the answer.
Mr. Golding. No. I think--
Mr. Williams. So what policy tool do you recommend, then,
to ensure that the FHA's future role minimizes market
distortion and preserves the financial condition of the FHA?
Mr. Golding. I think in terms of getting private capital
back in, especially as it relates to the mortgage insurance
industry, their traditional market has been serving the
conforming market and the GSEs, and the housing finance reform
and getting real competition in is probably the most powerful
tool for getting private capital back into the mortgage--
Mr. Williams. ``Competition'' is the key word. I am glad
you said that.
Switching topics, let me go back to my own experience in
selling automobiles for a living and use the FICO scores. Now,
contrary to what some may believe, my industry heavily relies
on one's credit history, as you probably know. In most cases,
the borrower becomes riskier based on their credit score.
I think everyone knows that. And in fact, there are some
studies which show that loan performance deteriorates rapidly
for borrowers with FICO scores below 660.
The FHA currently allows homeowners with exceedingly low
FICO scores by industry lending standards--and frankly, as low
as 500--to qualify for its mortgage insurance. So should FHA be
in the business of insuring loans to borrowers with credit
scores so low--and frankly, that I can't even sell a car to--
that other private sector companies would deem too risky?
In other words, as we talked about earlier, you really are
in the subprime business.
Mr. Golding. Thank you for your question.
And the risk management and the use of credit scores and
what the odds ratios are things that we study considerably on
that. We have taken the important step that if you are below
580 you need to put 10 percent down, so you have to have that
compensating.
And we take into account the credit score during the
underwriting process, in particular the total scorecard. So if
one has a 620, one needs other compensating factors, whether it
is debt-to-income ratios or the amount of the downpayment.
And we do look very carefully at the credit score in
deciding what FHA mortgages to insure.
Mr. Williams. Okay. And another question: Do you think that
FHA has an obligation to underwrite mortgages for applicants
with credit scores that are that low--are the low end of the
FICO spectrum?
Mr. Golding. Thank you for your question.
It is always where exactly you do--what is the last loan in
is always a difficult one. We look at our credit policies; we
are comfortable with the credit policies we have today. And in
fact, the credit mix that we are getting is actually quite
good, with 680, which is higher than the historical average has
been over those 82 years.
Mr. Williams. All right. Thank you for being here.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back the balance
of his time.
I now recognize the gentlelady from Ohio, Mrs. Beatty, for
5 minutes.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, to our ranking member.
And also, I would like to thank our witness, Mr. Golding,
today.
Mr. Golding, I would like to start today by asking about
the Distressed Asset Stabilization Program.
I have an article from the New York Times, dated September
2015, Mr. Chairman, which I would like to ask unanimous consent
to be entered into the record.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mrs. Beatty. This article brought to light the affinity
which hedge fund and private equity funds have for buying
discounted mortgages from HUD at auction under the Distressed
Asset Stabilization Program. Many folks have expressed concern
that these firms are too quick to push homes into foreclosure
once they acquire the mortgage, and seem to be really less
helpful than banks in negotiating loan modification.
This article specifically mentions a couple from my
district in Gahanna, Ohio. Their mortgage loan was sold at
auction last summer by HUD, but prior to the auction JPMorgan
Chase was working with this couple on a loan modification. But
after the sale of their mortgage to Caliber, a private equity
firm, loan modification talks were abruptly ended and the
couple were met with a foreclosure notice.
In fact, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau has
recently had over 1,000 complaints from consumers about Caliber
alone, which has bought some 20,000 mortgages from HUD. That
same company, as I understand it, is currently under
investigation for its foreclosure practices by the New York
attorney general.
And I could go on and on. You get the gist of this.
My question is, how can we get more nonprofit
organizations, whose mission is neighborhood stabilization, to
be more competitive in these auctions?
Mr. Golding. Thank you for your question. It is one that is
very important because I have always been a believer that the
way to mitigate loss is to do loss mitigation, and foreclosure,
REO, and then trying to sell the property should be a last
resort--although, unfortunately, it is one that we too often
have seen.
So we do struggle to make sure that there is loss
mitigation--we put loans into these pools that have largely
exhausted attempts by the original servicer to do the loss
mitigation.
And as you point out, we do want--we have both neighborhood
stabilization options, where we have minimum outcomes and we do
a lot of smaller pools. Half of the last option went to the NSL
option. And we have been working with different nonprofits with
small pools, targeted pools, to try to get more nonprofits in.
We have done a lot of outreach.
I have to say, it is a difficult one for many nonprofits.
They are good in--traditionally in dealing with actual houses
and properties; servicing loans is new to many of them and it
is very difficult.
But I pledge to work hard to try to continue to do more,
and I look forward to working with you on this.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back my time.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentlelady yields back.
With that, we go to the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr.
Rothfus, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rothfus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Golding, for being here today.
You are currently the Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary
for the Office of Housing. What was your position at HUD, and
during what specific dates did you hold that position?
Mr. Golding. I joined HUD in June--Principal Deputy
Assistant Secretary in April 2015.
Mr. Rothfus. Your biography on the HUD website says that
you ``worked with the Department of Justice to craft consumer
relief as part of mortgage settlements with the large lending
institutions.'' These are the residential mortgage-backed
securities, or RMBS settlements with JPMorgan Chase in November
2013 and Citibank and Bank of America in July and August 2014?
Mr. Golding. I provided technical expertise and I am--I
think those were the ones I was involved in, but I would have
to go back and check my records.
Mr. Rothfus. You said, ``technical expertise.'' What was
your specific role in the negotiations?
Mr. Golding. It was how to structure the consumer relief in
order to bring sort of the greatest benefit. There were
different parts of the settlements that the Justice Department
entered into where specific actions in effect expanded
servicing on some of the loans, loss mitigation, addressing
blight. And it was that technical expertise.
Mr. Rothfus. Was your involvement directed by anyone
specifically?
Mr. Golding. Again, I was sharing my technical expertise,
so I--
Mr. Rothfus. Who directed you to do it? The Secretary?
Anybody at DOJ?
Mr. Golding. I don't remember how I came upon that task. I
can, again, check my records, but I--
Mr. Rothfus. Did you negotiate directly with any of the
banks yourself?
Mr. Golding. I was in the room during negotiations. But as
I said, I did not view my role as a negotiator, but rather to
provide technical expertise in the area of consumer relief.
Mr. Rothfus. Did you ever do that without anybody from DOJ
being present?
Mr. Golding. No, I don't remember ever being in a meeting
without DOJ there.
Mr. Rothfus. Did you ever work directly with any of the
heads of the banks when working on your technical expertise?
Mr. Golding. On these matters, I would be with the DOJ.
Just in my role of FHA and my knowledge of the mortgage
industry and at conferences, I have--
Mr. Rothfus. This is when you were a senior advisor on
housing--
Mr. Golding. But not on these issues related to the
settlements. It would have been with DOJ.
Mr. Rothfus. Did you ever meet with Jamie Dimon at JPMorgan
Chase with respect to these settlements?
Mr. Golding. I have never met Jamie Dimon, to the best of
my recollection.
Mr. Rothfus. As part of the settlements the banks are
directed to make payments to third-party groups who were not
part of the settlements and were not directly harmed by the
conduct of the banks, such as HUD-approved housing
organizations and attorney state organizations. The settlements
require that the banks pay $150 million to these organizations.
Who came up with the idea of directing money to third-party
groups? Did you?
Mr. Golding. Again, I do not remember particular--it has
been a few years here. I do not remember how that was put on
the table.
Mr. Rothfus. Did you speak to any of the organizations that
are named as recipients of the funds in the RMBS settlements
during or after the negotiations process?
Mr. Golding. Again, I don't have a list in front of me, so
I am not sure who they are or whether I have ever talked to
them before, during, or after.
Mr. Rothfus. So you don't recall ever having any
conversations with anybody at La Raza, the National Urban
League, NeighborWorks America, about any of these settlements?
Mr. Golding. I don't remember having conversations with
those parties about the settlements.
Mr. Rothfus. Is it possible you had conversations with
them?
Mr. Golding. I may have had conversations about the
mortgage market with them; I would not have had conversations
about the settlement with them.
Mr. Rothfus. Who, besides you, would have been involved
with negotiating in any part of the RMBS settlements--anybody
at HUD? Who besides yourself?
Mr. Golding. I would have to--the Office of General Counsel
was with me, I think, at all of those meetings.
Mr. Rothfus. The settlements require that banks pay a
certain fixed amount. Under the settlement, a dollar sent to
the Treasury, as is the case with most law enforcement
penalties, counts as one dollar towards the total. But in these
settlements, a dollar sent to a third-party groups counts for
more than one dollar towards the total.
Do you know who came up with that plan?
Mr. Golding. I don't know who came up with specific
elements.
Mr. Rothfus. Did you come up with that plan?
Mr. Golding. As I said, I was there to provide technical
expertise on that, so I would not have been the one who came up
with or formulated these.
Mr. Rothfus. I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Kildee, is now recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kildee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Golding, thank you for being here.
There are two areas I would like to pursue. One has to do
with the issue of disposition of REO owned by HUD, and then I
would like to specifically ask a couple of questions about my
hometown of Flint, Michigan.
On the issue of REO, can you in rough form, not--you don't
have to have specific numbers, but what is the current
inventory held by the Department?
Mr. Golding. I am going to have to get you that number. I
think we dispose--I know the run rate. I think we dispose of
something like 5,000 properties a month.
Mr. Kildee. And those dispositions, are they through bulk
dispositions? How are those executed? I guess I'll maybe just
give you a general question: Is there preference given to
public land bank authorities or neighborhood-based nonprofit
organizations, over the private for-profit speculator market?
Mr. Golding. They are. I will have to get back to you on
specifics.
We tend to sell them one at a time, manage that process.
There are certain preferences, first-look types for certain
groups, and I would have to get back to you on the details of
that program.
Mr. Kildee. Okay. I would appreciate that. I have some
concerns, not so much about bulk disposition specifically, but
bulk disposition that doesn't have the impact considered on
external--the externalities considered when it comes to
neighborhoods, especially those that are already struggling.
I appreciate that. And if we could pursue some engagement
on that subject, I would appreciate it.
If you could help me think through, maybe offer some
guidance on what the Department's role might be in providing
direct assistance to people in Flint--and I am sure most of you
are familiar with what has happened in Flint due to a series of
decisions by the State-appointed emergency manager and then the
lack of--and an extended period of time with high levels of
lead leeching into the water system and having, obviously, a
devastating effect on individuals, but particularly on
children, which is the real tragedy.
But part of the problem that we are seeing right now is
that the City, which is a city of about 100,000 people, is now
getting sort of a third hit to its housing market. The chronic
abandonment as a result of population loss driven by
globalization, racial avoidance, poor land-use planning, et
cetera, was the first hit.
The crisis, the housing collapse, was the second hit, which
really drove down property values. In the last 7 years, for
example, the real estate values in the City of Flint have been
cut in half--just in 7 years.
And now the crisis that we are facing with water is a third
hit that I am not sure without some serious intervention, we
are going to be able to recover from. We are seeing, for
example, individuals not being able to close on sales--even
sales that they are able to make, which is one question; who is
going to buy one of these houses--but even when they can, not
being able to get to closing because they can't provide the
kinds of certifications regarding drinking water that would be
required to close.
Can you just address first of all whether or not the
Department is thinking about this, and if so, what that
thinking is? And if the answer is no on either one of those,
how we can engage you?
Mr. Golding. No, we are very engaged and very focused. The
Secretary has made that very clear.
Let me talk about what FHA is doing, because there are
other activities at HUD. And it is something that is of grave
concern.
FHA tends to be the lender in communities like Flint. As
you know, it is part--we talk about a countercyclical role, but
sometimes that is not just the national recession; it is cities
like Flint that have been hard hit. So we have stayed there and
will stay there to be part of the mortgage market, because it
is important to have lending.
That said, it is also--we will lend only on houses that
have safe potable water. It is part of our longstanding mission
and goes back 82 years.
And we have given guidance to the industry on how they can
do both--how they can still continue lending. We will continue
to monitor that.
I would be glad to work with your office. It is so
important to continue lending, because if you cut off lending,
you basically will drop house prices even further.
On the other hand, we have to make sure that the water is
potable. And we have given clarity. We are looking to see
whether certain waivers are necessary.
Again, I would be glad to work closely with your office on
this one.
Mr. Kildee. Thank you very much. I see that my time has
expired.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. I thank the gentleman.
I would be willing to yield you another 2 minutes if you
have some more questions, because I think this is an issue of
utmost importance, not only to you but for the country. And to
have the gentleman here in front of you, and have him be able
to be on record for some things, is going to be very helpful.
We want to yield you 2 more minutes, sir, if you have some more
questions.
Mr. Kildee. I really appreciate that, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you.
I guess the specific question is whether you have been
pursuing any direct relief? One of the things we are seeing
right now, for example, in Flint, a lot of folks aren't paying
their water bill, which often is an attachment to the tax bill,
which can lead to delinquent taxes and even a potential tax
foreclosure action.
And again, when we see properties that may have a booked
value of somewhere, even on the tax rolls, it is going to have
a State taxable value assigned to it. But we know how markets
work. Property is only worth--or any commodity--is only worth
what somebody is willing to pay for it.
And so I am concerned about whether or not this problem
will double down in Flint by folks essentially not paying their
water bill, not paying their property taxes, walking away from
property. Is there any way or any thought you have about
assistance--direct assistance to individuals to prevent the
loss of their home, which would obviously affect them, but
worse, would contribute to an oversupply of substandard housing
in a weak market community already?
Mr. Golding. I am going to have to check to see the tax and
insurance defaults, which I have not--that has not risen to me
of being an issue, but it is one that you have my personal
commitment to monitor and make sure that we are responding
appropriately. We don't want to foreclose because of a tax, and
if someone is not paying their water bill it is sort of
understandable on that one.
So again, very much the entire Department is committed to
doing what it can, is focused on this, and thank you for
bringing this specific issue to my attention.
Mr. Kildee. Thank you. And we will follow up with you and
perhaps get together.
Again, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I really appreciate that
indulgence.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Absolutely. Hopefully, it can be
helpful in many ways to work on your problem. This is of
significant and national importance.
With that, the gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from New Mexico, Mr. Pearce, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pearce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Golding, for being here.
As we look at the CFPB, their required QM standards for
loans, do the loans that you all insure comply with QM
standards?
Mr. Golding. Yes, we have. The statute--
Mr. Pearce. All?
Mr. Golding. --provided for a specific HUD-FHA QM standard,
but we do.
Mr. Pearce. All of them do?
Mr. Golding. Yes.
Mr. Pearce. Now, I note that you have the capacity to
include mortgages up to $625,000. What percent of your
portfolio would be houses above $200,000, say?
Mr. Golding. The average is $190,000, so--or the median, so
half are above $190,000. Our loan limits in most counties in
this country are $271,000. It is only a few very high-cost
areas that go up to the $625,000.
Mr. Pearce. When I read your opening statement, you say
that you are providing underserved borrowers, so people buying
$270,000 houses are underserved?
Mr. Golding. As I said, the highest in most communities--in
most counties in this country is $271,000. The average is
$190,000.
Mr. Pearce. So, okay, we will use the $191,000. Are those
people underserved?
Mr. Golding. Typically, we do serve a market that--
Mr. Pearce. Okay, but if your average is there, you have a
lot above that. And so my question is, the people who are above
$191,000, pulling your average up to that, are they
underserved?
Mr. Golding. They are not being served by the conforming
market. The GSEs' average FICO score is, I think, around 750,
760. So we are playing in a very different market than the
conventional or private sector is playing in.
Mr. Pearce. The average income in my district is maybe
$31,000; 50 percent of the houses are manufactured housing. It
is hard for me to sit here and believe that these people are
underserved that you are telling me.
And so I find maybe that all of the portfolio increases is
you creating an artificial market in order to improve the
balance sheet and improve what you report to us in order to
delay and defer questions. And our questions are to keep people
who are making $31,000 a year in my district from paying for
the people who are making enough to borrow a $600,000 house and
the government is insuring it. That is what the rub is about.
Do you think that we are in a recovery market here? The
President said in his State of the Union Address that we have
recovered, and we recovered a long time ago, and it is now
looking really good. Have we recovered?
Mr. Golding. The housing market is recovering and has
recovered. We now are seeing housing start--
Mr. Pearce. How long has that recovery been going on?
Mr. Golding. I don't remember the exact year where housing
started to increase, probably around 2009, 2010.
Mr. Pearce. 2009, 2010--in your opening statement you say
you are a countercyclical force, so in the period that you say
that we have been recovering, countercyclical means when the
market is not recovering that you get in and when it is
recovering you should be diminishing out because the private
market is there.
And so you say that the recovery started about 2009, but
that is during the period when you are skyrocketing in your
portfolio. Do you find that to be not consistent with your
statements, not consistent with your stated objectives as an
institution?
Mr. Golding. Thank you for the question.
The exact numbers of what it means to be countercyclical
are sometimes difficult to measure. But as I said, we in--
Mr. Pearce. Then why do you come and talk to us about it?
If it is difficult to measure, why are you saying that in your
opening statement, in your opening paragraph? You lead with
that. Why don't you put it at the end where nobody is going to
read down there if it is difficult to assess?
Mr. Williams said, basically you are in the subprime
business, and you made the comment that, ``We study the odds.''
What does that mean, that you study the odds?
Mr. Golding. The odds ratio of defaults. As we--
Mr. Pearce. So you think that the people who rate 500 in
the private system of measuring are being unfairly evaluated
and that you all have an evaluation system that is better than
the 500 and you are going to go ahead and lend that money down
there because these are insurable real estate, I think is what
you said. Is that correct, that the private market is
undervaluing the capability of people with these scores to make
their payments back?
Mr. Golding. The private market traditionally will not
serve that market, correct--for a variety of reasons, but that
is not where--
Mr. Pearce. So what you are telling me is that your agency
is willing to put my constituents at risk, who are making their
lives work on $31,000 a year. You are willing to put them at
risk to help somebody who bought a $600,000 house with a 500
credit score because you have a system of measuring that is--
and the private market is inaccurate and yours is accurate.
Sir, I have trouble believing it. I appreciate it.
I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
We now go to the gentleman from Minnesota, Mr. Ellison. He
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ellison. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thanks to the ranking member, as well.
Mr. Golding, thanks for joining us today. I have a chart I
would like to direct your attention to, if we can get that up.
My first question, Mr. Golding, is this--first of all,
thanks for the good news you shared. It is clear that FHA is in
good financial health.
The FHA Mortgage Insurance Fund continues to grow stronger.
That is a good thing.
And we appreciate your team's effort to reduce risk,
improve recoveries, and lower premiums. In my community in
Minnesota and around the Nation, FHA remains a critical source
of sustainable credit for American families.
So here is what I would like to ask you: This chart I have
up here shows that nationwide, we have a rental housing crisis.
Current estimates are that nearly 12 million low-income people
pay more than half of their income for rent.
And according to a Harvard Joint Center for Housing Studies
report, one in two households spend more than 30 percent of
their gross income on rent and utilities; one in four
households pay more than 50 percent of their gross income for
rent and utilities. And in my district we have more than 10,000
low-income families on a waiting list for assisted housing.
So could you talk to us about what the FHA is doing to help
us address the dire rental housing crisis for low-income
families? And what more could the FHA do?
Mr. Golding. Thank you for the question.
And if you add in utilities, the number goes to over 11
million paying over half, so we are, as you point out,
definitely in a rental crisis.
On the FHA--and HUD in general, but FHA specifically--is on
its multi-family program we support construction of new
properties. We, in fact, recently reduced--for affordable
properties, we reduced the insurance premium in order to
attract more capital into that sector so that we would get more
construction, more units, and more proceeds for rehab also. So
it is not just the construction, but it is a substantial rehab.
And our multi-family program is continuing to focus on that
area.
As you know, our Rental Assistance Demonstration Program is
also putting more capital--we are nearing the $2 billion and
about 35,000 units preserved in terms of affordable housing.
But with those numbers up there, we clearly are only
chipping away at what is a huge problem.
Mr. Ellison. Thank you very much.
Let me ask you now about manufactured housing finance. A
year ago, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau published a
report noting that manufactured home buyers have more expensive
loans. It noted that two of three manufacturing homeowners
eligible for a mortgage financed with more expensive personal
property loans instead.
On the screen is a CFPB chart on FHA requirements for
manufactured home loans. Can you briefly explain the types of
financing FHA provides to manufactured home buyers?
Mr. Golding. Yes. We have both Title 1 and Title 2 loans
for manufactured housing. Title 2 requires that it be real
property, and Title 1 will also be for just--for property that
is chatteled. We do try to provide financing to--through both
of those FHA programs.
Mr. Ellison. The CFPB report said that the FHA-guaranteed
loans constituted about a fifth of the manufactured housing
loans for home purchases in 2012. That seems a little low,
especially since about half of all African-American and
Hispanic households seeking mortgages have relied on FHA for
financing since 2008. Contrast 20 percent to 50 percent.
What can the FHA do to improve the financing options for
people who buy manufactured homes?
Mr. Golding. It is an area where the demand has been
declining. I will commit to working with you and your office to
see what more we can do in this area. As you point out, it is
an important source of affordable first-time home ownership.
Mr. Ellison. Quickly, in Minnesota we have eight
manufactured home communities that are resident-owned, which we
are very proud of. Can FHA help those residents buy their
property?
Mr. Golding. Again, thank you for the question. I will have
to work with you on that.
Mr. Ellison. It would be a good thing if we could.
Thank you.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
With that, we go to the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Garrett, chairman of our Capital Markets Subcommittee. He is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garrett. I thank the chairman.
And I thank the Secretary for coming here to testify.
And I thank anyone else who is here from the Department
coming to testify.
By the way, who else is here from the Department? Can they
raise their hands? Anybody else? That's it?
Thank you. About a third of the audience.
So the past news in these hearings was, as has already been
talked about, that the MMI has consistently in the past been
below the 2 percent minimum capital requirements, as required
by law since 2009. You have indicated it is now above that
level.
It should be noted that the 2008 downturn was not foreseen
or expected by anyone. The taxpayers are still on the hook for
over $1 trillion of FHA-insured mortgages.
Here is the difference, Mr. Secretary: Unlike other
financial entities subject to the Dodd-Frank Act and the
Federal Reserve requirements, FHA's 2 percent minimum capital
ratio has not been increased ever, right? It is still 2 percent
and it was 2 percent.
I know in previous hearings on this matter, Mark Zandi
recommended an increase of the minimum capital to 4.5 percent.
Why did he say that? To withstand the effects of another
financial crisis, which all the experts tell us there will be
another financial crisis.
So, quick question: Do you believe that FHA is strong
enough to withhold and withstand another Great Recession at its
level right now? Or do you believe, as other testimony has
given us, that we should increase it to something above 4
percent, instead of 2 percent?
Mr. Golding. Thank you for your question.
If a Great Recession were to start tomorrow, I don't
believe that we would be able to sustain a positive capital
reserve ratio.
Mr. Garrett. What is the level that it should be increased,
do you think?
Mr. Golding. I actually think that the 2 percent standard
is a good standard.
Mr. Garrett. But you just said that it was not strong
enough to meet the next recession, so what would be one that
would be able to withstand it?
Mr. Golding. We are growing and it is projected to--the
fund--there is the question of the standard. I don't expect the
Great Recession to start tomorrow. But we are building reserves
above--
Mr. Garrett. That is good.
Mr. Golding. --that 2 percent.
Mr. Garrett. And I appreciate that. So what is the goal,
what is the target you are trying to get to?
Mr. Golding. We have, again, no specific target. We have a
statutory 2 percent standard.
Mr. Garrett. Right. So what should the--since you have just
testified that the 2 percent level is not strong enough for the
next recession, wouldn't it be incumbent upon us--either you or
Congress--to set a standard that is your target? Maybe you
can't get there tomorrow or next week or next month or by the
end of the year, but shouldn't either you or us set that target
now?
Mr. Golding. As I said, if the Great Recession starts
tomorrow, we can withstand some recessions on that. And we
would be glad to work with your office to try to come up with
what the number is that we would be--in order to survive
another Great Recession.
Mr. Garrett. That would be great, and--that would be
fantastic, actually, if you could provide us with that number.
Now, private financial institutions have to go through
stress tests to deal with that situation, to try to prepare for
that. You do not, correct?
Mr. Golding. Correct.
Mr. Garrett. Is that something that we should require or
you should do voluntarily--do your own stress tests?
Mr. Golding. The independent actuarial does do scenario
analysis, which is similar to a stress test--
Mr. Garrett. But isn't it true that when they do those,
they do so based upon your assumptions?
Mr. Golding. They do a variety of assumptions. Many of
these assumptions are taken from third parties, some from OMB,
but they all--
Mr. Garrett. Isn't it true that some of your assumptions
are not accurate or are faulty assumptions, and that they
recommend other assumptions?
Mr. Golding. I--
Mr. Garrett. That is my understanding.
Mr. Golding. Okay. I will have to go back and look at the
exact report on--
Mr. Garrett. So would you be averse to having--either have
the Congress order or you can do this independently--you have
the power to do a--your own stress test that is akin to or
similar to or the same as what the Fed requires of private
institutions? Why wouldn't that be fair and good to do?
Mr. Golding. As I said, we do--there are scenario
analyses--
Mr. Garrett. But you agree that these are not the same
stress tests that the Fed requires in private institutions? We
agree on that, don't we?
Mr. Golding. They are not exactly the same. They are
similar.
Mr. Garrett. Right. So wouldn't it be good to do those
same--similar stress tests, just like the private sector would,
that would give us a best picture?
Mr. Golding. It always is good to look at different
scenarios.
Mr. Garrett. Would you commit today, then, to reaching out
to them so you could do the exact same stress tests so we could
come back and put everything on an even keel?
Mr. Golding. It is very difficult to know exactly what the
Fed--we are--
Mr. Garrett. You could do this by yourself, adopt those
standards and do your own stress tests. Would you commit to
doing that right now so we can know conceivably that these are
on the same level as the other private institutions have to
deal with? That would be great if you could say that.
Mr. Golding. We do and continue to look at different
scenarios. Not being regulated by the Fed, it is very difficult
for me to make a commitment that we will match exactly what the
Fed does.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
We now go to the gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Clay, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Clay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Golding, for being here today.
It has been over a year since the FHA made the decision to
reduce annual premiums for new borrowers by half of a percent,
despite Republican criticisms that the MMIF was not strong
enough to handle this change. What can you tell us now about
the impact of the premium reduction and the validity of
Republican criticisms against the decision?
Mr. Golding. Thank you for the question.
The concern when you do--we have clearly reduced the
premium in order to lower the cost of housing and for new
first-time homebuyers. And as my written testimony points out,
we actually exceeded our expectations. We had expected 75,000
new first-time homebuyers. The data suggests it is over
106,000.
So we have had--on the benefit side, we clearly did better
than expected. On the cost side, you are cutting your per-loan
revenue, but you also are increasing volume.
And there I turn to the independent actuary, which
basically estimated how those two balanced out. And the
understandable concern was the lost revenue would be greater
than the expanded value.
The independent actuary showed those were basically a wash,
so the cost was actually lower than expected. So greater
benefits than expected, lower costs than expected.
Mr. Clay. And under what conditions might the FHA consider
decreasing premiums further?
Mr. Golding. In general, when one looks at what the
appropriate premium is what you do is you look at the strength
of the fund, you look at what track it is on, what are the
projections. And then you also look at the market conditions in
the housing market: How healthy is it? Are people getting the
credit they need? Is housing affordable?
Mr. Clay. Is HUD considering changing the requirement that
borrowers pay premiums for the life of the loan?
Mr. Golding. Again, I am not considering a change in that.
I view the life of the loan--a lot of our defaults occur much
longer after origination than people expect. This is true of
all mortgages. And so, the losses are fairly long-lived.
And I also will point out that the GSEs do not--their
guarantee fee is also for the life of the loan. So I am
actually not considering changes to the life of the loan
policy.
Mr. Clay. How would you consider the health of the housing
market? I met with some homebuilders yesterday, and apparently
it is increasing, but they complained about some of the
regulatory obstacles. And they think it is a little more
difficult, especially with some of the hurdles that they have
to jump through in relation to the Clean Water Act and things
like that.
What are you seeing?
Mr. Golding. Yes. So especially for new construction
largely driven by household formation, and that has come--is
much stronger than it had been. It is over a million
households.
There is no doubt that getting the land and getting it
permitted are tough issues, and it is community by community.
There is not just one national policy there. As they say, real
estate is local no more than when you are building.
Mr. Clay. Okay. And do you--despite the premium reduction
announced in January of last year, the FHA premiums remain high
by historical standards. Many have pushed for an even larger
reduction.
The most recent independent actuarial report on the Mutual
Mortgage Insurance Fund shows it to be in a strong financial
condition. And is HUD now considering further premium
reductions or other steps?
Mr. Golding. We have no plans at this time. Again, it is a
very--it is one of these things that we evaluate. It depends,
as I have pointed out, on the strength of the fund, its
trajectory, and the needs of the housing market.
Mr. Clay. I see. Thank you very much for your answers.
And I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back.
With that, we go to the gentleman from California, Mr.
Royce, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Royce. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Golding, thanks for being with us this morning.
The GSEs, under the direction of the FHA, have engaged in
innovative methods of offloading risk to shield the American
taxpayers currently holding the back for Fannie and Freddie
losses. And I have been encouraged by the progress that the
GSEs have made in this regard, although I think a lot more
could be done.
Risk-sharing with the private sector is a way to slowly but
quite surely remove the Federal Government's grip on the
housing market and introduce private capital in a way that lets
us better price risk and avoid a calamity. So it is my belief
that the FHA has the authority to do risk-share transactions,
or at least co-insurance to reduce the risk.
We had a conversation with Secretary Castro here and he
told me we can find ways to introduce more private capital into
the market. And I was going to ask, what are you doing to work
with the private sector to--in mortgage finance with an eye to
avoiding the need down the road, should troubled waters be
ahead, of avoiding any taxpayer-funded bailout?
Mr. Golding. Thank you for the question.
And I am aware of what the GSEs have done, some of their
innovative products. As I mentioned before, on the multi-family
side, we do risk-sharing. I would also mention that there is a
lot of private capital in the FHA market in terms of the
origination, the servicing, and actually the funding of the
mortgages.
As it relates to credit risk, it is a difficult one on the
single-family side for FHA to share credit risk. As I am sure
the GSEs will tell you, there is a lot of systems work involved
in setting up these programs. I know many of the individuals
over there working on that. So it is very difficult.
The other thing I would point out is you are also giving up
significant income. So while you are shedding some of the
downside, you are also shedding considerable revenue when you
do do a risk-sharing transaction.
Mr. Royce. The question I will ask you about--and I saw Mr.
Garrett had inquired about capital--your target capital ratio.
And I remember a conversation I had with Mark Zandi after he
finished his book, and in particular we were talking about the
GSEs.
For FHA, the issue of a target capital ratio of 2 percent--
I know you are looking at this--he felt that 4.5 percent was
the proper capital ratio, at least 4.5 percent. And so, since I
know you are looking at analyzing where will you go on that
target, I would just suggest that I think with an eye toward
experience, that would be a wise objective. And I just wanted
to get your feedback on that.
Mr. Golding. I have been looking at capital ratios for most
of my career in the mortgage market. Yes, it's a tough question
exactly what the right level is.
I will point out we have had--the 2 percent target has
served us well, that while we came through the Great Recession
there was a mandatory appropriation. I think FHA came through,
as all the mortgage--of all the major participants in the
mortgage market that I know of, FHA came through this crisis
better than any of them did.
So I do think that we have the wherewithal. And these
numbers, the 2 percent works. It is a projection of whether we
are going to run out of cash in year 27.
Mr. Royce. Right.
Mr. Golding. It is not an immediate cash need. We have lots
of cash at hand.
But we would be glad to continue the discussion of what a
different target might be.
Mr. Royce. Thank you, Mr. Golding.
I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the gentlelady from California, Ms. Waters,
who is the ranking member of the full Financial Services
Committee. She is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and members.
I am very pleased that we are here today and the committee
has invited you, Mr. Golding, to speak with us, because it does
give us an opportunity to highlight the very positive results
that were included in the most recent independent actuarial
report on the health of the Mutual Mortgage Insurance Fund.
The report showed that the fund has now reached and
exceeded the capital ratio requirement and now stands at 2.07
percent. The economic net worth of the fund is now at $23.8
billion, which is up $19 billion from the previous year. The
report also shows that delinquency rates and foreclosures
started to decrease substantially.
Exactly 1 year ago, this committee held an oversight
hearing on the FHA, for which Secretary Castro came to testify.
At that hearing the Republicans criticized the Secretary for
his decision to decrease premiums, saying that the decision was
irresponsible and that the fund was not strong enough to handle
a premium decrease.
But here we are 1 year later and the fund has reached and
exceeded the capital ratio earlier than expected, and it is in
strong financial shape. Moreover, the premium reduction is
helping thousands more borrowers access affordable home
ownership.
So thank you very much for your work, and for Mr. Castro's
leadership on this issue.
I have a few issues that I would like to bring to your
attention.
Let me just ask about the reverse mortgage program. We had
some interaction with HUD, particularly about the spouses of
deceased individuals who were the mortgage-holders, and an
inability for them to stay in their homes, et cetera, et
cetera. I understand that a lot of work has been done on this
issue and that you are continuing to work on this.
But I am concerned about the reverse mortgage program in
general. I see a lot of advertising that continues to go on, a
lot of lack of information that seniors don't have, a lot--
information that they don't have.
And so what is the future of this reverse mortgage program?
What are you doing, and do you think that we need to either
talk about how we wind this down, or can it be fixed in a way
that seniors understand it, and that they are fairly
compensated while they are alive, and that they don't end up
basically losing property that is valued much higher than what
they have gotten out of it? What do you think about this?
Mr. Golding. Thank you for the question.
Reverse mortgage is a really tough question, and I struggle
with it too. Thanks to this committee, we have made important
changes in this program, and I am--what is being originated now
I generally think is good for allowing seniors to age in place.
There is a very important role for counseling so that
individuals know what they are getting. And, quite frankly, we
encourage families and heirs and non-bearing spouses to be part
of that counseling.
So I think the program now is on the steady keel. Its
volumes are way down as a result, but it is one that needs to
be monitored closely, as we learn more about the program.
Ms. Waters. We are going to be paying very close attention
to it and trying to address some of the concerns that we have
identified.
Let me just move on. Since HUD announced its multi-family
transformation initiative, I have been active in opposing this
dramatic consolidation of HUD's multi-family field offices
throughout the country. This plan seems to ignore the
importance of local offices, and I am concerned that it will
adversely affect the delivery of services by reducing staff's
ability to effectively respond to local concerns.
That is why I successfully introduced an amendment to the
2015 HUD funding bill to ensure that HUD is not requiring the
consolidation of asset management staff. However, I am very
disappointed that HUD is circumventing the intent of this
legislation and to keep asset management in every field office
by failing to backfill these positions. Some offices are
already completely vacant because HUD has not replaced asset
management staff in those locations.
And I have also heard from affected HUD staff that HUD is
penalizing asset management staff who are not choosing to
relocate by sending the message that there will be no
opportunities for career advancement rules--they voluntarily
relocate to a hub office. Is this true?
Mr. Golding. Our current plans have been to, when vacancies
were to occur--now, it is a fairly new program so I will have
to get to you on the number of vacancies--but our current plan
has been to fill those at one of either the hub or the
satellite offices.
Ms. Waters. Is there any intimidation going on with
employees because you would like to or you are trying to
circumvent what I successfully had passed?
Mr. Golding. Let me look into that. We don't tolerate
intimidation, so please, I will work with your office on that
one.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentlelady's time has expired.
With that, we go to the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Barr,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for holding this
hearing.
Mr. Golding, thanks for your testimony and your service.
I want to follow up on the line of questioning from Mr.
Garrett and Mr. Royce on what is the appropriate capital
reserve ratio. I think we are all happy to see the positive
development of exceeding the 2 percent target, but we continue
to be concerned that target may be inadequate.
The Government Accountability Office found that the
statutory target of 2 percent is insufficient to ensure the
stability of the FHA in the event of another crisis. I think
Mr. Royce mentioned economists like Mr. Zandi, who said that we
need a capital ratio of at least 4.5 percent.
And then, of course, just the history of a $1.7 billion
mandatory appropriation suggests that a 2 percent capital ratio
requirement may not be adequate in a stress scenario.
So, given those realities, and given the decision by the
FHA to reduce the mortgage insurance premiums, what was the
decision-making process in making that decision to reduce
premiums? And are you in any way concerned that may deteriorate
a more realistic target where we need to go?
Mr. Golding. I appreciate the question, and it is an
important one because the strength of the fund is very
important, and one that I, too, have always been concerned
about.
The track is strong. We raised--I don't remember the exact
number, but I think we raised the mortgage insurance premium
about 8 times. The last one was a step back as market
conditions had changed and the like, where we thought it was
important to get it at a level that promoted affordability.
And as I said, the actuary has showed that it didn't really
have an effect on the trajectory of how fast we are growing. In
fact, they are now projecting that we are going to grow faster
than they did last year before the cut.
Mr. Barr. I appreciate the goal and the mission of
affordability. But according to the National Association of
Insurance Commissioners, their model act on mortgage insurance,
any mortgage insurance company that has outstanding total
liability greater than 25 times its capital is required to
cease operations until it rebuilds capital.
Obviously, the FHA is competing and supplanting PMI. Its
capital requirements arguably should be at least similar to
private markets, but the FHA baseline is 50-to-one, meaning
that it is operating with only 2 cents on hand for every dollar
of risk, which is half the minimum amount required by State
regulators.
So, given that, what should be the proper balance in market
share between FHA and private mortgage insurance, and where is
it now?
Mr. Golding. In terms of, as I said, in terms of
insurance--and these are rough numbers, but for a very high LTV
above--basically above 80 LTV, where the M.I.s play, where we
play, the rough breakdown is basically 40 percent M.I., 40
percent FHA, and about 20 percent VA is where it is.
Mr. Barr. So 40-40-20?
Mr. Golding. Roughly.
Mr. Barr. Okay.
Mr. Golding. It bounces around, but that is my rule of
thumb.
Mr. Barr. Do you all look at the substitution effect that
you all are having when you lower premiums, when you have lower
capital requirements versus the private sector? Do you all
actually look at the displacement that your policies create?
And don't we want to invite more private mortgage
insurance? Forty percent seems like a low number.
Mr. Golding. Now look, we look at it, I read what the M.I.
said. One of them told their investors that the net reduction
had less than a 5 percent effect on their business.
So I am definitely aware of the fact that there is overlap.
But if you step back, we really do operate in largely different
markets. Our core market and their core market--
Mr. Barr. But in the high-income areas you are talking
about loans of $625,000, and I know that that is a high-income
place or standard, but where I come from, a $625,000 mortgage
is a very significant amount of debt.
But in any event, my time has expired. I would just
encourage FHA to--we want to make sure risk is on the private
sector, not on the taxpayer.
I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back.
With that, we are finished with our witnesses.
And I will thank Mr. Golding for being here today.
I just have a few closing comments. I still have concerns
and, to your testimony today, sir, I appreciate some of your
remarks, and I am glad to see your capital has improved. I
think that is fantastic.
But if you take the report, as I initially started my
discussion with, in 2011, you are diametrically opposed with
the way you are operating today compared to what that report
was trying to give you the guidelines in the future. And so you
were talking about raising premiums; now you are lowering
premiums. You were talking about trying to shift stuff to the
private market; through many of our Members' questions and what
have you today, that is not happening.
So your comment a while ago was with regards to all the
underwriting you did. The chart on the screen right now shows
that for 10 years, underwriting went downhill, or your profits
went downhill, or negative, in fact, as a result of the
underwriting practice that you were using.
In 2009, you switched and got back on a sound basis, and
now you have actually made money, which is fantastic.
The problem and the concern that I have, though, is that
you testified a minute ago, whenever I was discussing it with
you, with regards to the reverse mortgages, that you are taking
on higher loan levels with more risk, and doing it with less
income associated with that risk. That is a recipe for
disaster.
And so hopefully, there isn't a downturn. Hopefully, we can
work our way out of this. But I think it is incumbent on us as
a committee to continue to watch what goes on here very
carefully because I think you are treading on some very thin
ice with the way that you are running the Department,
especially with getting into the reverse mortgage market with
less income to protect it.
So with that, we certainly want to, again, thank you for
your participation today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this witness, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to this witness and to place his responses in the record. Also,
without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days to
submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in the
record.
And with that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:07 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

February 11, 2016

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
