- LONG LINES, SHORT PATIENCE: LOCAL PERSPECTIVES

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

LONG LINES, SHORT PATIENCE:
LOCAL PERSPECTIVES

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION SECURITY

of the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 26, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-74

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

23-246 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Michael T. McCaul, Texas, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas                   Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Peter T. King, New York              Loretta Sanchez, California
Mike Rogers, Alabama                 Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Candice S. Miller, Michigan, Vice    James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Chair                            Brian Higgins, New York
Jeff Duncan, South Carolina          Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania             William R. Keating, Massachusetts
Lou Barletta, Pennsylvania           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Filemon Vela, Texas
Curt Clawson, Florida                Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
John Katko, New York                 Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Will Hurd, Texas                     Norma J. Torres, California
Earl L. ``Buddy'' Carter, Georgia
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Barry Loudermilk, Georgia
Martha McSally, Arizona
John Ratcliffe, Texas
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York
Brendan P. Shields, Staff Director
Joan V. O'Hara,  General Counsel
Michael S. Twinchek, Chief Clerk
I. Lanier Avant, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION SECURITY

John Katko, New York, Chairman
Mike Rogers, Alabama                 Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Earl L. ``Buddy'' Carter, Georgia    William R. Keating, Massachusetts
Mark Walker, North Carolina          Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
John Ratcliffe, Texas                Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Michael T. McCaul, Texas (ex             (ex officio)
officio)
Krista P. Harvey, Subcommittee Staff Director
Kris Carlson, Subcommittee Clerk
Cedric C. Haynes, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable John Katko, a Representative in Congress From the
State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Transportation
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Donald M. Payne, a Representative in Congress From
the State of New Jersey:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     5

Witnesses

Ms. Christina R. Callahan, Executive Director, Syracuse Hancock
International Airport, Syracuse, New York
Oral Statement.................................................     6
Joint Prepared Statement.......................................     8
Ms. Bonnie A. Allin, President and CEO, Tucson Airport Authority,
Tucson, Arizona:
Oral Statement.................................................    10
Prepared Statement.............................................    11
Ms. Lydia Beairsto, Managing Deputy Commissioner for Security,
Department of Aviation, City of Chicago, Illinois..............    17
Ms. Kerry Philipovitch, Senior Vice President, Customer
Experience, American Airlines:
Oral Statement.................................................    19
Prepared Statement.............................................    21
Mr. J. David Cox, Sr., National President, American Federation of
Government Employees:
Oral Statement.................................................    23
Prepared Statement.............................................    25

LONG LINES, SHORT PATIENCE: LOCAL PERSPECTIVES

----------

Thursday, May 26, 2016

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Transportation Security,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:08 a.m., in
Room 311, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. John Katko
[Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Katko, Carter, and Payne.
Also present: Representatives McSally and Jackson Lee.
Mr. Katko. The Committee on Homeland Security, Subcommittee
on Transportation Security, will come to order.
A bit of housekeeping before we proceed. I ask unanimous
consent that the gentlewoman from Arizona, Ms. McSally, be
allowed to sit on the dais and participate in this hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
The subcommittee is meeting today to better understand the
root causes of increased passenger wait times and gain local
perspectives on this important issue.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
As the summer holiday season approaches, we are in the
midst of a crisis at our airports. American families are
planning to enjoy their time off traveling to points near and
far, business men and women are doing the same that they do all
year round, and the added crush of the travel season, leisure
season, is causing particular problems.
As they begin their journeys, they will arrive at airports
around the country only to be confronted with longer and longer
lines at many airports at TSA checkpoints, causing some to
return home after missing their flights and stranding others to
take up temporary residence at the airport on a cot, like we
saw in Chicago a few weeks ago.
Unfortunately, this is not an isolated incident, and this
committee continues to receive reports from around the country
describing delays at TSA checkpoints in excess of 2 hours. On
Good Friday, March 25, 600 passengers missed their flights at
the Charlotte Douglas International Airport due to an apparent
lack of TSA manpower and checkpoint inefficiencies. In fact,
that airport was nearly forced to effect a ground stoppage, a
literal standstill of air traffic, due to delays at the
checkpoint.
This is wholly unacceptable. I, along with the American
taxpayer, expect the security at America's airports to be
streamlined, effective, and efficient.
This committee has worked tirelessly with TSA to ensure
that the manpower and technology they need to operate
checkpoints at optimal levels is there.
While TSA realized there would be an issue and communicated
to the American public that increased wait times should be
expected at our Nation's airports as we enter the high travel
seasons, they did not have a clear picture of the resources
they would need to tackle this problem and clearly were not
prepared for it.
The TSA fiscal year 2017 budget request did not account for
any of the increases in overtime or staffing that they are now
requesting to meet their basic screening function. It wasn't
until widespread media reports of passengers on cots, which is
completely unacceptable, and excessive wait times that TSA made
the decision to request to reallocate assets to help combat the
issue.
I, my colleagues on this committee, and Ms. McSally are
growing increasingly frustrated that TSA needs constant
prodding to effect positive changes at the agency.
This committee has passed several pieces of bipartisan
legislation that would go a long way towards improving the
overall security of airports, as well as improving checkpoint
optimization. But the Senate refused to expedite passage of
these important bills, standing on principle or some esoteric
theory about how the agency should be run. In short, they are
trying to polish the brass while the fire bell is ringing.
For example, my TSA PreCheck bill would require TSA to
expand and aggressively market the program, thereby increasing
the number of trusted travelers into the system, diverting them
into PreCheck checkpoints, and alleviating the stress on the
general public checkpoints. However, due to typical Washington
antics, this bill, amongst others, remains stalled.
When I came to Congress I made a commitment to my
constituents to tackle problems head on and just get things
done. Last week, the subcommittee convened representatives from
airports and airlines from across this country to discuss this
wait time crisis and hear directly from them about what they
think needs to be done to help. It was a very productive
meeting, and it gave me faith that the process in Congress can
and does work sometimes.
The message was consistent: TSA needs to collaborate with
individual airlines and airport authorities to coordinate
sufficient staffing levels on a local basis.
I have heard your message, and later today I will introduce
the Checkpoint Optimization and Efficiency Act of 2016, which
will require TSA to maximize all of their available resources
and give airports and airlines a seat at the table to ensure
those resources are being utilized and allocated in the most
effective and efficient manner.
Make no mistake, security is first and foremost. Those that
wish to do us harm continue to plot against the aviation
community, and we must be ready to confront them at every turn.
But TSA has to find a way to maintain security while fulfilling
its duty to keep passengers safely moving through the system.
They have the capability to do it. TSA has to be forward-
leaning and creative to address obstacles as they present
themselves, just like all of us do in our daily jobs.
I would like to thank our witnesses for taking time out of
their busy schedules and making multiple trips on short notice
to Washington to aid us in solving this problem. I am lucky,
honored, and fortunate to have the Syracuse International
Airport, which I fly in and out of each week, as the well-oiled
machine that it is, compared to the horror stories we heard at
last week's roundtable discussion on checkpoint efficiency. I
have Christina Callahan, one of the witnesses here, to thank
for that.
I would like to thank all of you for being here today, and
I look forward to hearing your perspective on the best and most
effective way forward.
[The statement of Chairman Katko follows:]
Statement of Chairman John Katko
May 26, 2016
As the summer holiday season approaches, we are in the midst of a
crisis at our airports. American families are planning to enjoy their
time off traveling to points near and far. As they begin their
journeys, they will arrive at airports around the country only to be
confronted with longer and longer lines at TSA security checkpoints,
causing some to return home after missing their flights and stranding
others to take up temporary residence at the airport, on a cot, like we
saw in Chicago a few weeks ago.
Unfortunately, this is not an isolated incident and this committee
continues to receive reports from around the country describing delays
at TSA checkpoints in excess of 2 hours. On Good Friday, March 25, 600
passengers missed their flights, at the Charlotte-Douglas International
Airport, due to an apparent lack of TSA manpower and checkpoint
inefficiencies. In fact, the airport was nearly forced to affect a
ground stoppage--a literal standstill of air traffic--due to delays at
the checkpoint. This is wholly unacceptable and I, along with the
American taxpayer, expect the security at America's airports to be
streamlined, effective, and efficient.
This committee has worked tirelessly with TSA to ensure they have
the manpower and technology they need to operate checkpoints at optimal
levels. While TSA realized there would be an issue, and communicated to
the American public that increased wait times should be expected at our
Nation's airports as we enter the high travel seasons, they did not
have a clear picture of the resources they would need to tackle this
problem. The TSA fiscal year 2017 budget request did not account for
any of the increases in overtime or staffing that they are now
requesting to meet their basic screening function. It wasn't until
wide-spread media reports of passengers on cots and excessive wait
times, that TSA made the decision to request to reallocate assets to
help combat the issue. I am growing increasingly frustrated that TSA
needs constant prodding to effect positive changes at the agency.
This committee has passed several pieces of bipartisan legislation
that would go a long way to improve the overall security of airports as
well as improving checkpoint optimization, but the Senate refuses to
expedite passage of these important bills. For example, my TSA PreCheck
bill would require TSA to expand and aggressively market the program,
thereby, increasing the number of trusted travelers into the system,
diverting them into the PreCheck checkpoints and alleviating the stress
on the general public checkpoints. However, due to typical Washington
antics, this bill amongst others remains stalled.
When I came to Congress I made a commitment to my constituents to
tackle problems head on and get things done. Last week, this
subcommittee convened representatives from airports and airlines from
across this country to discuss this wait time crisis and hear directly
from them what they think needs to be done to help. The message was
consistent; TSA needs to collaborate with individual airlines and
airport authorities to coordinate sufficient staffing levels on a local
basis. I have heard your message, and later today, I will introduce the
``Checkpoint Optimization and Efficiency Act of 2016,'' which will
require TSA to maximize all of their available resources and give
airports and airlines a seat at the table, to ensure those resources
are being utilized and allocated in the most effective and efficient
manner.
Make no mistake, security is first and foremost. Those that wish to
do us harm continue to plot against the aviation community and we must
be ready to confront them at every turn. But TSA has to find a way to
maintain security while fulfilling its duty to keep passengers safely
moving through the system. TSA has to be forward-leaning and creative
to address obstacles as they present themselves.
I would like to thank our witnesses for taking time out of their
busy schedules and making multiple trips, on short notice, to
Washington to aid us in solving this problem. I am lucky, the Syracuse
Hancock International Airport, which I fly in and out of each week, is
a well-oiled machine compared to the horror stories we heard at last
week's roundtable discussion on checkpoint efficiency, and I have
Christina Callahan to thank for that.
I would like to thank all of you for being here today and I look
forward to hearing your perspective on the best and most effective way
forward.

Mr. Katko. With that, I now recognize the Ranking Member of
the subcommittee, the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Payne, for
his opening statement. I like those glasses.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wore them just for
you.
Mr. Katko. Go orange.
Mr. Payne. Yeah, right.
I would also like to thank you for holding this hearing.
It is good that we are having this hearing immediately
following the full committee hearing with Administrator
Neffenger yesterday.
Recently, wait times have been a major cause of concern
within our Nation's airports. Last week, for example, due to
extreme wait times, the Transportation Security Administration
reallocated resources to Chicago Midway International Airport
and Newark Liberty Airport to decrease the length of screening
lines.
While I am pleased that TSOs are being given the
opportunity to be converted to full-time and the administration
has taken steps to address the problem in the interim, we need
to find a viable long-term solution to this problem.
Reallocating, or taking one airport's resources and giving it
to another, will only fix the problem temporarily.
For the summer travel period, TSA predicted that nearly 740
million individuals will use commercial aviation travel, which
happens to be the most air travelers this country has ever
seen. In contrast, TSOs, who are responsible for screening
passengers and baggage, are at some of the lowest numbers we
have seen in years.
This is due in large part to limited resources. Under
former Administrator Pistole, the agency pivoted to risk-based
security, a frame of mind that we focus our resources on
individuals who we know less about, and rightfully so.
However, this methodology also came with programs that were
not sustainable due to security risk, such as Managed Inclusion
2, which has since ceased. Although they are still using a
risk-based approach, it does not take away from the fact that
the amount of officers, when compared to the number of people
traveling, is insufficient.
Last week, the Subcommittee on Transportation Security held
a roundtable discussion with the airports, and many important
things were discussed. There were general agreements that BDOs
could be used in other roles throughout the screener model.
Yesterday, we learned TSA agrees and supports the Federal
security directors having the flexibility to use BDOs in
different ways.
We also heard concern on whether or not Federal security
directors had enough flexibility to operate as necessary
checkpoints with staffing. The administrator testified
yesterday that he believed that they always had such
flexibility and that he worked to ensure that they knew that
they had this flexibility.
Now we get to hear more perspectives from stakeholders who
are intimately involved with the commercial aviation and
airlines and airports themselves. Today I look forward to
hearing what your experiences throughout this issue have been,
as well as how you view the steps that are being taken.
I would also like to thank President Cox from AFGE for
being here to serve as the voice of the workforce. TSOs
represent the front line in our efforts to secure the
commercial aviation sector. They do an outstanding job
screening passengers and their belongings, and often unfairly
receive the majority of the blame for this issue. Their
perspective is absolutely vital in this conversation.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you, and I yield
back the balance of my time.
[The statement of Hon. Payne follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Donald M. Payne, Jr.
May 26, 2016
Recently, wait times have been a major cause for concern within our
Nation's airports. Last week for example, due to extreme wait times,
the Transportation Security Administration reallocated resources to
Chicago-Midway International Airport and Newark Liberty Airport--to
decrease the length of screening lines.
While I am pleased that TSOs are being given the opportunity to be
converted to full-time, and the administration has taken steps to
address the problem in the interim, we need to find viable long-term
solutions to this problem.
Reallocating, or taking one airport's resources and giving them to
another, will only fix the problem temporarily. For the summer travel
period, TSA has predicted that nearly 740 million individuals will use
commercial aviation to travel, which happens to be the most air
travelers this country has ever seen.
In contrast, TSOs, who are responsible for screening passengers and
baggage, are at some of the lowest numbers we've seen in years. This is
due, in large part, to limited resources.
Under former-Administrator Pistole, the agency pivoted to risk-
based security, a frame of mind that we focus our resources on
individuals who we know less about--and rightfully so.
However, this methodology also came with programs that were not
sustainable due to security risks, such as Managed Inclusion 2, which
has sense ceased. Although they are still using a risk-based approach,
it does not take away from the fact that the amount of travelers, when
compared to the number of people traveling, is insufficient.
Last week the Subcommittee on Transportation Security held a
roundtable discussion with airports and many important things were
discussed. There was general agreement that BDOs could be used in other
roles throughout the screener model. Yesterday, we learned that TSA
agrees, and supports Federal Security Directors having the flexibility
to use BDOs in different ways.
We also heard concern on whether or not Federal Security Directors
had enough flexibility to operate as necessary with checkpoint
staffing. The administrator testified yesterday that he believed that
they always had such flexibility, and that he worked to ensure that
they knew that they had this flexibility.
Now, we get to hear more perspectives from stakeholders who are
intimately involved with commercial aviation and airlines and the
airports themselves. Today, I look forward to hearing what your
experiences throughout this issue have been, as well as how you view
the steps that are being taken by the administration, and in some
instances, yourselves, to address wait times.
I would also like to thank President Cox from AFGE for being here
to serve as the voice of the workforce. TSOs represent the front line
in our efforts to secure the commercial aviation sector. They do an
outstanding job screening passengers and their belongings, and often
unfairly receive the majority of the blame for this issue. Their
perspective is absolutely vital in this conversation.

Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Payne.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
We are pleased to have a very distinguished panel here to
testify before us today on this very important topic. Christina
Callahan serves as executive director for Syracuse Hancock
International Airport in Syracuse, New York. Ms. Bonnie Allin
is president and CEO of the Tucson Airport in Tucson, Arizona.
Ms. Lydia Beairsto serves as managing deputy commissioner for
security in the department of aviation for the city of Chicago.
Ms. Kerry Philipovitch, senior vice president for customer
service at American Airlines. Mr. David Cox, National president
of the American Federation of Government Employees.
Thank you all for being here today.
I now recognize Ms. Christina Callahan for an opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTINA R. CALLAHAN, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
SYRACUSE HANCOCK INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT, SYRACUSE, NEW YORK

Ms. Callahan. Thank you. Good morning. Chairman Katko and
Ranking Member Payne, and to the other Members of the
Transportation Security Committee, thank you. Thank you for
inviting us to today's hearing on an issue that requires both
immediate attention and long-term sustainable solutions: How to
handle growing lines at TSA checkpoints at airports across the
country while maintaining the high standards for passenger and
baggage screening we need in order to keep the flying public
safe.
Syracuse International Airport is a small commercial hub
serving 2 million passengers annually, providing cargo and
general aviation services to central New York. It employs
hundreds of people and is a vital component of our economy. As
an origination and destination airport, we serve 17 direct
markets and we are the departure point for 1 million outbound
passengers every year.
While Syracuse has not experienced the recent increased
long security checkpoint times, we are part of a National
transportation system that links our passengers to the airports
represented here today, and working towards a solution as we
enter one of the busiest travel seasons in the year is as
important to Syracuse as it is to my fellow airports. What I
hope to offer today, in addition to echoing my fellow airports'
concerns, are examples of the steps we have taken to address
our issues at home.
Ensuring the security and safety of the flying public,
employees, and other airport users is the top priority for
airports. Above all else, we are entrusted by the traveling
public to provide safe and secure air transportation.
Checkpoint wait times that exceed an hour or longer at some of
our Nation's busiest airports have negative impacts on all
elements of the air transportation system. Passengers are
frustrated, taking their frustrations out on TSA, airport, and
airline employees. The anxiety caused by concern over missing a
flight, or even worse, missing that flight, creates an
environment that is already challenged and difficult.
Several factors have been identified that have contributed
to the checkpoint wait time issues. They include no increase in
the number of Transportation Security Officers between fiscal
years 2015 and 2016, the high rate of TSO attrition followed by
the lengthy process to hire new TSOs, record growth in
passenger traffic and lagging numbers in PreCheck enrollment.
Combined, they have created a perfect storm that has led to
recent events.
Working together, the airports, TSA, the airlines, and
industry advocates have identified short- and long-term
recommendations that focus on key areas, including the need for
sufficient TSA staffing, increased PreCheck enrollment and
participation, and the continued need to modernize airport
infrastructure. We do not, however, support the imposition of
any new passenger fees. Rather, we believe that the portion of
the 9/11 passenger security fees that are currently being used
to pay for other Government programs should be used to fund
TSA.
Let me talk about PreCheck for just a moment. Chairman
Katko was at the airport last November when we unveiled the TSA
enrollment center in Syracuse. PreCheck has proven to be very
successful at our airports. Currently, almost 40 percent of the
flying public is enrolled in PreCheck.
While we believe that this is the result of having an
enrollment center in the terminal, our efforts to educate the
public on the benefits of PreCheck have been very important.
While seemly insignificant, the airport's role in incentivizing
people to enroll in PreCheck by giving them free parking has
resulted in the increased numbers of people enrolling. While
not all airports are in a position to offer incentives, we have
found that it has encouraged enough people to come out and
spend an hour and enroll in PreCheck.
I would be remiss if I did not bring up the need to
modernize airport infrastructure. We have spent time and money
improving our airport, consolidating our checkpoint into one
central checkpoint, to introduce efficiencies at every level. A
central checkpoint was designed to bring the physical screening
of passengers and baggage in alignment. It improved passenger
and baggage screening at several levels. It allowed for the
introduction of new screening equipment, consolidated TSA
resources into one, and it has allowed us to implement new
security requirements, such as the screening of all concession
employees.
We have also been on the cutting edge of security by
installing automated exit portals. These automated exit portals
allow passengers and employees to exit the concourses safely
and securely, without--preventing re-entry. It also eliminates
the need to staff the exit lanes, thus saving the airport money
and reducing the human error element. Let me stress that this
project would not have been possible without the use of the
airport's passenger facility charges.
To place the blame solely on TSA is unfair and not a
solution to the problem. Rather, we must work together to
address the major underlying issues before you today.
In closing, I would like to offer my gratitude to Chairman
Katko and to the other Members of the subcommittee for taking
the time to listen to our concerns. Thank you for inviting us
and for your continued commitment to the safety and security of
airports and the people who use them every day.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Callahan follows:]
Prepared Statement of Christina R. Callahan
May 26, 2016
Good morning Chairman Katko and Ranking Member Rice and the other
Members of the Transportation Security Subcommittee. Thank you for
inviting us to today's hearing on an issue that requires both immediate
attention and long-term, sustainable solutions--how to handle growing
lines at TSA checkpoints at airports across the country.
Syracuse Hancock International Airport is a small commercial hub,
serving 2 million passengers annually, providing air cargo and general
aviation services to the Central New York region, employing hundreds of
people, and is a vital component of the economic engine that drives the
success of our community. The airport is located in Onondaga County, in
approximately the geographic center of New York State and is a joint
use facility along with the 174th Attack Wing of the New York Air
National Guard.
While Syracuse has not experienced the recent increasing long
security checkpoint times, we are part of a National air transportation
system that links our passengers to the airports represented here today
and working towards a solution as we near one of our busiest travel
seasons in the year, as is important to us as it is to my fellow
airport representatives.
Ensuring the safety and security of the flying public, employees,
and other airport users is the top priority for airports. Above all
else, we are entrusted by the traveling public to provide safe and
secure air transportation. Checkpoint wait times that exceed an hour or
longer at some of our Nation's busiest airports, have negative impacts
on all elements of the air transportation system. Passengers are
frustrated, taking their frustrations out on TSA, airline, and airport
employees; the anxiety caused by concern over missing a flight, or even
worse, actually missing that flight, creates unease and unrest among
all airport users.
Several factors have been identified that have contributed to the
checkpoint wait time issues. They include no increase in the number of
Transportation Security Officers between fiscal years 2015 and 2016;
the high rate of TSA attrition followed by the lengthy process to hire
new TSOs; record growth in passenger traffic, and lagging numbers in
PreCheck enrollment. Combined, they created a perfect storm of events
that led to recent events.
We have identified short-term and long-term recommendations that
focus on key areas including the need for sufficient TSA staffing,
increased PreCheck enrollment and participation, and the continued need
to modernize airport infrastructure. We do not support the imposition
of new passenger fees, rather we believe that the portion of the 9/11
passenger security fees that are currently being used to pay for other
Government programs, should be used to fund TSA.
PreCheck has proven to be very successful at SYR. Currently, almost
40% of passengers flying out of SYR are enrolled in PreCheck. We
believe that this is the result of having an enrollment center in the
terminal, our efforts to educate the public on the benefits of
PreCheck, and while seemingly insignificant, the airport's offer to
validate parking for PreCheck applicants. PreCheck customers bring
their receipt to the airport's administration office after submitting
their application and we validate their parking ticket. It is an
incentive for people to make that appointment, drive to the airport,
and enroll in PreCheck. While not all airports are in a position to
offer free parking, we have found that it is enough of an incentive to
get people to enroll in PreCheck.
I would be remiss if I did not bring up the need to modernize
airport infrastructure. Airports, like Syracuse, were not built to meet
the demands of today's security requirements. Prior to 2013, Syracuse
was in the same position many airports find themselves in today. Long
lines, missed flights, and angry passengers. We decided to do something
about it, and committed our PFCs through 2027 for the Passenger
Terminal Security Improvements Project. We built a new, second-level
central checkpoint which was designed to bring both the physical
screening of passengers and baggage in alignment with current-day
security requirements, and it also allowed for expansion and
implementation of future screening requirements. The new centralized
security checkpoint has improved passenger and baggage screening at
several levels; new screening equipment including advanced imaging
technology, implementation of TSA PreCheck; improved customer service
by consolidating TSA resources into one, centralized location; and the
ability to implement new security requirements, such as the requirement
to screen all concession employees.
Following completion of the centralized security checkpoint, the
airport reconfigured the checkpoints located at the entrance of each
concourse as passenger exit points, which had previously been used for
passenger and baggage screening, as the exits for passengers leaving
the secure area. The airport then installed automated exit portals in
each concourse. The automated exit portals allow passengers and
employees to exit the secure area safely, while at the same preventing
people from accessing the secure area. The portals provide a positive
barrier to security breaches by preventing people and things from
entering or accessing the secure area from a non-secure area. Through
the use of sensors, the portals can detect items that are left in a
portal, such as keys, a cell phone, or a bag. If a foreign object is
detected, the sensor will cause the portal to lock down until security
personnel sweep the portal and clear it for use again. In addition to
the safety and security benefits of the exit portals, the cost savings
are such that the portals have paid for themselves. Because the exit
portals are automated, the airport is no longer required to physically
monitor the exit lanes, thus eliminating the human error element.
To place the blame solely on TSA is unfair and not a solution to
the problem. Rather, we must work together to address the major
underlying issues addressed before you today. What we have learned in
Syracuse is that communication and cooperation between the airport,
TSA, and the airlines is critical to safe and efficient operations. As
proposed in the Checkpoint Optimization and Efficiency Act of 2016, we
agree that advisory committees be established at a local level. Working
together rather than pointing fingers is the first key step at the
local level.
What the airports can offer today is the experience we have running
one of the most complicated and complex transportation systems in the
world. We believe that the focus areas we have identified and the
solutions we have proposed will address some of the immediate concerns,
but also layout a long-term plan for the continued safety and security
of the flying public.
Thank you for your time this morning.

Mr. Katko. Thank you, Ms. Callahan. Syracuse is indeed very
fortunate to have you at the helm at the airport. I can tell
you from personal experience that it is a generally very
pleasurable experience. The only thing that is difficult is
when you are trying to get a flight to Kennedy and it always
seemed to be delayed.
But other than that, I really appreciate your efforts. Your
forward thinking on getting a kiosk out at the airport, your
forward thinking by giving free parking to TSA as like a
marketing thing, that thinking outside the box, that is all
good stuff. So thank you very much.
I would like to have Ms. McSally introduce her friend from
the Tucson airport.
Ms. McSally.
Ms. McSally. Thank you, Chairman Katko. I just want to say
I really appreciate you being my wingman on this issue and many
issues, letting me join this hearing today. I am also grateful
for you inviting Bonnie Allin to testify this morning.
Bonnie is the president and CEO of the Tucson Airport
Authority responsible for promoting aviation services and
related economic development for southern Arizona, including
operations and maintenance of the Tucson International Airport
and Ryan Airfield, where she has first-hand experience on the
challenges related to TSA staffing.
Bonnie began her career in aviation in 1976 with the Tucson
Airport Authority, then moved to Texas, where she worked for
Corpus Christi International, ending her tenure as director of
aviation. She holds the designation of accredited airport
executive and is the past chairman of the International
Association of Airport Executives.
I am glad to have Bonnie with us today, and I yield back.
Mr. Katko. Ms. Allin, you are on.

STATEMENT OF BONNIE A. ALLIN, PRESIDENT AND CEO, TUCSON AIRPORT
AUTHORITY, TUCSON, ARIZONA

Ms. Allin. Thank you, Representative McSally, for the
introduction.
Good morning, Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Payne,
honorable Members of the committee, Representative McSally. It
is a privilege to appear before you this morning to discuss
Tucson's challenges with passenger screening wait times.
Mr. Chairman and Members, thank you for your leadership on
airport security and the protection of our passengers.
Representative McSally, thank you for your leadership in
protecting Tucson International Airport in southern Arizona.
I was fortunate to participate in last week's roundtable,
which you mentioned, Mr. Chairman, and the discussion, and I am
truly appreciative of the time and attention you are devoting
to understanding the causes of checkpoint processing delays and
your efforts to seek both short- and long-term solutions.
Safety and security of our people, property, and aircraft are
the highest priority.
For those of you unfamiliar with Tucson International
Airport, we are an origination and destination airport.
Therefore, less than 5 percent of our passengers connect
through. Instead, all are screened by local TSA. Historical
wait times average 10 to 15 minutes, with our peak times rarely
exceeding 20, 25 minutes maximum, even when we had passenger
levels 25 percent higher than we do today.
Tucson's high season, as opposed to many other airports, is
November through March, with a very strong peak season mid-
January through March.
Mr. Katko. I have to interject, and I can assure you that
is not the high season in Syracuse. That is the high season for
snow. I am sorry to interrupt you. I couldn't resist.
Ms. Allin. We would love for you to visit Tucson in
February, sir.
This year our visitors, many, many visitors from the
northern part of the country, and our Tucsonian customers
experienced wait times 45 and sometimes in excess of 60
minutes. There is an exhibit to my written testimony with a
photo of the passengers lined up all across the front of our
terminal.
We have a very dedicated and loyal TSA staff who are
committed to the safety, along with the efficient screening, of
our passengers. Unfortunately, they lack the planning,
coordination, and staffing resources needed to be able to
efficiently process the passengers in our peak times.
In May 2015, Tucson TSA lost between 10 and 13 percent of
the workforce. It was a full year before replacements were
trained and released to fully screen and have their duties.
Combined with increased passenger levels, adding AIT equipment,
and having limited authority due to inflexible staffing and
processing models prescribed to them, they did not allow them
to respond to the changing conditions, and as a result we
experienced very long lines.
I respectfully offer some recommended solutions for your
consideration:
It is recommended that the local TSA have the ability to
openly communicate with their airport and airline partners in
order to better plan and allocate their resources.
That flexibility, autonomy, and authority be delegated to
local TSA, within parameters, to adjust for changing
conditions, especially spoke airports, such as Tucson.
That regular and consistent staffing at PreCheck lines be
allocated so that they can be opened; Tucson's 2 PreCheck lanes
are open less than 5 hours a day, usually between 3 and 4.
That the staffing allocation model be updated; it is
inflexible and doesn't allow for changing conditions.
That better utilization of existing resources and personnel
be made, especially Behavioral Detection Officers.
That effective outreach and marketing of PreCheck and
Global Entry, as we are close to the border and it is a very
high use there, be done to increase enrollment.
That development of technology to help provide solutions be
given a priority.
That optimization of checkpoints be customized to best fit
each airport and the information shared.
Airports are willing to invest in effective solutions.
Tucson will begin a $10-plus million project in June to
relocate and expand our checkpoints to improve throughput. If
they are not properly equipped and staffed, all of those
resources will be lost.
Mr. Chairman and Members, while none of these
recommendations alone are a perfect fix, by stakeholders
working together, we have the opportunity to solve the
checkpoint issues and enhance the safety of our aviation
system.
We commend you on the proposed legislation, Checkpoint
Optimization and Efficiency Act of 2016. If enacted, it will go
a very long way towards providing solutions to the checkpoint
wait issues.
Thank you for this opportunity to share my views. I would
be happy to answer any questions you might have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Allin follows:]
Prepared Statement of Bonnie A. Allin
May 26, 2016
Good afternoon. My name is Bonnie Allin. I am the president/CEO of
the Tucson Airport Authority, Federally-certificated operator of Tucson
International Airport, a commercial service airport located in southern
Arizona. The 5 largest U.S. domestic airlines providing service at
Tucson International Airport fly to 18 non-stop destinations and/or
connect our passengers to other destinations throughout the world.
These airlines enplane approximately 1.8 million passengers each year,
which is down from our peak in 2008 of approximately 2.1 million
enplanements, a number we are beginning to grow back through various
air service development initiatives. Ninety-five (95) percent of our
traffic is origination/destination passengers, which means virtually
everyone who travels through Tucson is subject to screening.
Historically, passenger wait times at Tucson International Airport
averaged approximately 10-15 minutes with maximum times rarely
exceeding 20-30 minutes (even when we were at higher passenger levels).
The safe, efficient, and convenient processing of passengers is a key
element in growing our passenger levels.
Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Payne, Representative McSally,
Members of Congress, Members of the subcommittee, thank you for your
leadership in this transportation security issue and the opportunity to
speak with you today. It is my privilege to be here before you today to
represent Category 1 (CAT1) airports.
Mr. Chairman and Members, on behalf of all airports, we appreciate
the efforts by Congress to determine the causes of the security
screening checkpoint issues and to explore meaningful solutions that
provide efficiency without sacrificing security. I also thank you for
the opportunity to be with you this morning to discuss some of the
challenges facing Tucson International Airport with regard to growing
wait times at passenger screening checkpoints.
I was fortunate enough to participate in last week's roundtable
discussion on the same topic, and I am truly appreciative of the time
and attention the subcommittee has devoted to understanding the causes
of checkpoint processing delays and for your efforts to seek immediate
and long-term action to address what is both an inconvenience for
travelers and a security threat.
I also want to thank Representative McSally for her focus on this
issue and for her work to draw attention to some of the specific
challenges we face in Tucson.
The safety and security of people, property, and aircraft are our
highest priority. Airports, airlines, and the TSA share the
responsibility to provide this protection to the best of our combined
abilities at commercial airports throughout the United States. This
proactive protection can best be provided when all responsible parties
are able to communicate effectively and have the authority to work
collaboratively and cooperatively. It should be seamless and invisible
to the traveling public, and it should be convenient and customer-
friendly. Airports appreciate the very critical mission TSA has to
screen and protect passengers and property, and we applaud the
dedication of the front line screeners who have a very challenging job.
We commend the willingness of Administrator Neffenger to listen to
stakeholders and effect change. We have a dedicated local TSA staff,
with which we have a very good working relationship.
Like many airports across the United States, Tucson International
Airport has experienced issues with long security checkpoint lines due
to TSA short-staffing, the unavailability of PreCheck, and a host of
other issues. Tucson International Airport's peak period was January
through April. During February and March peak periods, passenger lines
would stretch from 1 of our 2 concourse checkpoints across the ticket
lobby almost reaching the other end of the terminal. Please see Exhibit
A. Flights were delayed to wait for passengers or some missed their
flights. With full loads, rebooking was often a problem, particularly
for those international customers with connections attending the
International Tucson Gem and Mineral Show.
The long lines at security checkpoints at U.S. commercial airports,
including Tucson International Airport, clearly indicate the system is
not working efficiently or meeting the shared goals. Tucson's
historical average wait time was 10-15 minutes, and even when in years
when passenger levels were at their highest, peak times rarely exceeded
20-30 minutes. A common theme heard across the Nation's airports is
increased number of passengers, increased leisure passengers, which are
often families who are not frequent fliers and are slower to accomplish
the screening process, and a reduction in TSA staffing over the last
few years. This can be very frustrating when there is unused capacity
in extra security lanes, but no TSA personnel to open them because of
manpower shortage issues. Tucson is an origination and destination
airport with less than 5% of our passengers transferring, thus has a
high proportion of passengers to be screened.
In addition, under the TSA model, PreCheck is open on average less
than 5 hours a day (both concourses total) due to TSA being
understaffed and not able to get the manpower needed to provide this
important service. As we observe and understand the model, one regular
lane is open and PreCheck passenger are provided ``PreCheck light.''
PreCheck light is where a passenger is given a card by the Travel
Document Checker (TDC) that allows the passenger to keep their shoes
and jacket on, but must divest of all other items such as liquids and
laptops. They then must go through the same screening line as the non-
PreCheck customers. This is unfortunate because the TSA promotes this
program, passengers pay to sign up, then face disappointment and
extreme frustration when they arrive at the airport and find that the
TSA PreCheck lane is not open. The TSA needs to commit to this program,
and this commitment requires staffing resources.
TSA has limitations on the number of Full Time Employee (FTEs) they
can hire. TSA could be more flexible and cross-train functions to
perform more than one security task to increase efficiency when
scheduling or manpower demands arise. For instance, Behavior Detection
Officers (BDOs) are not certified to perform all screening functions
like X-ray, but are trained to be TDCs utilizing their deception
detection training.
The TSA is facing a manpower shortage, and it will take time for
the TSA to hire, train, and certify the new FTEs. Short-term solutions
aimed at reducing customer wait times are necessary to manage the
summer travel season.
I would like to ask your consideration of potential recommended
solutions.
Establish more effective and consistent communication and
coordination.
We applaud your proposed legislation ``Checkpoint Optimization and
Efficiency Act of 2016'' requiring each airport establish a joint
committee of airport, airline, and TSA representatives that has
mandatory meetings, and has the authority to review advance boarding
data, proactively plan and schedule for the effective screening of
passengers and bags, and the protection of property and aircraft. The
committee should have the ability to meet, as necessary, to react to
emerging issues.
TSA's local airport representatives should be delegated the
authority to be an effective member of the committee and have the
ability to make quick adjustments within established broad parameters
to meet the mission.
When lines reach a certain maximum throughput with 1 lane open, the
local TSA is authorized to open a second regular lane. The staffing
model does not allow sufficient staff to open the PreCheck lane instead
of a regular lane which would greatly expedite the screening process
throughput. Some small airports have reported that TSA will close their
checkpoint for the night after the last scheduled departure due to the
inability to keep staff on overtime. Passengers track the flight via
the airline and know a flight is late, show up for the flight and are
not allowed to board because they cannot be screened. Local control to
manage unusual situations would greatly improve throughput
capabilities.
More efficient use of existing resources is recommended. Your
legislations' proposal to utilize TSA BDOs during peak periods to the
TDC positions would provide an immediate increase in manpower. This
will allow the BDOs to use their behavioral detection skills by having
direct contact with every passenger prior to the passenger passing
through the security screening checkpoint. We understand and appreciate
that Administrator Neffenger has already approved this change.
Allow the TSA the flexibility to utilize non-certified screening
personnel to perform divestiture, bin-running, line management, and
exit lane duties during peak times. This will allow the certified
Transportation Screening Officers (TSOs) to focus on and expedite the
security screening functions.
Authorize the immediate replacement of and expedite the hiring of
replacement TSOs. Currently, the hiring process can take as long as 12
months for the TSA to hire, train, and certify replacement personnel.
In May 2015 Tucson International Airport TSA lost 10% of its workforce.
Those positions, plus others lost through regular attrition were not
hired, trained, certified and in place until the end of April 2016.
This process is too long, degrades efficiency, and creates extreme
passenger frustration through long wait or missed flights.
Authorize the TSA to conduct standardized local TSO training until
the backlog of hiring and training is eliminated. A long-term solution
could be to consider opening more than one center, geographically
located throughout the country to allow for shorter waits for training
slots.
Appropriately staff all airport security screening checkpoints,
including having dedicated staff and a predictable schedule to
adequately staff the PreCheck during peak travel hours and airport
operating hours.
In many cases, the Federal Security Director may be responsible for
more than 1 airport. This means that ``spoke airports'' are
geographically separated (example: Phoenix and Tucson; Las Vegas and
Reno). It is recommended that the TSA official at the ``spoke airport''
have the authority to effectively manage for exceptions and have the
flexibility to increase part-time hours, reduce the need for excessive
overtime, and make other operational decisions, as needed.
Update the TSA Staffing Allocation Model (SAM) to be flexible and
adapt to the changing conditions of an airport and airline environment.
The present model is rigid and relies heavily on the prior years' data.
The SAM needs to be reviewed frequently (perhaps quarterly) and
incorporate triggers that better take into account new flights, new or
up-gauged equipment, the change in passenger numbers, expanded hours,
etc. When the triggers are activated, there should be the flexibility
to make adjustments immediately. Allow local TSA involvement and
consultation or sharing with local airports and airlines.
Allow TSA to authorize the PreCheck enrollment contractor to deploy
flexible strategies for enrollment in airports at peak times. The
Contractor needs to have an effective education and marketing program
to inform and register passengers for PreCheck. Offsite centers do not
attract or inform passengers. They are most likely to sign up when
standing in checkpoint lines. Consider reduced or no-cost enrollment
until the numbers reach TSA goals.
Deploy passenger screening canines at the high volume airports to
expedite the screening process.
Your Congressional review and oversight of how the financial
resources collected from passengers are utilized to ensure the
resources are prioritized and effectively used for the benefit of
protection of people, aviation property, and aircraft would be helpful.
Technology should be developed, tested, approved, and deployed in
an expedient time frame. Consider funding pilot programs with academic
or private company partnerships to encourage development of new
technology.
Understand that each airport has infrastructure and needs that are
unique and different from other airports. There is no ``one size fits
all.'' While there needs to be standardization in the security
screening process, the layout of checkpoints should include more
flexibility to make adjustments that allow for the effective use the
area, equipment, and personnel.
Deploy the TSA optimization teams to review the checkpoint layouts
and include the airport and airlines serving that airport in the review
and recommendation process.
We are grateful to advise that the TSA at Tucson International
Airport is receiving the trained staff replacements, and are able to
adjust the overtime to better cover peak periods. We are now at the end
of our busy season, and with these replacements, the lines' wait times
have been reduced and are now closer to normal. Our concern is that
when traffic picks up in the fall for the holidays and our peak season
that the long lines will return. With implementation of the changes you
recommend, especially allowing for PreCheck to be open longer, this can
be mitigated. We are also hopeful that some of these recommendations
will be helpful to many airports throughout the United States.
As a long-term solution, the Tucson Airport Authority is doing its
part by investing $10.7 million into relocating both checkpoints to
allow for additional lanes to accommodate passenger growth through a
Terminal Optimization Project. This solution will only be effective if
it is appropriately equipped and staffed.
In closing, I want to thank Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Payne,
Representative McSally, Members of Congress, Members of the
subcommittee, for your time today and your thoughtful consideration of
the issues and solutions presented. We also appreciate TSA
Administrator Neffenger's willingness to work toward and try ideas to
achieve solutions. Airports stand ready to work with you and the TSA to
put in place effective solutions that properly protect and serve our
passengers.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you. I am happy to
answer any questions you may have.
Attachment.--Exhibit A

Mr. Katko. Thank you, Ms. Allin, for your testimony. We
appreciate you being here today. It is interesting to juxtapose
your experiences at your airport with what we experience in
Syracuse. It seems like the larger the airport, the more acute
the problems.
Now we are going to talk to Ms. Beairsto about that.
So, Ms. Beairsto, I appreciate your testimony today, and
you have 5 minutes. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF LYDIA BEAIRSTO, MANAGING DEPUTY COMMISSIONER FOR
SECURITY, DEPARTMENT OF AVIATION, CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS

Ms. Beairsto. Thank you, Chairman Katko, Ranking Member
Payne, and Members of the subcommittee for inviting me to
testify today on this important issue of providing efficient
and safe passenger screening at our airports. My name is Lydia
Beairsto. I serve as the managing deputy commissioner for
public safety and security for the Chicago Department of
Aviation, overseeing O'Hare and Midway International Airports.
Chicago manages 2 of the Nation's busiest airports, O'Hare
and Midway, and it is the only single-city system that serves
as a hub for 3 major airlines, United, American, and Southwest
Airlines. In 2015, 98 million passengers passed through our
airports combined. In 2016 and beyond, those numbers are
projected to grow.
Our airports serve as an economic engine, contributing $45
billion in annual economic activity, creating 540,000 jobs. We
are a major part of the air ecosystem. When O'Hare sneezes, the
rest of the country catches a cold.
Passenger safety and security is our top priority, and it
is certainly mine. In March, suicide bombings at Brussels
Airport killed 16 people in the airport check-in areas and 16
others in the city metro station. Long security lines, large
crowds of passengers in queues are not just an inconvenience.
They, themselves, expose a vulnerability and security risk.
By more efficiently moving passengers into the screened and
secure areas, we are increasing safety and security. This year,
there has been a 7 percent growth in passenger activity, while
TSA staffing levels declined nearly 17 percent.
Airports and airlines began raising concerns about security
staffing for the summer travel season as early as last summer.
By early May of this year, as our peak travel season started,
we started experiencing a total breakdown. Passenger wait times
were consistently 60 minutes or more. Airline passengers have
reported wait times as high as 120 minutes, with thousands of
passengers missing their flights.
The delays we experienced were knowable and preventable.
Staff resources went down as security operating procedures
changed.
Moving forward to address these issues, TSA resources are
needed to increase and meet passenger demand. TSA needs to
manage existing resources better. TSA needs flexibility and
local authority to respond to situations on the ground.
May 13, a traveler at Midway Airport posted a YouTube video
documenting significant checkpoint lines. Six out of 17 lanes
were staffed by TSA.
At O'Hare, the situation reached crisis point on Sunday,
May 15, where without adequate staffing American Airlines
reported 543 passengers were impacted by long lines. United
Airlines experienced 37 flight delays and rebooked over 4,300
passengers, many of which, as you noted, Chairman, stayed
overnight at the airport sleeping on cots.
Mayor Rahm Emanuel worked with key officials from DHS, TSA,
and members of Chicago's Congressional delegation to secure
immediate resources for the city. TSA sent in optimization
teams. They committed to add 58 officers to O'Hare, converted
over 160 part-timers to a full-time duty, increased overtime,
and provided 8 additional K-9 teams to O'Hare from around the
country.
We greatly appreciate Administrator Neffenger's
responsiveness and that resources arrived so quickly for
O'Hare. We are working to ensure similar prompt responses to
the needs and concerns at Midway Airport.
This response was possible because Congress approved TSA's
reprogramming request, and we are grateful to you for taking
that quick action.
To ensure transparency, we will be releasing a biweekly
scorecard showing average and maximum wait times, staffing and
resource levels provided by TSA.
In the short term, in order to manage the spring and summer
travel season ahead, there are a few critical resources and
management steps that we need to ensure are happening:
Reallocate passenger-screening K-9 teams based on the
aviation system priorities.
Ensure TSA is transparent about its staffing allocation
models and levels; information transparency helps us better
predict potential staffing strategies and shortages.
Provide Federal security directors the ability to make
local decisions about manpower allocation and overtime.
Ensure checkpoints are open on time or risk playing catch-
up all day.
Streamline TSA PreCheck enrollment process.
In the long term we need to be looking at ramping up
resources, including passenger screening K-9s. To prepare for
future growth, we need to start now, as training K-9s can take
approximately up to 8 months. We need to invest in our security
infrastructure and checkpoint expansion projects and invest in
technology solutions that enhance security and achieve
operational efficiencies.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss these important
and timely issues with you today. We are eager to work with you
and secure needed resources to address short-term and long-term
airport security challenges.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Ms. Beairsto. Much of what you
described towards the end of your testimony is embodied in the
bill we are going to be presenting today to Congress. It is
born out of our discussions with some of the folks in the
audience last week and some of you, and I appreciate that. It
is important.
One side thing that you said that caught me was opening the
gates on time. If I understand, and perhaps you can all comment
on this later, sometimes they open the gate at, like, 5:30 in
the morning, but they don't actually start screening passengers
for a while because they have to calibrate the machines and
stuff. Then once the back-up starts, you can't catch up. That
is just poor planning.
So there is much more to talk about with all of, but thank
you very much for your testimony.
I now recognize Ms. Kerry Philipovitch, the senior vice
president for customer experience at American Airlines--which I
know very well because that is how I get here every week--for
her testimony.

STATEMENT OF KERRY PHILIPOVITCH, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT,
CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE, AMERICAN AIRLINES

Ms. Philipovitch. Thank you for flying with us.
Good morning Chairman Katko, Congressman Payne, and Members
of the subcommittee. My name is Kerry Philipovitch, senior vice
president of customer experience at American Airlines,
testifying on behalf of Airlines for America. Thank you for
inviting me here today to discuss the impact TSA security lines
is having on our customers.
There is nothing more important to the airline industry
than the safety and security of our passengers, employees, and
cargo. We have never seen TSA wait times that affect airlines
and passengers throughout the United States like we have seen
in recent months.
Without immediate leadership and innovation, the 231
million Americans that will board a plane this summer will be
frustrated and angry. We are working collaboratively with the
TSA to develop and implement solutions to the pressing problem
of excessive wait times.
Last year, programs that had been in place to drive
efficiency and increase security throughput were eliminated
without adding resources required to support longer passenger
processing times. The result is a screening process that is
causing unacceptably long security lines and a frustrated
flying public.
Our discussions with TSA revealed 3 other contributing
factors. First, it appears TSA did not adjust its staffing
model after screening protocols were changed. Second, TSA is
experiencing abnormally high attrition and is unable to retain
transportation security officers, or TSOs. Third, the TSA
PreCheck program, which allows low-risk passengers to go
through expedited screening, has not met enrollment goals.
All of these factors combined cause a systemic slowdown in
passenger processing at security checkpoints, resulting in
delays and missed flights. Year-to-date, more than 70,000
American Airlines customers have missed flights due to
excessive wait times.
The same challenges at the passenger checkpoints bog down
screening of checked baggage, which is also a core TSA
function. This year alone, over 40,000 checked bags were
delayed in TSA screening and did not travel on their scheduled
flights.
To say customers are agitated is putting it mildly and the
public outcry has resonated. Congress recently reallocated $34
million in funding to the TSA to hire more TSOs by June 15. We
are also glad to see that TSA is working to shift K-9 teams to
airports experiencing the worst delays, rebalancing staffing,
and hiring more TSOs.
However, TSA needs to do more, and more collaboration is
needed to minimize the impact on summer travelers, airports,
airline employees, and the overall economy.
Airlines are pitching in to do our part. We are committing
millions of dollars to fund nonsecurity functions like bin
running and queue management so TSAs can focus solely on
screening customers.
At American this summer, we are adding an additional $4
million on top of the $17 million already planned to spend this
year to facilitate passengers through TSA checkpoints at our
largest airports. Airlines have advised customers to arrive at
the airport 2 hour in advance of a domestic flight and 3 hours
prior to an international departure to ensure sufficient time
to clear security. This added time in the travel process is
inconvenient and will likely affect less frequent travelers who
are not familiar with the screening process.
We are launching aggressive campaigns to promote TSA
PreCheck to our customers and employees. As PreCheck enrollment
increases, however, TSA must commit to keep PreCheck lanes open
and sufficiently staffed throughout the day, especially during
peak travel times.
The industry is also exploring ways to facility support for
additional K-9 teams, including whether TSA can use certified
K-9s from other Governmental agencies to conduct passenger
screening. When K-9 teams are deployed, TSA can increase
passengers going through TSA PreCheck.
We as an industry are doing our part to help TSA manage
through this challenge. However, airline actions alone cannot
solve the problem. We need a partner in TSA that will consider
innovative ideas to mitigate wait times immediately and in the
long run.
In the short term, to augment resources, TSA could declare
an all-hands-on-deck for the summer, much like we do at our
airports during peak and irregular operations. All available
staff should be assigned to help at passengers screening
checkpoints. TSA resources should be prioritized based on
airports with the most need and projected traffic volumes.
TSA could look at ways to spur enrollment in TSA PreCheck
by streamlining the enrollment process. To ensure that
enrollment resources don't become a new bottleneck, TSA should
expedite its selection of third-party enrollment providers.
We also support the idea to give Federal security directors
the ability to cooperate with their airline partners to make
local decisions about manpower resource allocation without
having to consult TSA headquarters.
All parties need to work collaboratively to manage through
the summer. Full transparency to staffing models and
performance data is required to engage all stakeholders in
troubleshooting issues. We can't be a part of the solution if
we don't have all the facts.
To that point, we applaud TSA for its decision this week to
stand up a National command center and institute daily
stakeholder calls to better prepare for each day's challenges.
In the long run, TSA could review current security
protocols to ensure there are no unnecessary procedures. As
part of this review, TSA should consider additional methods for
increasing risk-based screening, some of which were
discontinued this year.
Airlines and airports are eager to work with TSA to
expedite next-generation screening technology, including
innovation lanes.
Finally, TSA must create a position that reports to the
administrator to advocate for customers within the TSA, much as
airlines and many airports have executives dedicated to
improving customer experience.
These are just a few ideas that American Airlines and A4A
believe can help reduce the congestion in security screening.
Of course, Congress can help by ensuring Administrator
Neffenger and his team have the tools and resources needed to
improve screening, including ensuring that the passenger
security fee collected for TSA goes to TSA.
Ultimately, the TSA screening issue was not created
overnight and will not be solved overnight. However, we must
work together to offer ideas and resources to TSA while
Administrator Neffenger and his team review current screening
protocols, funding priorities, and management practices.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I would
be happy to answer any questions you might have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Philipovitch follows:]
Prepared Statement of Kerry Philipovitch
May 26, 2016
Good morning Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Rice, and Members of
the subcommittee. My name is Kerry Philipovitch, senior vice president
of customer experience at American Airlines, testifying on behalf of
Airlines for America. Thank you for inviting me here today to discuss
the impact TSA security lines is having on our customers.
The subcommittee's focus on this issue is both timely and
beneficial since we are just 2 days shy of the Memorial Day weekend and
the start of the busy summer travel season. Regardless of timing, there
is nothing more important to the airline industry than the safety and
security of our passengers, employees, and cargo.
We have never seen TSA wait times that affect airlines and
passengers throughout the United States like we've seen in recent
months. Without immediate leadership and innovation, the 231 million
Americans that will board a plane this summer will be frustrated and
angry passengers. We are working collaboratively with the TSA to
develop and implement short-, medium-, and long-term solutions to the
pressing problem of excessive wait times, but more needs to be done,
and fast.
the root of the problem
Up until last year, TSA front-line employees kept our skies safe
while efficiently moving passengers through the screening process.
Programs that had been in place to drive efficiency and increase
security throughput were then eliminated without adding commensurate
resources required to support longer passenger processing times. The
result is a screening process that is causing unacceptably long
security lines and a frustrated flying public.
Our discussions with the TSA have revealed 3 other contributing
factors. First, it appears TSA did not adjust its staffing model after
screening protocols were changed. Second, TSA is experiencing
abnormally high attrition and is unable to retain Transportation
Security Officers, or TSOs. Third, the TSA PreCheck program, which
allows low-risk passengers to go through an expedited screening
process, has not met enrollment goals.
All of these factors combined caused a systemic slowdown in
passenger processing at security checkpoints, resulting in delays and
missed flights. Year-to-date, more than 70,000 American Airlines
customers have missed flights due to excessive wait times.
The same challenges at passenger checkpoints bog down screening of
checked baggage, which is also a core TSA function. This year alone,
over 40,000 checked bags were delayed in TSA screening and did not
travel on their scheduled flight, causing further inconvenience to our
customers.
To say customers are agitated is putting it mildly, and the public
outcry has resonated. Congress recently reallocated $34 million in
funding to TSA to hire more TSOs by June 15. We are also glad to see
that TSA is working to shift canine teams to airports experiencing the
worst delays, rebalancing staffing and hiring more TSOs.
However, TSA needs to do more, and more collaboration is needed to
minimize the impact on summer travelers, airports, airline employees,
and the overall economy.
airlines are doing our part to support tsa
Airlines are pitching in to do our part. We are committing millions
of dollars to fund non-security functions--like bin running and queue
management--so TSOs can focus solely on the screening aspects of their
jobs. At American, this summer we are adding an additional $4 million
on top of our $17 million of planned spend this year to facilitate
passengers through TSA checkpoints at our largest airports.
Airlines have advised customers to arrive at the airport 2 hours in
advance of a domestic flight and 3 hours prior to an international
departure to ensure sufficient time to clear security. This added time
in the travel process is inconvenient, and will likely affect less
frequent travelers who are not familiar with the screening process. The
added hassle also has the potential to significantly dampen demand for
air travel.
We are launching aggressive campaigns to promote TSA PreCheck to
our customers and employees. As PreCheck enrollment increases, however,
TSA must commit to keep PreCheck lanes open and sufficiently staffed,
reliably throughout the day, especially during peak travel times.
When canine teams are deployed, TSA can increase passengers going
through TSA PreCheck. The industry is also exploring ways to facilitate
support for additional canine teams, including whether TSA can use
certified canines from other Governmental agencies to conduct passenger
screening.
We, as an industry, are doing our part to help TSA manage through
this challenge.
airlines are willing to work with tsa to solve the security screening
issue
However, airline actions alone cannot solve the problem. We need a
partner in TSA that will consider innovative ideas to mitigate wait
times immediately and in the long run.
In the short term, to augment resources, TSA could declare an ``all
hands on deck'' for the summer much like we do at airports during peak
and irregular operations. All available staff--whether full-time, part-
time, administrative, or based at headquarters--should be assigned to
help at passenger screening checkpoints. TSA resources should be
prioritized based on airports with the most need and projected traffic
volumes.
TSA could look at ways to spur enrollment in TSA PreCheck by
streamlining the enrollment process, and potentially reducing the fee
to enroll. To ensure that enrollment resources don't become a new
bottleneck, TSA should expedite its selection of third-party enrollment
providers.
We also encourage TSA to give Federal Security Directors the
ability to coordinate and cooperate with their airline partners to make
local decisions about manpower resource allocation without having to
consult TSA headquarters.
TSA, airports, and airlines need to work collaboratively to manage
through the summer. Full transparency to staffing models and
performance data is required to engage all stakeholders in
troubleshooting issues. We can't be a part of the solution if we don't
have all the facts.
To that point, we applaud TSA for its decision, this week, to stand
up a National command center and institute a daily stakeholder call to
better prepare for each day's challenges.
In the long run, TSA could review current security protocols to
ensure there is no duplication or unnecessary procedures. As a part of
this review, TSA should consider additional methods for increasing
risk-based screening, some of which were discontinued last year.
Airlines and airports are eager to work with TSA to expedite next
generation screening technology, such as that found in Innovation
Lanes.
Finally, TSA must create a position that reports to the
administrator to advocate for customers within TSA, just as airlines
and many airports have executives dedicated to improving customer
experience.
These are just a few ideas that American Airlines and A4A believe
can help reduce the severe congestion in airport security screening. Of
course, Congress can help by ensuring Administrator Neffenger and his
team have the tools and resources needed to improve screening,
including ensuring that the passenger security fee collected for TSA
goes to TSA.
a short-term moratorium on baggage fees will not help or fix the broken
system
We challenge all stakeholders to offer constructive ideas that will
bring relief. Yet, one idea we have heard is for airlines to waive
checked baggage fees this summer. The rationale is that the number of
bags screened at passenger checkpoints would decrease so appreciably
that the TSA wait times would return to normal. The premise of the idea
is flat-out wrong, and distracts from the root problems of the TSA
crisis.
The fact is that bag fees have been in place since 2008, but
travelers have never been impacted by TSA wait times like we've
recently seen.
Over the last few months, all passengers have experienced long TSA
lines, even those flying on carriers that do not charge bag fees.
Chicago Midway, for example, is served predominantly by one of our
competitors that does not charge checked baggage fees, yet airport
security wait times have still been in excess of 90 minutes. There is
simply no correlation.
Waiving checked baggage fees would not have any material impact on
wait times. Indeed, TSA's own data shows the number of checked bags per
person has remained relatively unchanged for the past 5 years.
What we do believe, however, is that eliminating bag fees certainly
would increase the number and size of checked bags. Additional checked
bags would further inundate TSA baggage screening, which already lacks
the resources to timely and consistently screen checked bags.
Phoenix and Miami, two of American's hubs, have suffered from
baggage delays in recent months. Both airports have sustained tens of
thousands of misconnected checked bags solely due to TSA issues.
This idea isn't helpful, it's harmful. It wouldn't help the core
problem of wait times but it would make the checked baggage problem
worse. And, at a time all airlines are trying to help TSA through their
crisis, it is diverting attention from that effort.
working toward a solution
Ultimately, the TSA screening issue was not created overnight, and
will not be solved overnight. However, we must work together to offer
ideas and resources to TSA while Administrator Neffenger and his team
review current screening protocols, funding priorities, and management
practices.
The industry continues to work cooperatively with TSA, airports and
other stakeholders to better serve our valued customers.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I would be happy to
answer any questions you may have.

Mr. Katko. Thank you, Ms. Philipovitch. I appreciate your
testimony.
We will have several follow-up questions for all of you, of
course.
I now recognize David Cox, National president of the
American Federation of Government Employees, for his testimony.
Mr. Cox.

STATEMENT OF J. DAVID COX, SR., NATIONAL PRESIDENT, AMERICAN
FEDERATION OF GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES

Mr. Cox. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Representative Payne,
Members of the committee. I am proud to testify today on behalf
of the 42,000 transportation security officers, TSOs, that AFGE
represents that stand on the side of the safety of the flying
American public.
TSOs point to 4 issues that have conspired to produce the
acute situation at airports we see today. No. 1, the size of
the TSO workforce did not keep pace with passenger volume. No.
2, TSA's budget was deprived of much-needed funding by the
decision of Congress to divert a portion of the security fee to
deficit reduction. No. 3, the focus on the patchwork of
airline, airport, and contract employees shifted focus away
from the TSO workforce that is the present and future of
aviation security. No. 4, TSOs are subject to second-class
treatment that hurts the morale of TSOs who stay on the job and
causes too many experienced screeners to leave TSA.
As passenger volume has increased 15 percent between 2013
and 2016, TSA lost almost 5,000 screeners and failed to replace
them. TSA's hiring was focused on part-time workers who have a
much higher attrition rate than full-time TSOs. TSA's staffing
methodology and model depended on PreCheck enrollments that
never happened. Congress cut the budget for TSA personnel and
imposed arbitrary caps on the number of full-time screeners.
Staffing shortages are obvious to the public because they
experience long lines. Least obvious are the effect of
shortages on the TSO workforce--missed trainings, meals, and
rest breaks, missed position rotations that are necessary to
keep your focus, cancelled days off, and months of mandatory
overtime, resulting in very tired and erratic scheduling. This
is no way to run airport security.
AFGE advocates an increase of 6,000 additional full-time
TSOs to the workforce. The figure represents the decrease in
the size of the TSA workforce since 2011 as passenger volume
has grown 15 percent.
AFGE also calls on Congress to end the arbitrary and severe
cap on full-time TSOs. When Congress voted to divert 60 cents
of the $5.60 security fee per enplanement to the Treasury
rather than TSA, it deprived the agency of 1.25 billion--that
is billion with a ``b''--dollars each year. It is time for
Congress to dedicate the proceeds of the security fee to TSA to
be used for its intended purpose, funding the agency's security
mission and hiring staff.
Introducing airline and airport employees and private
contract employees into the framework of checkpoint security
is, at best, a temporary bandage. Years of on-the-job
experience and commitment to the public are the services that
are lost when the TSO workforce is replaced with airport and
airline employees.
Airport authorities should be aware that they are not going
to get more screeners under the Screening Partnership Program
and that there are long checkpoint waits at airports with
private screeners.
Despite the importance of their work, TSOs receive second-
class treatment from their employer, the Federal Government.
TSA is the only Federal agency that is allowed to excuse itself
from the fundamental workplace rights and protections found in
title 5 of the U.S. Code. TSA does not follow the Fair Labor
Standards Act and the Office of Personnel Management guidelines
on leave. TSA does not have statutory title 7 protections
against discrimination, and they are not paid under the general
schedule like the majority of Federal workforce. TSOs lack the
ability to appeal adverse personnel actions to a neutral third
party, like the Merit System Protection Board, even those TSO
management has that right.
To paraphrase the late Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., justice
delayed has been justice denied to the TSO workforce. It is
well within the authority of both the Congress and TSA to
provide TSOs the same workplace rights and protections as other
Federal workers.
We urge Administrator Neffenger to apply title 5 rights and
protections to the TSO workforce. Congress should pass H.R.
4488, the Rights of Transportation Security Officers Act,
introduced by Representatives Bennie Thompson and Nita Lowey.
The bill requires that TSA follow the same workplace rules as
most agencies in the Federal Government. Congress should also
ensure funding to TSA to provide 5 percent retention raises to
TSOs who have been on the job for 2 or more years.
Transportation Security Officers do all they can to screen
passengers. That is why AFGE pledges to work with TSA,
Congress, and the public on solutions for the long lines. Mr.
Chairman, AFGE is asking and seeking a seat at the table to be
part of the solution, not part of the problem, in what we are
currently experiencing in TSA.
Thank you very much for allowing me to testify today. I
would be glad to take any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cox follows:]
Prepared Statement of J. David Cox, Sr.
May 26, 2016
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Rice, and Members of the subcommittee:
My name is J. David Cox, Sr., and I am the National president of the
American Federation of Government Employees, AFL-CIO (AFGE). On behalf
of the more than 670,000 Federal and District of Columbia workers our
union represents, including over 42,000 Transportation Security
Officers (TSOs) working to provide safe and secure travel for over 2
million passengers each day, I thank you for the opportunity to testify
today on ``Long Lines, Short Patience: Local Perspectives.'' TSOs have
always stood on the side of the flying public. Their job is to provide
efficient screening to the best of their abilities to keep passengers
safe when they fly. Even though TSOs did not create the conditions
resulting in seemingly endless lines at airport checkpoints, they are
ones who must deal directly with the shortsightedness of the
Transportation Security Administration (TSA), the airlines, airport
authorities, and the Congress. AFGE's TSA members have much to offer as
all parties begin to work together to resolve the challenges of long
passenger wait times without sacrificing security.
The TSO workforce observes current conditions at checkpoint and
also witnessed the emergence and growth of all the problems that are
only recently the subject of news stories. These long lines were an
inevitable consequence of decisions that have been made by TSA and
Congress over the past 5 years. TSOs can point to 4 issues that have
conspired to produce the acute situation we see today: (1) Decline in
the size of the TSO workforce; (2) Diversion of the security fee; (3)
Emphasis on an array of non-Federal personnel as a temporary ``fix'' to
staffing issues; and (4) Second-class treatment of the TSO workforce.
1. The TSO workforce was allowed deliberately to fall by attrition
while passenger volume increased.--TSA admits that TSO staffing
levels fell from 47,147 full-time employees to 42,525 between
2013 and 2016. Concurrent passenger volume rose 15 percent in
this period. According to recent Congressional statements, in
2014, TSA only hired 373 workers to replace the 4,644 who left
the agency. The few employees hired during that period of time
were disproportionately part-time TSOs who have a much higher
attrition rate than the full-time TSO workforce. Congress cut
the TSA budget for TSO compensation and benefits and continued
a misguided cap on the number of full-time employees. TSA
failed to request the funding needed to fully staff checkpoints
or even hire up to the statutory cap. TSA's staffing
projections included passenger participation in PreCheck that
never materialized. The Staffing Allocation Model (SAM) did not
take into account these factors and clearly fell short of the
deployments necessary to prevent long waits at checkpoint. The
impact on the flying public is obvious: Wait times that are up
to 3 hours long and missed flights have become a normal part of
the flying experience for passengers. The impact on TSOs is
less obvious: TSOs often do not rotate positions (a requirement
to retain focus), miss trainings, meals, and rest breaks and
for months have endured mandatory overtime and cancelled days
off due to TSA's operational needs. Female TSOs face an
additional burden because of the continuing inadequate male to
female ratios at the airports. The current crisis was both
foreseeable and preventable.
2. Airline fees and distribution of the security fee.--Two fees
affect the checkpoint: Airline fees for checked baggage and the
diversion of .60 of every $5.60 of the security fee collected
to deficit reduction instead of screening. Many passengers seek
to avoid the checked baggage fee charged by airlines, which is
typically $25 for the first bag and $35 for the second with
carry-on bags. TSOs report the number of bags passengers screen
as carry-ons has increased with the fees. Although Congress
increased the security fee in 2014, $1.25 billion each year is
diverted to deficit reduction. Airline checked bag fees have
changed the behavior of the flying public while much of the
security fee needed to fund screening operations is currently
beyond TSA's grasp.
3. The patchwork of airline, airport, and contract employees
working around the checkpoint.--The use of airline and airport
authority employees included in Department of Homeland Security
Secretary Jeh Johnson's plan and individual decisions by
airport authorities to hire contract workers undermine the
ability to realize a permanent solution for current staffing
shortages. The safety of the public required Federalization of
screening duties following the terrible events of September 11,
2001. Airports in the Screening Partnership Program (SPP) are
also experiencing long lines and frustrated passengers. Private
security companies are required to follow the same procedures
and SAM as airports with Federal TSOs. Airports in the
Screening Partnership Program have serious problems. TSA ended
the contracts at 4 Montana airports because the screening
companies were unable to meet the agency's requirements for
security. Multiple security breaches occurred after Orlando
Sanford Airport privatized screening. There is a decline in
workforce experience when airports privatize security
screening. TSOs want to serve the public as Government
employees; they do not want their security mission compromised
by the for-profit incentives of private contractors. AFGE also
questions the provision in Secretary Johnson's 10-point plan
that depends on airline and airport authority employees to
``pitch-in'' on ``non-screening'' duties. We are concerned
about the definition of ``non-screener duties,'' the rigor of
background checks and training received by these employees, and
the presence of individuals who are not TSA employees or
passengers in the checkpoint area.
4. Despite the importance of their work, TSOs receive second-class
treatment from their employer, the Federal Government.--As the
economy improves and working conditions at TSA worsen,
increasingly TSOs are voting with their feet and leaving TSA.
Many former TSOs now work for other Government agencies. TSOs
do not have the same rights and protections as other Federal
workers, including those employed by other DHS agencies,
because the agency is able to ignore the law. TSA has excused
itself from complying with the Federal Labor Standards Act and
the Office of Personnel Management guidelines and rules
governing leave, including the Family Medical Leave Act. TSOs
do not have statutory Title VII protections against
discrimination, and are not paid under the General Schedule.
Starting wages for a TSO are about $15 per hour, even as we are
reminded by recent world events that terrorists remain focused
on attacking commercial aviation world-wide.
The duties of a TSO require adherence to a number of different
screening procedures that must be performed quickly, with no room for
error, unpredictable hours due to staffing shortages, and do so while
treating passengers with friendly respect. AFGE is particularly
concerned that staffing shortages have placed an unnecessary burden on
female TSOs. Although over one-half of all passengers are female, women
comprise less than 40% of the TSO workforce. The disparity in numbers
has resulted in female TSOs being denied the ability to bid for shift
or positions due to a shortage of women at the checkpoint. All TSOs
bear the burden of disciplinary review procedures created by TSA with
no ability to appeal adverse personnel actions to a neutral third party
like the Merit Systems Protection Board or a negotiated grievance
procedure. The denial of fundamental workplace rights has nothing to do
with security and does not make the country safer.
From the perspective of TSOs, their job is to screen passengers and
bags effectively and efficiently. Their first priority is to keep the
flying public safe, and to do so as proficiently as possible. Here are
their ideas:
1. Return the workforce to 2011 levels. The continued practice of
starving TSA screening operations of necessary funding must
stop immediately. As enacted, the proceeds of the Passenger, or
the September 11 Security Fee, only captured 36% of TSA's costs
to provide aviation security. In 2014, fee increases were
partially diverted to address the deficit and are deposited in
the general fund of the Treasury. Despite rising passenger
volume, Congress only increased the TSA budget by less than 1
percent between fiscal year 2015 and fiscal year 2016. Even
with knowledge of the gaps between passenger growth and
staffing, the fiscal year 2017 budget request for TSA asked to
fund a staffing request for an additional paltry 323 positions.
Congress should pass emergency legislation to ensure funding to
fully staff TSA checkpoints. TSA should face no obstacle in
applying fee proceeds to TSO staffing as necessary. Congress
must finally end the arbitrary and severe cap on full-time
TSOs. Like other agencies in the Department of Homeland
Security, TSA should be able to hire the number of full-time
TSOs required to fulfill its mission.
2. Dedicate the proceeds of the Security Fee to TSA.--Perhaps the
most obvious solution to funding problems at TSA is to utilize
the security fee for the reason it was intended: To finance the
mission of the agency.
3. Increase efforts to retain the current TSO workforce.--It is
well within the authority of both Congress and TSA to address
the issues set forth in this testimony. The TSO workforce is
not a footnote to the agency's goal of effectively and
efficiently screening passengers. The work of TSA falls greatly
on the shoulders of the TSO workforce. Their common-sense
solutions address both current understaffing and prevent a
future reoccurrence. We urge lawmakers to direct Administrator
Neffenger to apply title 5 rights protections to the TSO
workforce. AFGE strongly supports H.R. 4488, the Rights for
Transportation Security Officers Act, introduced by
Representatives Bennie Thompson and Nita Lowey. The bill
requires TSA to follow the same workplace rules as the majority
of agencies in the Federal Government. TSA consistently
receives the lowest rating from its employees when surveyed,
including the current Best Places to Work in the Federal
Government survey, where TSA ranked 313th out of 320 agencies.
AFGE believes TSA's low ratings are attributable to TSA's
unique ability to choose which rights and protections apply to
the workforce.
In addition, TSA should provide TSOs who have been on the job 2
years or longer with an immediate 5% longevity pay increase to
finally adjust their wages to match the 5% wage increase paid
to employees of less than 2 years in 2015. Protections and
rights under title 5 and fair compensation for their work will
finally provide the TSO workforce with the respect and
stability appropriate to their position in the framework of
homeland security with the added benefit of supporting the
retention of an experienced TSO workforce.
4. Private-sector employees are a diversion from the permanent
Federal staffing solution required at checkpoint.--AFGE does
not support the provision of Secretary Johnson's plan allowing
airport and airline employees to be assigned duties around the
checkpoint to ``free-up'' TSOs for screening duties. The
Aviation and Transportation Security Act, Public Law 107-71 at
Section 44901 states:

``The Under Secretary of Transportation for Security shall provide
for the screening of all passengers and property, including
United States mail, cargo, carry-on and checked baggage, and
other articles, that will be carried aboard a passenger
aircraft operated by an air carrier or foreign air carrier in
air transportation or intrastate air transportation. In the
case of flights and flight segments originating in the United
States, the screening shall take place before boarding and
shall be carried out by a Federal Government employee (as
defined in section 2105 of title 5, United States Code), except
as otherwise provided in section 44919 or 44920 and except for
identifying passengers and baggage for screening under the
CAPPS and known shipper programs and conducting positive bag-
match programs.''

Airline and airport employees have no experience performing these
duties and have not received the hours of training TSOs are
required to complete. It is not clear that these employees were
vetted by their employer to the same extent as the TSO
workforce. Instead of diverting resources by inserting
employees who do not work for TSA into the framework of
aviation security, AFGE calls on Congress to provide the
funding to fully staff airport checkpoints.
Transportation Security Officers do all they can to detect any
person or anything moving through checkpoints that might cause harm to
passengers. It should not be so hard for them to simply do their jobs.
AFGE pledges to work with TSA, Congress, and the public on solutions
that address the agency's problems in a manner that improves passenger
experiences and the ability of TSOs to carry out their duties. Thank
you for the opportunity to appear before you at this hearing, and I
look forward to responding to any questions you might have regarding my
testimony.

Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Cox, for your testimony. We
appreciate you being here today.
Before I recognize myself for 5 minutes of questions, I do
want to note that it is very interesting that the part-time
employee attrition rate is nearly triple that of full-time
employees at TSA. That is something I want to talk to you about
in a few moments' time.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questions.
One of the overarching observations from speaking to you
last week all at the panel, two things: Expansion of TSA is
critically important, and also it was a revelation to all of us
that field service directors really have their hands tied to
some extent with respect to making staff and allocation
decisions and oftentimes are not interacting in an appropriate
manner with the airports and airlines in the field.
So our bill addresses all of those things. But I do want to
flesh them out a little bit. I will start with the TSA PreCheck
program.
Ms. Callahan, you stated that 40 percent now of the
Syracuse Airport is on PreCheck.
Ms. Callahan. That is correct.
Mr. Katko. What type of an impact has that had on the
airport and the throughput of passengers?
Ms. Callahan. We are seeing wait times on average of
anywhere between 12 and 15 minutes. When I flew out this
morning, I had a first experience at seeing that, and it really
has helped to balance the distribution of PreCheck and non-
PreCheck employees during those peak periods, which for us is
really 4:30 until about 7 a.m.
Mr. Katko. Right.
Now, for any of you who can answer this question. There are
discussions at times that PreCheck isn't always open, and I
have experienced that myself and it is frustrating to me, being
Chairman of this subcommittee. But is it fair to say that if
PreCheck were expanded dramatically, like it is intended to be,
that it would allow those lanes to be open on a more regular
basis because the staffing would warrant it? Is that correct?
Anyone want to answer that?
Ms. Philipovitch. No, I think that the point is good that
especially when customers enroll in PreCheck. The enrollment
rates tend to be higher the more frequently the customers
travel, and they build that expectation of having PreCheck
available into their schedules in terms of what flights they
book and when their meetings end and the like. It is a service
that the TSA is selling, that people are paying for. So people
are incredibly frustrated, customers, when they come and find
those lines closed.
The screening procedures in PreCheck are much faster, so
the transaction time per customer is lower. Therefore we can
get many more customers through the checkpoint, both safely,
securely, and efficiently, the more people are in PreCheck. So
we are a big fan of expanding it as well.
Mr. Katko. Okay. Thank you.
I take it all of you are. Is that right? Yes. You are all
nodding your head. It seems self-evident.
Mr. Cox. Mr. Chairman, I think the one issue that we
constantly find, PreCheck is helping, but as we have continued
decrease in staffing, that continues to perpetuate the problem.
No matter whether we have PreCheck or not, the real issue is
that we have to have adequate staffing in TSA.
Mr. Katko. It is understood. But it is fair to say, is it
not, Mr. Cox, that if you had 20 million people enrolled in
PreCheck Nation-wide, or 30 million people enrolled in PreCheck
Nation-wide, and you have the throughput for PreCheck
individuals are double the time it is for others, it would have
less stress on the system? You have to acknowledge that.
Mr. Cox. It would definitely have less stress on the
system. But if we keep losing 5,000 every several years, that
is going to have stress on the system.
Mr. Katko. That is something we need to address for sure.
Now, with respect to the field service directors, it was
really shocking to me that they weren't interacting with some
of the airports, especially the major airports, on a regular
basis with respect to the staffing allocation models.
So, Ms. Beairsto, could you comment on that for a moment,
if you would, please?
Ms. Beairsto. Sure. We have a strong and favorable
partnership with our local TSA. However, when it comes to
staffing allocation model, we encourage TSA to provide greater
transparency so we, airports and our airline partners, can
better plan and schedule around staffing shortages and the
like.
Mr. Katko. All right. I am sorry. I referred to them as
field service directors, and my able staffer told me: Hey,
dummy, it is Federal service directors--Federal security
directors, excuse me.
But one of the things we propose in the bill is that you
take the FSDs, if will you, and basically mandate that they
meet with the airport directors and airlines on a regular basis
and that they discuss staffing allocation models and then
certify to us that they are actually doing that. We are asking
that to be done on both the local level and on the National
level. We are hoping that is going to have an impact on it.
Now, Ms. Callahan, I understand from speaking to you
earlier last week that you do that now on a regular basis. Is
that right?
Ms. Callahan. Yes, sir, we do. In fact, we had a meeting
yesterday with our Federal security director and his assistants
from Albany all the way to Buffalo, a meeting held in Syracuse.
Forty of the airports in New York State were at that meeting
where we had an in-depth, detailed briefing on their plans for
the summer travel season, how we can work together and
collaborate to address some of the issues.
My FSD oversees 14 airports. So to see him on a monthly
basis is really incredible, that he has the time to do that.
But he is very responsive and reactive to issues.
Mr. Katko. That is good. One of the things we want to do in
this bill is to untie their hands to some extent from an
administrative standpoint, because I believe that they need to
have more flexibility with respect to their decisionmaking
authority on the front lines.
If you get a call from American Airlines or from Chicago
and they say, ``Lookit, we are going to get crushed over the
next 3 days, we just sold a bunch of tickets,'' whatever, let's
work together, figure out how to do that. They have got to be
able to have the flexibility to grant more overtime. They have
got to have the flexibility to be able to bring more people in.
So that is part of what we are contemplating in this bill,
and it is based on our discussions with all of you. So I
appreciate that.
Now, Mr. Cox, one of the things I have been thinking about,
when you were talking about some of the staffing issues and the
attrition rate, is if there is some money that is reallocated,
if that is the right term, from other parts of TSA to staffing,
would it make sense to take a lot of these individuals that are
part-time now and make them full-time and in so doing you
thereby reduce the attrition rate considerably, for some of
them at least?
Mr. Cox. Yes, sir, that would definitely help with that
situation. Administrator Neffenger spoke with me yesterday and
said his attrition rate with full-time TSOs was around 7 to 8
percent, but, again, it is over 20 percent in the part-time.
People want full-time employment. They will go to other
Federal jobs or other jobs in the airport seeking full-time
employment. So moving that money to getting them full time
would definitely help fix a lot of the problems.
Mr. Katko. Okay. Of course the added benefit during this
crisis, if you will, that we are having at airports is that
moving someone from part-time to full-time doesn't take any
additional training.
Mr. Cox. No, sir, that doesn't. They are ready to go. Many
of them in peak times are already working 40 hours a week or
possibly more than 40 hours a week. So they are ready to go.
There is a cap that has been put on the number of full-time
employees. So if Congress could fix that, that would help with
a lot of the situation.
Mr. Katko. All right. Thank you very much, Mr. Cox.
I have so many more questions, but I can't go over my time
too much here.
So I now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Payne, for 5
minutes of questions.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I ask unanimous consent
that 2 letters from AFGE to President Obama and Secretary
Johnson be inserted in the record.
Mr. Katko. Without objection, so ordered.*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* The information was not submitted at the time of publication.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Payne. Thank you.
Ms. Beairsto, in response to the issues at your airport and
others around the Nation, Secretary Johnson and Administrator
Neffenger announced plans to address the lines, including
additional resources. Has the administration's response to the
wait times within your airports been effective and has it had a
positive effect? To this point, I hear a lot that we have the
additional resources coming in but have not heard how it has
impacted your wait times in a positive manner, if it has.
Ms. Beairsto. Sure. It has. TSA has provided 58 additional
officers. The shift of moving over 160 part-time officers to
full times helped TSA address the peak periods both in the a.m.
shifts and the p.m. shifts. Tripling the amount of overtime
allows them to open checkpoints early so they are not behind
the curve. Adding morning shifts for TSA screeners and the
additional K-9 teams at O'Hare from around the country has
proven incredibly helpful. The K-9 teams alone are allowing us
to move roughly 5,000 passengers a day through PreCheck.
Mr. Payne. Okay. So what would you say the wait times as
opposed to what they were are now, specifically?
Ms. Beairsto. Sure. So at Midway Airport the wait times
with K-9 teams can be 20 to 30 minutes during peak periods.
Without them, they can reach of 69 to 90 minutes. We are seeing
a great impact on the K-9s. Thank you for asking.
Mr. Payne. Yeah. I have Newark International in my
district, and we really have had the same experiences you have
been having in Chicago based on the hub that we are. Also with
the Port Authority having 3 airports under its purview has been
a major hang-up with the wait times. We have had the resources
moved in Newark as they have in Chicago and it has dramatically
impacted the ability to move passengers in a timely manner.
Ms. Allin, within your testimony you note that the BDOs
could be useful in other positions within the screening model.
Could you expound for the committee on your thoughts on
achieving efficiencies through using the Behavior Detection
Officers?
Ms. Allin. Thank you, Representative Payne.
Yes, sir, the Behavioral Detection Officers are trained in
perceiving people who are going to do something that is not
correct, or it may be illegal, may be trying to smuggle
something, potentially terrorist ties. By having them as the
ticket document checkers, they have a personal connection to
every single passenger that goes through and they can screen
each individual. As opposed to standing to the side or the back
of the line where they are observing behavior, they can better
detect people who may need additional screening or discussion.
Mr. Payne. Okay. Thank you.
Ms. Allin. This is a model that is used overseas that has
been quite effective there.
Mr. Payne. Okay. My time is winding down, but I just wanted
to say to Mr. Cox, all throughout this discussion over the past
several weeks that I have kept the TSOs in mind and have made
sure that my colleagues have some idea of what they go through
and the strain that they are under based on these long wait
times as well. They are our last line of defense, and we need
to make sure that they have the resources that they need in
order to do the job well. We can't afford them not to. They
have to be right 100 percent of the time.
So I just wanted to put that on the record. I yield back.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Payne.
The Chair will recognize other Members of the subcommittee,
and then Ms. McSally, for 5 minutes of questions that they may
wish to ask the witnesses.
In accordance with our committee rules and practice, I plan
to recognize Members who are present at the start of the
hearing by seniority on the subcommittee and then others, such
as Ms. McSally, who are visiting the committee this morning.
Those coming in later will be recognized in order of their
arrival.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Carter, for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Carter.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank all of you for being here. This is obviously a very
important subject to us. I am glad to see you all because I
have some important questions I want to ask you.
I have the honor and privilege of representing the First
Congressional District of Georgia. That includes the entire
coast of Georgia. Georgia is unique in the sense that we have a
lot of small airports, a lot of rural areas. We also, as you
know, have Hartsfield-Jackson Airport, which is the busiest
airport in the country, in the world. That presents a dilemma.
But I want to ask you some questions about that, and I am very
interested to know your responses to this.
What we have been hearing and what I have been hearing from
a lot of the airport officials is that there exists somewhat of
a disconnect between the local TSA officials, the airlines, the
airport officials, and then upper management, that management
in TSA up here in Washington, DC, if you will. Have any of you
experienced that? Can you comment on that? Ms. Allin or whoever
wants to comment. Just very quickly, because I have a bunch
here.
Ms. Callahan. Yes, Mr. Carter. I think it is really each
airport is different. There is a saying in our industry: You
have seen one airport, you have seen one airport. So the
relationships that exist are really local and dependent on the
people within the organizations at those airports. I imagine in
Atlanta it is much more difficult than in it is Syracuse, New
York, where we have access to our FSDs and AFSDs and the
airlines on a regular day-to-day basis. That is what I can
offer.
Mr. Carter. Okay.
Anyone else?
Ms. Allin. Representative Carter, Tucson previously had an
FSD until 2 years ago, then we became a spoke airport. We have
an excellent relationship with our local screening managers and
our local personnel. They now have many layers to go through.
Models and requirements are dictated, and I can't personally
say from where, but certainly above their ability to be able to
react quickly to issues on the ground. That is what we
experienced during our peak period in February and March. They
were only allowed to open the PreCheck lane after they had
opened a second standard lane because of staffing. Then they
could open a PreCheck lane.
When they opened the PreCheck lane the lines were cut in
half and they were not the full length of our terminal front.
So having the ability to do that would be helpful.
Mr. Carter. Okay. Great.
Let me ask you, has anyone had any experience with private
security? Any of you who have had that experience?
Ms. Philipovitch. In a few airports that we serve have
private security.
Mr. Carter. I am sorry. Say again?
Ms. Philipovitch. Sorry. Oh, thank you.
A few of the airports that American serves have private
security.
Mr. Carter. Can you give me your impression? I mean, what
have been the results?
Ms. Philipovitch. I will just use San Francisco as an
example, because that is probably the one I am most familiar
with. Because the privatized airports, the way the privatized
model is today, follows the same procedures and staffing
allocation models as other airports.
Mr. Carter. Okay, I hope that my colleagues heard that.
They have to follow the same rules and regulations.
Ms. Philipovitch. Right.
Mr. Carter. The training is the same. Everything is the
same. TSA oversees it, correct, oversees it?
Ms. Philipovitch. Correct. That is my understanding.
Mr. Carter. All right. I am sorry. Continue.
Ms. Philipovitch. So we really see that as long as the
operation is properly resourced we are able to have both
effective and efficient screening in either model. Really the
key is making sure that the resource allocation meets the peak
needs of the operation.
Mr. Carter. Okay.
The Screening Partnership Program. Mr. Cox, I am going to
ask you directly, can you give me an idea of why, it appears to
me and from what I have heard, that they do a better job and
that they save money on top of that? You had any experience
with this?
Mr. Cox. Sir, we believe that the TSOs that are employed by
the Federal Government, No. 1, it is a professionalized
workforce, they do a great job, they have been trained to do
that. I think the record speaks very clearly for themselves.
Since 9/11, we have not had acts of terrorism in this country.
We had a privatized workforce on 9/11 and we saw what happened,
this country was brought to its knees. The Government has been
taking care of that, been doing that. Part of our real problem
right now is a lack of staffing, not enough staff to do the
work properly.
Mr. Carter. I understand and I appreciate what you are
saying, but at the same time, I am convinced that the private
industry can do this just as well with oversight with TSA and
save money and improve customer service and decrease the long
lines that we are experiencing at our airports. They go through
the same training. The TSA still has the oversight, the
responsibility.
I think it is unfair to compare what happened on 9/11
between privatization and being run by the public. I mean, that
took us all. We were all asleep at the wheel then, you have to
admit that.
Mr. Cox. I agree. I was watching Fox News last Sunday and
one of the commentators was at the San Francisco Airport, was
complaining about the long lines, the rudeness of the officers,
and the various incidents that were going on and said, this is
a classic example of why it needs to be privatized. I busted
out laughing because it is a privatized airport and all the
problems that she was referring to were at a privatized
airport. She wasn't in Atlanta or Miami, one of those that was
not privatized, she was in San Francisco complaining, saying it
was a classic example of why it should be privatized.
Mr. Carter. Well, what I would like to see are some
comparisons. I mean, this is something that is very important
and if we can improve it--because you mentioned the
disconnect--or I brought up the disconnect and you commented on
the disconnect between Washington and the local officials. This
is something that we have got to work on. This is what happens
when the bureaucracy gets out of control. That is I think we
are headed with and we are at right now with the TSA, is the
bureaucracy out of control. We need to get it under control.
Mr. Chairman, I know I have gone past my time, but this is
just a very important subject to me.
So I appreciate your input on that.
Mr. Cox, what you are telling me, I am having different
views expressed to me by other people, so I am going to
continue to search on this and continue to try to see what we
can come up with.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Carter.
I ask unanimous consent that the gentlelady from Texas, Ms.
Jackson Lee, be allowed to sit on the dais and participate in
this hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me express my appreciation to the
Chairman and the Ranking Member for your courtesies. This is a
committee that I have a great affection for because I indicated
before that the TSOs are the first line of defense, if you
will, for the neighborhood, for the Nation's aviation security.
So let me thank all of you for your presence here.
I have some direct questions and then I want to raise a
series of questions with Mr. Cox. Thank you very much for
representing very fine professional staff, which I want to be
more professional, less part-time, more recruitment, increased
salaries, and the numbers that you would like to have.
So I would ask the representative from Chicago, Illinois,
the admiral was here just yesterday, and I understand that the
wait has gone to 15 minutes. I would like to see what--you are
obviously here today, Thursday--I would like to hear your
assessment. Have the lines improved, the time and the waits
improved?
Ms. Beairsto. Oh, considerably, ma'am. We have seen wait
times less than 15 minutes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So there has been a fix, if you will, and
obviously we have to see that it is a consistent fix.
Ms. Beairsto. A permanent fix.
Ms. Jackson Lee. That is even better, to hear that it is a
permanent fix. He has added more, as I understand, there is a
task force and he has added more employees. Is that correct?
Ms. Beairsto. May I correct? It is temporary right now. We
need a permanent fix.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So you were saying we need a permanent
fix?
Ms. Beairsto. Right.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Well, that will come. The temporary is
that you added more personnel. Is that correct?
Ms. Beairsto. Yes, the extended overtime allowed for
increased shifts in peak periods.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Are you aware that we expect about 700 to
be in by July, and so you would probably get some additional
TSOs?
Ms. Beairsto. I am aware. Thank you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. That would probably help their
circumstances.
Is there a problem with the baggage check down--there is a
screening and then there is a baggage check. Is there a problem
on the baggage check area as well?
Ms. Beairsto. It has not surfaced at our level. We can
certainly find out additional information and follow up.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. But the problem has been at
least relieved for a moment and we expect to continue to work
with you for that.
Ms. Beairsto. Midway Airport is still waiting for
additional resources.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Additional resources.
Would you say that your TSOs are professional, your
management level?
Ms. Beairsto. Yes, absolutely.
Ms. Jackson Lee. They were attempting to correct the
problem?
Ms. Beairsto. Yes, absolutely.
Ms. Jackson Lee. All right. Thank you.
I see that there are other airports. There is an airline
representative here, I think, from American Airlines. Have you
been able to work by way of getting your concerns to TSA,
should we facilitate a better communication protocol when there
are concerns?
Ms. Philipovitch. You know, we have been working very
collaboratively and effectively with the TSA, both at the
headquarters level with Admiral Neffenger, as well as at the
local level. So the airlines are taking action in collaboration
with the TSA and also promoting many of the actions that the
TSA is suggesting and already taking and also the actions that
are contained in Chairman Katko's proposed legislation, which
we are in favor of as well.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Which means that you would be willing to
pay for overtime for TSOs?
Ms. Philipovitch. You know, right now we really want to get
more transparency into the staffing model and understand how
resources are being deployed. We need to make sure that we have
an analytical model that puts resources where they need to be
to meet the peak demands of our customers.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I agree with you. More flexibility for the
FSDs, would that be helpful?
Ms. Philipovitch. In cooperation with their airline
partners, yes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Would you join with us, because I heard
the point being made that we need nor data regarding the
baggage fees? So I think there should be an assessment and a
study coming from both ends, the airlines and TSA, on the
baggage fees as to whether or not they do increase the number
of bags coming through by hand-carry. Would you work with us on
that?
Ms. Philipovitch. May I comment on the checked baggage in
general?
Ms. Jackson Lee. Uh-huh.
Ms. Philipovitch. The airlines have been charging checked
baggage fees since 2008, and the line waits we are experiencing
with TSA this year are unprecedented. So I think it would be
inaccurate to say that bag fees are leading to the current line
waits that we are experiencing.
You mentioned the baggage----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Can I interject for a moment? We note that
we have had a sizable increase in passenger travel between
2008--already between 2011 and 2016. My only question is, we
all have our different perspectives. I am not offering any
perspective. I am just offering, would you participate and
collaborate on getting the data that we need to understand the
question better?
Ms. Philipovitch. We are interested in collaborating to
solve the problem.
I do want to note that baggage screening, as you noted, is
also a core function of TSA. Even though we had heard from my
colleague from Chicago that we haven't had severe issues there,
some of our other airports have experienced significant
backlogs, in some cases even worse than what we are
experiencing at the checkpoints----
Ms. Jackson Lee. What we want to do is fix the problem.
Ms. Philipovitch [continuing]. Like in Miami and Los
Angeles.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Right. We want to fix the problem. I know
that you have hubs like Miami. So we want to fix the problem.
Let me quickly move to Mr. Cox, if I might.
Mr. Cox, I have traveled to many of your airports. I take
the opportunity to speak to TSOs everywhere I go, including
supervisors and managers. I will say that I ran into one
individual, his name is Vincent, who is a World War II veteran,
came, and was in a wheelchair, was dropped off by his family,
he was traveling by himself. He said, ``I don't want anybody
else. I want a TSO, TSO, TSO.'' That means to come out to the
curb.
So a TSO went out to the curb and took him with the
wheelchair all the way through security, et cetera, et cetera,
getting to the gate, getting down to the door of the plane. He
noted that this proud World War II veteran who had been dropped
off by his family members, I am sure they meant well, he could
not walk. Your TSO agent lifted him up and took him and took
him and put him on the plane.
I think these are the stories that need to be told. If the
Chairman would yield me just a moment here.
Mr. Katko. Ms. Jackson Lee, just to let you know, we are
kind-of crunched for time and Ms. McSally needs to go too.
Ms. Jackson Lee. May just get this last question in?
Mr. Katko. Votes are coming up, so please hurry.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Yes, thank you.
I support a professional staff, not privatization. Would
you respond to that quickly, please?
Mr. Cox. We clearly believe that a professional staff that
are Government employees, that this is an inherently
Governmental function to keep the American public safe. These
people are well-trained, they do a great job, they love their
jobs, they just need to have adequate staffing to be able to do
their jobs and to do them properly.
I think if the committee really wants to get legislation
that tries to get the input and the collaboration, that it
would be important that AFGE and the employees that it
represents be included in the legislation as one of the
partners trying to resolve the problem.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you so very much.
More funding is important.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member. Thank you.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Ms. Jackson Lee.
The Chair now recognizes the patient Ms. McSally from
Arizona.
Ms. McSally.
Ms. McSally. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In the roundtable last week and in your testimony today we
heard one of the main issues is flexibility for the FSDs, that
they can make decisions on the ground, but not just for the
FSDs, for the supervisors in spoke airports like Tucson.
Admiral Neffenger was asked this question yesterday, and he
said he has given the flexibility to FSDs. I felt like I was
listening to parallel universes that were in complete
contradiction of each other. He believed that they already have
that flexibility. It is unbelievable to me that it would take
an act of Congress to actually direct them to provide
flexibility. This is just leadership 101.
But he sincerely believes he has given that authority. I
specifically asked him yesterday about this and the spoke
airports like Tucson, and he said they have all the authority
they need. Maybe they are not just getting the message. He just
recently removed Kelly Hoggan, who potentially is the barrier
to this direction being communicated down to all of you.
But I want to say, we need your immediate feedback. He gave
his promise yesterday that he was going to follow up on this
and made sure they understood his guidance that they had that
flexibility.
Ms. Allin, can you share? You have given some examples. If
we had the flexibility with our senior TSA rep on the ground in
the last few months, what other instances? Were their hands
tied? What would have changed? What have you been able to do
there in order to alleviate the problems that we are having?
Ms. Allin. Thank you, Representative McSally.
When we were experiencing the extreme lines, the challenge
that our local representative with TSA had, which is not an
FSD, as we are a spoke, as you noted, was the fact that there
are specific models. A certain throughput of passengers per
hour have to go through the lane before the second lane can be
opened up, and that with one standard lane, then a second
standard lane had to be opened before PreCheck, where PreCheck
is the quick resolution because the lane was cut in half when
the PreCheck lane was opened.
Ms. McSally. That direction you think came from the
District of Columbia or Phoenix? Do you know?
Ms. Allin. Phoenix came down when the passengers were
calling the media from the lines and the media began showing
up. It all exploded during the week and that is when things
changed.
Ms. McSally. Right. Is that still the case? Do they have to
do the second line before PreCheck?
Ms. Allin. With staffing, yes, ma'am. They are limited on
staffing and therefore can't open the PreCheck, because it
requires more people--and I am sorry, I can't tell you exactly
how many more--than the standard lane.
Ms. McSally. Okay. Great. Are there any other situations
where you saw their hands were tied, that they could have maybe
moved, say, BDOs to be checking IDs or something else had they
been given more flexibility locally?
Ms. Allin. Yes, ma'am. We have been asking for BDOs to be
document checkers since the problems first started with the
holidays prior to our season coming. Our FSD in Phoenix
refused, saying that it was important for them to be observing
the line, the people in line, as opposed to being able to be
document checkers. I think all that is changed by the admiral
and we appreciate that greatly.
Ms. McSally. Okay. Great. Thanks.
Ms. Beairsto, you said you appreciated the assistance.
There was big media attention to the problems at Chicago and
then additional agents and K-9 teams came to the rescue.
However, they were pulled from somewhere else.
What we heard from the roundtable last week is the feeling
that this sort of squeaky wheel, let's move assets around to
whoever is on TV today, allows, I think one of the airport
managers said, something along the lines of we all get a turn
to be the worst, is that kind of model, which means that you
are just going to create a crisis somewhere else.
So I am concerned about that, that this is more like a
whack-a-mole scenario as opposed to a strategic model that is
going to address all these issues and we are not going to be
robbing from medium and small airports in order to address the
bigger airports that end up on TV.
Can anyone sort-of provide some perspectives on that and
concerns that we shouldn't be reactive, we should be much more
strategic on this?
Ms. Beairsto. If I can give an example, ma'am. The
passenger screening K-9s, for example, which we borrow and have
been reallocated from other airports, those kinds of resources
really need to be allocated based on airport passenger
throughput and the security risk, right? So those are the kinds
of things that TSA should consider.
Ms. McSally. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Cox, yesterday I asked Admiral Neffenger about
something that was really troubling that I discovered this
week, which is we have instances of at least 250 through April
that have been reported where TSA agents have been pulled away
from their primary mission, which is the security of air travel
and the efficiency and safety of passengers and air travel, to
support things like Presidential campaign rallies. We have
heard reports of other events, concerts, and sporting events.
This is nowhere in their core competency.
So could you please comment on your perspectives on
whether, when somebody signs up to be a TSA agent and a TSO,
whether they expected to be at a campaign rally or whether they
expected to be doing their core mission and how you all feel
about that?
Mr. Cox. We expected them to do their core mission, to do
their core work. As with any situation, you do understand the
workers don't get to drive the train, they just show up and do
what the bossman tells them to do.
I know our TSOs, they want to be at the airport doing their
mission and taking care of it. It upsets them when those lines
are long and passengers are waiting because passengers get more
frustrated with them.
I would say, if you really want to resolve a lot of these
problems, you can talk to FSDs, you can talk to the
administrator, but Congress probably needs to mandate that
there be some work groups made up of TSOs themselves. The
people who actually do the work can tell you how to improve the
processes. I know American Airlines does that all the time. I
know all these airports do that.
We need to be talking to the front-line employees and they
could give a lot of solutions. They can't necessarily give more
resources or more people, but I am sure they know how to
improve the work processes.
Ms. McSally. Great. Thank you. I agree with you. Look, we
need to make sure that large-scale events have safety and
security, but there are other ways to do that than to be
pulling agents, that its core responsibility is the safety of
air travel, in order to do that. So I will be following up on
that.
I appreciate the leverage, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Ms. McSally.
I would like to thank the witnesses for their thoughtful
testimony. Members of the committee may have some additional
questions for all of you, and we will be asking you to respond
to those in writing. Pursuant to committee Rule VII(E), the
hearing record will be held open for 10 days.
Before we close, a couple of observations. First of all, if
we had more time we could go on on this all day long. But what
is the beauty of this hearing was that we had the input of all
of the stakeholders at the table and those sitting in the
audience last week, which helped us become very prepared for
this testimony.
I think a lot of times people look at Congress and say,
Congress is broken, nothing gets done, they are not listening
to us. I think what has transpired over last week is that we
looked at a crisis, we got the stakeholders in here, we
listened to you, we crafted a bill responding to what you have
to say, and it is going to have immediate an impact if we can
get it passed. I am excited about that.
The frustration is that we are moving these things and we
are getting this stuff done. So I ask all of you to be
advocates with the Senate to tell the Senate to do their job as
well, because we don't want to hear any more of these wait time
issues.
When we can act like this in a collaborative manner, that
is when Congress really works. We have to make sure that
process comes to a positive conclusion.
So thank you all for coming here. I know it is an early
flight for some of you. If it is any consolation, we were
working until about 12:30 last night and I was up at 5 this
morning. So we have all had busy days.
So thank you all very much.
Mr. Payne. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Katko. Sure.
Mr. Payne. Just an observation before we close.
Ms. McSally, you should have not left Homeland. I see you
more now.
Ms. McSally. I am on Homeland. I just gave up the Chair of
the other subcommittee to move over to another subcommittee.
Mr. Payne. Well, we miss you there.
Ms. McSally. I am here, baby.
Mr. Payne. All right.
Mr. Katko. The committee stands adjourned. Thank you all so
very much.
[Whereupon, at 10:28 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
