- DHS'S EFFORT TO SECURE .GOV

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DHS'S EFFORT TO SECURE.GOV

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE
PROTECTION, AND SECURITY
TECHNOLOGIES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 24, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-23

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
96-169 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2015

_______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Michael T. McCaul, Texas, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas                   Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Peter T. King, New York              Loretta Sanchez, California
Mike Rogers, Alabama                 Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Candice S. Miller, Michigan, Vice    James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Chair                            Brian Higgins, New York
Jeff Duncan, South Carolina          Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania             William R. Keating, Massachusetts
Lou Barletta, Pennsylvania           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Filemon Vela, Texas
Curt Clawson, Florida                Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
John Katko, New York                 Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Will Hurd, Texas                     Norma J. Torres, California
Earl L. ``Buddy'' Carter, Georgia
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Barry Loudermilk, Georgia
Martha McSally, Arizona
John Ratcliffe, Texas
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York
Brendan P. Shields, Staff Director
Joan V. O'Hara,  General Counsel
Michael S. Twinchek, Chief Clerk
I. Lanier Avant, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION, AND SECURITY
TECHNOLOGIES

John Ratcliffe, Texas, Chairman
Peter T. King, New York              Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania             Loretta Sanchez, California
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Curt Clawson, Florida                James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York     Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Michael T. McCaul, Texas (ex             (ex officio)
officio)
Brett DeWitt, Subcommittee Staff Director
Dennis Terry, Subcommittee Clerk
Christopher Schepis, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS

The Honorable John Ratcliffe, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Texas, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Security
Technologies:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Cedric L. Richmond, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Louisiana, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Security
Technologies...................................................     4
The Honorable Michael T. McCaul, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas, and Chairman, Committee on Homeland
Security.......................................................     6
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     8

WITNESSES
Panel I

Mr. Andy Ozment, Assistant Secretary, Office of Cybersecurity and
Communications, National Protections and Programs Directorate,
U.S. Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     9
Prepared Statement.............................................    11
Mr. Gregory C. Wilshusen, Director, Information Security Issues,
Government Accountability Office:
Oral Statement.................................................    14
Prepared Statement.............................................    16

Panel II

Mr. Daniel M. Gerstein, The Rand Corporation:
Oral Statement.................................................    36
Prepared Statement.............................................    38

APPENDIX

Questions From Chairman John Ratcliffe for Andy Ozment...........    51
Questions From Honorable James R. Langevin for Andy Ozment.......    51
Questions From Chairman John Ratcliffe for Gregory C. Wilshusen..    52
Questions From Chairman John Ratcliffe for Daniel M. Gerstein....    54

DHS'S EFFORT TO SECURE .GOV

----------

Wednesday, June 24, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection,
and Security Technologies,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:42 p.m., in
Room 311, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. John Ratcliffe
[Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Ratcliffe, Perry, Clawson,
Donovan, McCaul, Richmond, Jackson Lee, and Langevin.
Mr. Ratcliffe. The Homeland Subcommittee on Cybersecurity,
Infrastructure Protection, and Security Technologies will come
to order.
The subcommittee meets today to hear what the Department of
Homeland Security is doing to secure U.S. Government networks
from cyber hackers. The magnitude of the latest breach at the
Office of Personnel Management, or OPM, and the impact that it
will have on tens of millions of Americans and our National
security for decades to come is simply unacceptable.
OPM was warned about its poor IT security. Yet, we still
found them asleep at the switch. To put it in perspective, OPM
was responsible for safeguarding extremely sensitive data,
personnel files, and security clearance information for tens of
millions of Federal employees. Yet, OPM's efforts to secure its
networks were frankly laughable. The stakes were immense. Yet,
the cybersecurity efforts were pathetic. In my opinion, this
could be classified as cybersecurity malpractice.
The Federal agency guarding this sensitive information
demonstrated gross negligence and willful disregard of earlier
warnings. We need to know who in this administration is really
in charge and who is truly responsible for securing our Federal
Government's civilian information systems.
The nature of the compromised data is particularly
concerning because it contained the personally identifiable
information, or PII, of what is now known to be at least 14
million Federal and Congressional employees and military
personnel. Not only did we fail to protect that PII, we failed
to protect the security clearance background check information
contained on the Questionnaire for National Security Position
form, also known as the SF-86.
The individuals who serve our country, often risking their
lives, disclose substantial personal information on these forms
to get special clearances to handle our Government's secrets,
and they have every right to expect that their information will
be safe. But, as we have learned, OPM struggled to implement
even the most basic network security protocols.
This was spelled out in the November 2014 inspector general
report 1 month before the breach occurred. The Government
Accountability Office has drawn similar conclusions.
Specifically, the inspector general found lackluster
information security governance and even recommended that OPM
shut down all of its information systems that lacked the valid
authorization.
Additionally, in 2014, DHS presented to OPM a mitigation
plan with recommendations for improving its information
security. The question then is why the recommendations from DHS
and others were not required and fully implemented by OPM.
Unfortunately, the White House response to the OPM breach
has been incredibly disappointing. The Federal Government was
attacked. Yet, there is no indication that there will be any
consequences from these actions. In addition, the U.S. Chief
Information Officer, Tony Scott, has called for a, ``30-day
cybersecurity sprint,'' for Federal agencies to secure their
networks and data.
So the White House is essentially calling on Federal
agencies to step up and do in the next 30 days what they were
already required to do. Our country's cybersecurity shouldn't
be a 30-day sprint exercise, but, rather, a dedicated marathon,
a long, sustained, and comprehensive effort to protect our
country from escalating and rapidly evolving cyber attacks.
This administration's response is superficial. It is not
serious, and it doesn't reflect the gravity of the threats
facing our Nation right now in cyber space.
It is clear that the Nation is under attack, under siege,
by state and non-state actors and our defenses at OPM and in
the Federal Government are woefully inadequate. As such, in
this hearing today, we will examine the cyber capabilities that
DHS is providing to OPM and to other Federal civilian agencies,
how quickly these tools are being deployed Government-wide,
and, ultimately, what vulnerabilities and gaps remain in our
cybersecurity posture.
Last December Congress passed the Federal Information
Modernization Act, or FISMA, to give DHS the authority to carry
out the operational activities to protect Federal civilian
information systems from cyber intrusions. Now that DHS has
these authorities, we want to hear how DHS plans to execute the
new law and rapidly implement its binding directives and other
Federal information security capabilities to more quickly
secure the .gov domain.
Additionally, DHS' EINSTEIN and Continuous Diagnostics and
Mitigation program, or CDM, were designed to protect Federal
civilian agency systems. Yet, not every Federal agency has
adopted them. Why is that the case?
Although these programs aren't a silver bullet to prevent
further cyber attacks, both play a vital role in what should be
a defense-in-depth cybersecurity strategy. Now more than ever
DHS needs to rapidly deploy its cyber capabilities and show
strong leadership to protect our Government's networks and most
sensitive information from cyber hackers.
I also hope that, if nothing else, this latest attack on
OPM servers will prove to be a catalyst to get the United
States Senate to act and pass the strong and bipartisan House-
passed cybersecurity information-sharing legislation.
These bills would, in part, authorize DHS' EINSTEIN program
and allow for greater sharing of cyber threat indicators so
both the public and private sectors can more effectively block
known and malicious cyber intrusions.
From my vantage point as Chairman of this subcommittee and
as a former terrorism prosecutor, cybersecurity is National
security. The United States Government is under cyber attack
from nation-states and criminal groups, and I look forward to
hearing from our witnesses today on what the Department of
Homeland Security is doing about it.
[The statement of Chairman Ratcliffe follows:]
Statement of Chairman John Ratcliffe
June 24, 2015
The subcommittee meets today to hear what the Department of
Homeland Security is doing to secure the U.S. Government's networks
from cyber hackers. The magnitude of the latest breach at the Office of
Personnel Management (OPM), and the impact it will have on tens of
millions of Americans and our National security for decades to come, is
simply unacceptable. OPM was warned about its poor IT security; yet we
still found them asleep at the switch. To put it into perspective, OPM
was responsible for safeguarding extremely sensitive data-personnel
files and security clearance information for tens of millions of
Federal employees--yet OPM's efforts to secure its network were
laughable. The stakes were immense, yet the cybersecurity efforts were
pathetic. In my opinion, this could be classified as a ``cybersecurity
malpractice'' of sorts. The Federal agency guarding this sensitive
information demonstrated gross negligence and willful disregard of
earlier warnings. We need to know who in this administration is in
charge, and who is responsible for securing our Federal Government's
civilian information systems.
The nature of the compromised data is particularly concerning
because it contained the personally identifiable information (PII) of
up to 14 million Federal and Congressional employees, and military
personnel. Not only did we fail to protect PII, we failed to protect
the security clearance background check information contained on the
Questionnaire for National Security Positions form, called an SF-86.
The individuals who serve our country, often risking their lives,
disclose substantial personal information on these forms to get special
clearances to handle our Government's secrets and expect their
information will be safe.
As we've learned, OPM struggled to implement even the most basic
network security protocols. This was spelled out in a November 2014
Inspector General report, 1 month before the breach occurred. The
Government Accountability Office has drawn similar conclusions.
Specifically, the IG found lackluster information security governance
and even recommended that OPM shut down all its information systems
that lacked a valid authorization. Additionally in 2014, DHS presented
to OPM a mitigation plan with recommendations for improving its
information security. The question, then, is why the recommendations
from DHS and others were not required and fully implemented by OPM?
Unfortunately, the White House response to the OPM breach has been
extremely disappointing. The Federal Government was attacked, yet there
is no indication that there will be consequence for these actions.
Additionally, the U.S Chief Information Officer Tony Scott has called
for a ``30-day cybersecurity sprint'' for Federal agencies to secure
their networks and data. The White House is essentially calling on
Federal agencies to do in the next 30 days what they were already
required to do. Our country's cybersecurity should not be a sprint
exercise; but rather a marathon--a long, sustained, and comprehensive
effort to protect our country from escalating and rapidly evolving
cyber-attacks. This administration's response is not serious and does
not reflect the gravity of the threats facing our Nation in cyberspace.
It is clear that the Nation is under siege by state and non-state
actors, and our defenses at OPM and in the Federal Government are
woefully inadequate. As such, today we will examine the cyber
capabilities that DHS is providing to OPM and other Federal civilian
agencies, how quickly these tools are being deployed Government-wide,
and ultimately, what vulnerabilities and gaps remain in our
cybersecurity posture.
Last December, Congress passed the Federal Information
Modernization Act (FISMA) to give DHS the authority to carry out the
operational activities to protect Federal civilian information systems
from cyber intrusions. Now that DHS has these authorities, we want to
hear how DHS plans to execute the new law and rapidly implement its
binding directives and other Federal information security capabilities
to more quickly secure the .gov domain. Additionally, DHS' Einstein and
Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM) programs were designed to
protect Federal civilian agencies' systems, yet not every Federal
agency has adopted them. Why is that the case? Although these programs
are not a silver bullet to preventing further cyber attacks, both play
a vital role in what should be a ``defense-in-depth'' cybersecurity
strategy. Now more than ever, DHS needs to rapidly deploy its cyber
capabilities, and show strong leadership to protect our Government's
networks and most sensitive information from cyber hackers.
I also hope that if nothing else, this latest attack will prove to
be a catalyst to get the Senate to act and pass the strong and
bipartisan House-passed cybersecurity information sharing legislation.
These bills would, in part, authorize DHS' Einstein program and allow
for greater sharing of cyber threat indicators so both the public and
private sectors can more effectively block known and malicious cyber
intrusions.
From my vantage point as Chairman of this subcommittee and a former
terrorism prosecutor, cybersecurity is National security. The U.S.
Government is under cyber-attack from nation-states and criminal groups
and I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today on what the
Department of Homeland Security is doing about it.

Mr. Ratcliffe. The Chairman now recognizes the Ranking
Minority Member of the subcommittee, the gentleman from
Louisiana, Mr. Richmond, for any statements that he may have.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
convening this hearing on DHS' responsibilities in helping all
of the Federal agencies secure their cyber networks and
databases.
I want to welcome our witnesses, Dr. Ozment, Mr. Wilshusen,
and Dr. Gerstein. Thank you for taking the time to appear
before us today.
Securing the Federal Government's networks and databases is
a monumental task. DHS has been charged with the primary task
to coordinate and provide cybersecurity guidance for the many
Federal agencies, critical infrastructure sectors, and
Government programs, whether it be Government, personnel
information, Classified background information, patents,
taxpayer data, nuclear facilities, health records, port
complexes, or any number of other vital Government services.
However, under the Federal Information Security
Modernization Act of 2014, FISMA, the White House Office of
Management and Budget is responsible for Federal information
security, oversight, and policy issuance.
However, OMB executes its responsibilities in close
coordination with its Federal cybersecurity partners, including
the Department of Homeland Security and the Department of
Commerce's National Institute of Standards and Technology.
Both state and non-state actors are attempting to breach
our Government and commercial systems. As President Obama said
a few days ago, this problem is not going to go away. It is
going to accelerate.
I think we all recognize that certifying the security of
information on the Federal Government's networks and systems
should remain a core focus of the administration as we here in
Congress should continue to be looking at innovative solutions
that provide DHS with the authorities to respond quickly to the
new challenges as they arise, and Congress must continue our
search for legislative initiatives that will help further
protect our Nation's critical networks and systems.
As a result of the latest Government network breaches, we
have been told that OMB has launched a 30-day cybersecurity
sprint, a review and recommendations effort. The review team is
made up of OMB, the White House E-Gov Cyber National Security
Unit, the National Security Council Cybersecurity Directorate,
the Department of Homeland Security, and Department of Defense,
among other agencies.
As part of the effort, OMB has instructed Federal agencies
to immediately take a number of steps to protect Federal
information and assets and improve the resilience of Federal
networks.
Specifically, Federal agencies must immediately deploy
indicators provided by DHS which can identify priority threat
active techniques and tactics and procedures and tools to scan
systems and check logs; No. 2, patch critical vulnerabilities
without delay and report to OMB and DHS on the progress and
challenges within 30 days; No. 3, tighten policies and
practices for privileged users; and, No. 4, dramatically
accelerate implementation of multi-factor identification,
especially for privileged users.
While I am pleased to see the White House taking immediate
action, all of the above efforts are generally recognized as
security measures that should already be in place, especially
in vital Government networks.
I hope to hear today from our witnesses a clear explanation
why many of the standard recognized security practices were not
in place in Federal agencies and clearly identify the plan that
DHS has to make sure and certify that Federal agencies'
cybersecurity standards are up to date.
Of particular interest to me in my district and I know to
others on this subcommittee is the status of port
cybersecurity. Overall maritime ports handle more than $1.3
trillion in cargo annually. The operations of these ports are
supported by information and communications systems that, like
all other network systems, are susceptible to cyber-related
threats.
Failures in these systems could degrade or interrupt
operations at ports, including the flow of commerce. Federal
agencies--in particular, DHS--and industry stakeholders have
specific roles in protecting maritime facilities and ports from
physical and cyber threats.
GAO did an audit last year of maritime port cybersecurity
efforts to assess actions taken by DHS and two of its front-
line component agencies, the U.S. Coast Guard and FEMA, as well
as other Federal agencies.
The GAO found that, while the Coast Guard initiated a
number of activities and coordinating strategies to improve
physical security in specific ports, it has not conducted a
risk assessment that fully addresses cyber-related threats,
vulnerabilities, and consequences.
The report also noted that FEMA identified enhancing
cybersecurity capabilities as a funding priority for the first
time in 2013.
I look forward to today's testimony on both of these
issues. It will be crucial that stakeholders appropriately plan
and allocate resources to protect ports and other maritime
facilities from increasingly persistent and pervasive cyber
intrusions.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Ratcliffe. The gentleman yields back.
The Chairman now welcomes and recognizes the Chairman of
the full committee, the gentleman from Texas, Mr. McCaul, for
his opening statement.
Mr. McCaul. I would like to thank Chairman Ratcliffe for
his leadership in holding this hearing today.
Our Government, in my opinion, is still reeling from what
appears to be the most significant breach of Federal networks
in U.S. history. This insidious attack was aimed at Federal
employees who handle our National security, many with security
clearances working to defend our country. Yet, the
administration failed to defend them.
Instead, it appears that Chinese hackers were able to cut
through our defenses and extract information about millions of
current and former U.S. Government employees with sensitive
security clearances.
As one who has filled these out in the past--I know the
Chairman has as well in our tenure at the Justice Department--
it is astounding to me that these very sensitive documents went
unprotected by the administration.
There can be no doubt that this attack will lead to more
brazen attempts to steal America's secrets. Yet, there is no
telling if we will be lucky enough to spot it the next time.
Clearly the administration needs to take this more seriously.
What is equally appalling to me is the administration's
response. No Government employee has been held accountable. No
foreign adversary has been warned. No one can say with any
degree of confidence whether we can stop this from happening
again.
We talk often now about how we have entered a new age that
requires new rules of the road. It is very true. I think this
is a watershed moment. It appears now that a foreign country
has invaded our networks and stolen sensitive data.
Yet, the administration's response is not to promise
retaliation. Instead, it has promised to add the issue to the
agenda of this week's strategic dialogue with China. I would
submit that is not strong enough. There are no consequences to
the actions.
What if this had been a foreign adversary invading our
territory instead of our networks to steal secrets? How would
the White House respond then? What if foreign espionage, we
caught them physically stealing the paper files? What would be
the response? This is the same action, just in the digital
world.
The abilities of our cyber adversaries are no secret. The
alarm bell has been going off for years. In 2012, Iran hackers
hit Saudi Arabia's national oil company, Aramco, destroying
30,000 computers.
Iran has targeted major U.S. banks to shut down websites
and restrict Americans' ability to access their accounts. We
have seen intrusions into Target, Neiman Marcus, Home Depot,
J.P. Morgan. All these were designed to steal the personal
information of private citizens.
In December, North Korea used a digital bomb to destroy
computer systems at Sony Pictures, an attack that was
destructive, but also a cowardly attempt to stifle our freedom
of expression.
In just this year we have seen the breaches of two major
health care companies, Anthem and Premera, that together
affected up to 90 million Americans.
I hope this latest breach will stir our Government to
action and, quite frankly, the Congress in a frank
acknowledgment that we have fallen behind.
Our Government is responsible for providing for the common
defense under the Constitution, and that also means defending
our cyber space.
During the last Congress, I led the efforts to strengthen
our cybersecurity foundations, and we managed to get five key
cybersecurity bills passed into law. We did this with the
support of both industry and privacy advocates.
This year we passed legislation in the House to enhance
cyber threat information sharing, which possibly could have
prevented this attack from occurring if we had the signature
threat information to block the breach from China.
In light of this attack--you know, we always say around
here it is going to take a big event for Congress to act. I
think the big event has happened and now it is time for
Congress to act.
The House has acted. It is now time for the Senate to act
and pass the bill that we passed out of the House with
overwhelming bipartisan support, 355 votes, supported by both
industry and privacy.
The Department of Homeland Security has several cyber tools
to defend these networks, such as the EINSTEIN and the
Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation program that were
authorized in our bill as well.
But these are only effective if they have been deployed to
our sprawling and disparate Federal networks. As of now, only
half of the Federal civilian agencies have deployed the latest
version of EINSTEIN.
I know, Dr. Ozment, you and I have talked about this. I
commend your efforts in expanding this now. Getting just to the
50 percent was quite an accomplishment. But I think we want to
hear about the expansion all across the Federal Government,
which I think would protect the networks better.
This digital frontier and safeguarding it is one of our
leading National security challenges of our time, and we, as
Americans, need to apply the same innovation, discipline, and
creativity that produced the information age into protecting
what we have created.
I want to thank the Chairman again for holding this
hearing. With that, I yield back.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the Chairman.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
June 24, 2015
I thank the leadership of this subcommittee for continuing to focus
on our Nation's most pressing cyber vulnerabilities--protecting our
Nation's critical infrastructure systems, and protecting citizens and
Federal workers and their personal information. Over the past few
months, the committee has found the repeated news that some of our most
valuable Government agencies have been infiltrated, and Government
employees' detailed personal information have been exposed quite
appalling.
We have seen the Internal Revenue Service breached. At the Defense
Department, Secretary Carter has told us about the Russian's hacking
from earlier this year, and now, we have a multi-layered exposure of
Federal workers exposed in an Office of Personnel Management incident.
Our networks and databases cannot be protected by one protocol, one
sophisticated procedure, or one magic arrow. We have cybersecurity
programs in place, but for them to take hold, either in the private
sector or across Government agencies, it will require leadership,
cooperation, and accountability. For example, the President's
cybersecurity Executive Order 13636 has charged the Department of
Homeland Security to be the motivator, teacher, and implementer of the
art and science of network and database security, across the Federal
Government.
However, for DHS to fulfill this mission, it has to engage with
both the public and private sectors. I want to hear more from Dr.
Ozment on how DHS is fulfilling this mission, and how it has responded
to previous intrusions. It is important for all of us to remember that
cybersecurity is a shared responsibility, and that no single approach
can protect us completely. Cyber threat protection is a complex and
incomplete process and it crosses several important intersections,
especially regarding privacy and civil liberties.
As people and Government become more dependent on technology,
technology-based opportunities for crime, espionage, and physical
disruption will most certainly increase. Today, some contend that
greater security means ceding some degree of personal privacy, or vice
versa. But in my book, cybersecurity enables privacy--because it
protects individuals, companies, and governments from malicious
intrusions. Privacy and security are not competing interests; we can
and must do both. The United States can set a positive example
regarding the role that cybersecurity standards play globally, for both
industry and Government. If we can develop effective, secure protocols
and standards that are easily implemented, it will represent an
important opportunity for U.S. products around the globe.
Finally, I would be remiss if I did not mention the cost of these
programs discussed today. All of this cybersecurity effort does not
come cheap. While the majority has seen fit to increase cybersecurity
funding by large amounts in some cases, House and Senate Republicans
have started to show how they plan to budget at discretionary levels
for other programs.
Compared to the President's budget, their budget will force cuts in
areas critical to the economy, as well as in National security
priorities. Homeland security, peacekeeping efforts, defense, and
foreign assistance will be impacted. These funding levels are the
result of Congressional Republicans' decision to lock in the funding
cuts imposed by sequestration. As we all know, sequestration was never
intended to take effect: Rather, it was supposed to threaten such
drastic cuts to both defense and non-defense funding that policymakers
would be motivated to come to the table and reduce the deficit through
smart, balanced reforms. Unfortunately, the bills and appropriations
targets released to date double-down on a very different approach.

Mr. Ratcliffe. We are pleased to have with us today a panel
of distinguished witnesses on this important topic.
Dr. Andy Ozment is the assistant secretary for the Office
of Cybersecurity and Communications within the National
Protections and Programs Directorate at the United States
Department of Homeland Security.
Welcome back, Dr. Ozment.
Mr. Greg Wilshusen is the director for information security
issues at the Government Accountability Office.
We're glad to have you with us today, sir.
At this time I will ask both witnesses to stand and raise
your right hand so that I may swear you in to provide
testimony.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Ratcliffe. You may be seated.
The witnesses' full written statements will appear in the
record.
The Chairman now recognizes Dr. Ozment for 5 minutes for
his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ANDY OZMENT, ASSISTANT SECRETARY, OFFICE OF
CYBERSECURITY AND COMMUNICATIONS, NATIONAL PROTECTIONS AND
PROGRAMS DIRECTORATE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Ozment. Thank you, Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member
Richmond, and Chairman McCaul, Members of the committee. I
appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today.
Like you, my fellow panelists, and countless Americans, I
am deeply concerned about the recent compromise at OPM, and I
am dedicated to ensuring that we take all necessary steps to
protect our Federal workforce and to drive forward the
cybersecurity of the entire Federal Government.
As a result, I want to focus these remarks on how DHS is
accelerating our efforts to protect Federal agencies and help
Federal agencies better protect themselves.
To begin, it is important to note that we are now making up
for 20 years of underinvestment in cybersecurity across both
the public and the private sector. At the same time, we are
facing a major challenge in protecting our most sensitive
information against sophisticated, well-resourced, and
persistent adversaries. This is a complex problem without a
simple solution.
To effectively address this challenge, our Federal agencies
need to deploy defense-in-depth. Consider protecting a
Government facility. Adequate security is not only a fence or a
camera or locking the doors of a building, but a combination of
these measures and others that, in aggregate, make it difficult
for an adversary to gain physical access. Cybersecurity also
requires multiple layers of security measures. No one measure
is sufficient.
Under legislation passed by this Congress last year,
Federal agencies are responsible for their own cybersecurity.
To assist them, DHS provides a common baseline of cybersecurity
across the civilian government.
It helps agencies manage their cyber risk through four key
lines of effort:
First, we protect agencies by providing a common set of
capabilities through the EINSTEIN and Continuous Diagnostics
and Mitigation, or CDM, programs.
Second, we measure and motivate agencies to implement best
practices.
Third, we serve as a hub for information sharing.
Finally, we provided incident response assistance when
agencies suffer a cyber intrusion.
In my statement this morning, I will focus on the first
area, how DHS provides a baseline of security through EINSTEIN
and CDM. I have described the other three areas in my written
statement, and I am happy to take your questions on them. Our
first line of defense against cyber threats is the EINSTEIN
system, which protects agencies at their perimeters.
Returning to the analogy of a Government facility that I
mentioned earlier, EINSTEIN 1 is similar to a camera at the
road onto the facility that records all traffic and identifies
anomalies in the numbers of cars. EINSTEIN 2 adds the ability
to detect suspicious cars based upon a watch list. EINSTEIN 2
does not stop the cars, but sounds the alarm if a suspicious
car enters the facility.
Agencies report that EINSTEIN 1 and 2 are screening over 90
percent of all Federal civilian traffic. EINSTEIN 1 and 2
played a key role in identifying the recent compromise at the
Department of Interior.
The latest phase of the program, known as EINSTEIN 3A, is
akin to a guard post at the highway that leads to multiple
Government facilities. EINSTEIN 3A uses Classified information
to look at the cars and compare them with a watch list.
EINSTEIN 3A then actively blocks prohibited cars from entering
the facility.
As the Chairman noted, we are accelerating our efforts to
protect all civilian agencies with EINSTEIN 3A. The system
currently protects 15 Federal civilian agencies with over
930,000 Federal personnel, or approximately 45 percent of the
civilian government, with at least one security countermeasure.
We have added EINSTEIN 3A protections to over 20 percent of
the Federal civilian government in the last 9 months alone.
During this time, EINSTEIN 3A has blocked nearly 550,000
attempts to access potentially malicious websites.
EINSTEIN 3A is a signature-based system. It can only block
attacks that it knows about. This is necessary, but not
sufficient, for protecting the civilian government. We are also
working on adding other technology to the EINSTEIN 3A platform
that can block attacks that we have not previously seen.
As we accelerate EINSTEIN deployment, we also recognize
that security cannot be achieved through only one type of tool.
EINSTEIN is not a silver bullet, and it will never be able to
block every threat. For example, it must be complemented with
tools to monitor the inside of agency networks.
Our CDM, Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation Program,
helps address this challenge. We have purchased CDM Phase 1
capabilities for 8 agencies covering over 50 percent of the
Federal civilian government, and we expect to purchase CDM for
97 percent of the Federal civilian government by the end of
this fiscal year.
Now, there's a caveat. The deadlines that I've just given
you are when DHS will provide a capability. It takes a few
additional months for each agency to fully implement both
EINSTEIN and CDM once the services are available. Of course,
agencies must supplement EINSTEIN and CDM with additional tools
appropriate to the needs of the agency.
I want to thank you again for the legislation Congress
passed in December 2014. As you know, additional legislation is
needed. This committee and the House have passed a bill
authorizing EINSTEIN and establishing DHS as the portal for
liability-protected information-sharing between the private
sector and the Government. We need information sharing and
EINSTEIN authorization legislation passed.
I'd like to conclude by noting that Federal agencies are a
rich target and will continue to experience frequent attempted
intrusions. As our detection methods improve, we will detect
more incidents, incidents that are already occurring, we just
didn't know it yet.
The recent breach at OPM is emblematic of this trend, as
OPM was able to detect the intrusion by implementing best
practices recommended by DHS. We are accelerating the
deployment of the tools we have, and we are bringing cutting-
edge capabilities on-line. We are asking our partner agencies
and Congress to take action and work with us to strengthen the
cybersecurity of our Federal agencies.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear before you
today. I look toward to any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ozment follows:]
Prepared Statement of Andy Ozment
introduction
Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member Richmond, and Members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today.
Recent compromises clearly demonstrate the challenge facing the Federal
Government in protecting our citizens' and employees' personal
information against sophisticated, agile, and persistent threats.
Addressing these threats is a shared responsibility. I will discuss the
roles of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) in protecting
civilian Federal departments and agencies and in helping agencies
better protect themselves.
the role of the department of homeland security in federal
cybersecurity
The Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014
specifies that Federal agencies are responsible for their own
cybersecurity. In addition, DHS has the mission to provide a common
baseline of security across the civilian government and help agencies
manage their cyber risk. DHS, through its National Protection and
Programs Directorate (NPPD), assists agencies by providing this
baseline for the Federal Government through the EINSTEIN and Continuous
Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM) programs, by measuring and motivating
agencies to implement best practices, by serving as a hub for
information sharing, and by providing incident response assistance when
agencies suffer a cyber intrusion. I will discuss each of these in
turn. NPPD has two additional cybersecurity customers besides the
Federal Government: Private-sector infrastructure owners and operators,
and State, local, Tribal, and territorial governments. While several of
the capabilities outlined below, such as information sharing and best
practices, apply to all three customers, this statement focuses on
NPPD's approach to Federal cybersecurity in the context of the recent
compromise at OPM.
EINSTEIN
EINSTEIN protects agencies' unclassified networks at the perimeter
of each agency. Furthermore, EINSTEIN provides situational awareness
across the Government, as threats detected in one agency are shared
with all others so they can take appropriate protective action. The
U.S. Government could not achieve such situational awareness through
individual agency efforts alone.
The first two versions of EINSTEIN--EINSTEIN 1 and 2--identify
abnormal network traffic patterns and detect known malicious traffic.
This capability is fully deployed and screening all Federal civilian
traffic that is routed through a Trusted Internet Connection (a secure
gateway between each agency's internal network and the internet).
EINSTEIN 3 Accelerated (EINSTEIN 3A), which actively blocks known
malicious traffic, is currently being deployed through the primary
Internet Service Providers serving the Federal Government. EINSTEIN 1
and 2 use only Unclassified information, while EINSTEIN 3A uses
Classified information. Using Classified indicators allows EINSTEIN 3A
to detect and block many of the most significant cybersecurity threats.
We are working aggressively to ensure that all agencies are protected
by EINSTEIN 3A, including by implementing alternative deployment
options that address the inability of some Internet Service Providers
to implement EINSTEIN 3A in a sufficiently timely manner.
We are now accelerating our efforts and making significant progress
in implementing EINSTEIN 3A across the Federal Government. The system
now protects 15 Federal civilian departments and agencies and over
930,000 Federal personnel with at least one of its two security
``countermeasures.'' Thus, EINSTEIN 3A protects approximately 45% of
the civilian government--a 20% increase over the past 9 months alone.
During this time, EINSTEIN 3A has blocked nearly 550,000 attempts to
access potentially malicious web sites via one of its countermeasures.
Any one of these blocked attempts could have conceivably resulted in an
incident of severe consequence.
As we fully deploy EINSTEIN 3A, we are also mindful that to stay
ahead of the adversary, we must go beyond the current approach that
uses indicators of known threats. To that end, we are developing
advanced malware and behavioral analysis capabilities that will
automatically identify and separate suspicious traffic for further
inspection, even if the precise indicator has not been seen before. We
are examining best-in-class technologies from the private sector to
evolve to this next stage of network defense. As I will discuss later,
EINSTEIN played a key role in understanding the recent compromise at
OPM.
Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM)
Security cannot be achieved through only one type of tool. That is
why security professionals believe in defense-in-depth: Employing
multiple tools to, in combination, manage the risks of cyber attacks.
EINSTEIN is a perimeter system, but it will never be able to block
every threat. For example, it must be complemented with systems and
tools inside agency networks. Through the CDM program, DHS provides
Federal civilian agencies with tools to monitor agencies' internal
networks. CDM is divided into three phases:

CDM Phase 1 identifies vulnerabilities on computers and
software on agency networks.

CDM Phase 2 will monitor users on agencies' networks and
detect if they are engaging in unauthorized activity.

CDM Phase 3 will assess activity happening inside of
agencies' networks to identify anomalies and alert security
personnel.
We have provided CDM Phase 1 capabilities to 8 agencies, covering
over 50% of the Federal civilian government. We expect to purchase CDM
for 97% of the Federal civilian government by the end of this fiscal
year. CDM will provide an invaluable tool in helping agencies protect
against cybersecurity compromises. Although NPPD provides both EINSTEIN
3A and CDM capabilities to Federal civilian agencies, each agency must
still take action to implement these systems. In some cases, it may
take agencies some months to fully implement a given capability once it
is made available by DHS.
For example, a vignette from the current incident may be useful to
illustrate how EINSTEIN and CDM jointly help protect Federal agencies:

As soon as OPM identified malicious activity on their
network, they shared this information with DHS. NPPD then
developed a signature for the particular threat, and used
EINSTEIN 2 to look back in time for other compromises across
the Federal civilian government. Through this process, we
identified a potential compromise at another location with OPM
data that would not have been identified and mitigated as
quickly without the EINSTEIN system. We then used the EINSTEIN
1 system to determine whether data exfiltration had occurred.

This same threat information is used by EINSTEIN 3A to block
potential threats from impacting Federal networks. Thus, DHS
used EINSTEIN 3A to ensure that this cyber threat could not
exploit other agencies protected by the system. As noted, DHS
is accelerating EINSTEIN 3A deployment across the Federal
Government. While it is challenging to estimate the potential
impact of a prevented event, each of these malicious DNS
requests or emails that were blocked by EINSTEIN 3A may
conceivably have led to a cybersecurity compromise of severe
consequence.

When implemented across the Federal Government, CDM will
help agencies identify and prioritize vulnerabilities within
their network. For example, CDM would have helped OPM identify
any vulnerabilities within its database of Federal personnel
information and mitigate those vulnerabilities before they
could be exploited by an adversary.
Measuring and Motivating Agencies to Adopt Best Practices
Many cybersecurity incidents can be avoided by simple measures.
Implementing best practices is the foundation of cybersecurity. DHS
works closely with individual agencies and governance bodies such as
the Federal Chief Information Officer (CIO) Council to motivate
agencies to implement best practices and to measure their progress in
reaching particular goals and outcomes. Examples of best practices
include patching critical vulnerabilities, implementing workforce
training and awareness programs, and using multi-factor authentication.
Secretary Johnson recently issued a Binding Operational Directive,
based upon authority provided by Congress in the Federal Information
Security Modernization Act of 2014, which directed civilian agencies to
promptly patch vulnerabilities on their internet-facing devices. These
vulnerabilities are identified by recurring scans conducted by the DHS
National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center (NCCIC).
These vulnerabilities are accessible from the internet, and thus
present a significant risk if not quickly addressed. Agencies have
responded quickly in implementing Secretary Johnson's directive, as
over half of the stale critical vulnerabilities that existed when the
Directive was issued have been mitigated within the 20 days since its
issuance.
Under the authority provided by Congress in last year's FISMA
legislation, DHS has a statutory role in developing, implementing, and
evaluating operational cybersecurity guidance, in conjunction with the
Office of Management and Budget. In this role, DHS leverages metrics,
consultation, and strategic engagements with agency CIOs and Chief
Information Security Officers (CISOs) to motivate agencies toward
better cybersecurity. In fact, OPM was able to first identify the
recent compromise of its network based upon technical recommendations
provided by NPPD.
Information Sharing
Information sharing is an essential aspect of NPPD's cybersecurity
role. By sharing information quickly and widely, we help other agencies
block cyber threats before damaging incidents occur. Equally
importantly, the information we receive from other agencies and the
private sector help us understand emerging risks and develop effective
protective measures. Our NCCIC is the civilian government's hub for
cybersecurity information sharing, incident response, and coordination.
In fiscal year 2015, the NCCIC has disseminated over 6,000 alerts,
warnings, and bulletins.
To effectively combat sophisticated and agile adversaries, we must
share information quickly enough to block threats before they can
penetrate Federal networks. We now have a system to automate our
sharing of cyber threat indicators, and we are working aggressively to
build this capability across Government and to the private sector so we
can share this information in near-real-time. One agency is already
receiving cyber threat information via this automated system. We expect
that multiple agencies and private-sector partners will begin sharing
and receiving information through this system by the end of October,
2015. As more agencies join us in automated information sharing, we
will increase our adversaries' cost and reduce the prevalence of
damaging incidents across the Federal Government and the private
sector.
Incident Response
Cybersecurity is about risk management, and we cannot eliminate all
risk. Agencies that implement best practices and share information will
increase the cost for adversaries and stop many threats. But
ultimately, there exists no perfect cyber defense, and persistent
adversaries will find ways to infiltrate networks in both Government
and the private sector. When an incident does occur, the NCCIC offers
on-site assistance to find the adversary, drive them out, and restore
service. In fiscal year 2015, the NCCIC has already provided on-site
incident response to 32 incidents--nearly double the total in all of
fiscal year 2014. The NCCIC also coordinate responses to significant
incidents to give senior leaders a clear understanding of the situation
and give operators the information they need to respond effectively.
Similar to the recent incident at OPM, providing on-site incident
response assistance also allows the NCCIC to identify indicators of
compromise that can then be shared with other agencies and applied to
EINSTEIN for broad protection across the Federal Government.
cybersecurity legislation
Last year, Congress acted in a bipartisan manner to pass critical
cybersecurity legislation that enhanced the ability of the Department
of Homeland Security to work with the private sector and other Federal
civilian departments in each of their own cybersecurity activities, and
enhanced the Department's cyber workforce authorities. As I noted, DHS
is using the authority granted in one of those bills--the Federal
Information Security Modernization Act of 2014--to direct Federal
civilian Executive branch agencies to fix critical vulnerabilities on
their Internet-facing devices.
Additional legislation is needed. I previously highlighted
EINSTEN's key role in identifying and mitigating an additional
potential compromise during the OPM activity. The Department and
administration have a long-standing request of Congress to remove
obstacles to the EINSTEIN program's deployment across Federal civilian
agency information systems by codifying the program's authorities and
resolving lingering concerns among certain agencies. Some agencies have
questioned how deployment of EINSTEIN under DHS authority relates to
their existing statutory restrictions on the use and disclosure of
agency data. DHS and the administration are seeking statutory changes
to clarify this uncertainty and to ensure agencies understand that they
can disclose their network traffic to DHS for narrowly-tailored
purposes to protect agency networks, while making clear that privacy
protections for the data will remain in place. I look forward to
working with Congress to further clarify DHS's authority to rapidly and
efficiently deploy this protective technology.
In addition, carefully updating laws to facilitate cybersecurity
information sharing within the private sector and between the private
and Government sectors is also essential to improving the Nation's
cybersecurity. While many companies currently share cybersecurity
threat information under existing laws, there is a heightening need to
increase the volume and speed of information shared without sacrificing
the trust of the American people or the protection of privacy,
confidentiality, civil rights, or civil liberties. It is essential to
ensure that cyber threat information can be collated quickly in the
NCCIC, analyzed, and shared quickly among trusted partners, including
with law enforcement, so that network owners and operators can take
necessary steps to block threats and avoid damage.
conclusion
Federal agencies are a rich target and will continue to experience
frequent attempted intrusions. This problem is not unique to the
Government--it is shared across a global cybersecurity community. The
key to good cybersecurity is awareness and constant vigilance at
machine speed. As our detection methods continue to improve, more
events will come to light. The recent breach at OPM is emblematic of
this trend, as OPM was able to detect the intrusion by implementing
cybersecurity best practices recommended by DHS. As network defenders
are able to see and thwart more events, we will inevitably identify
more malicious activity and thwart the adversary's attempts to access
sensitive information and systems. We are facing a major challenge in
protecting our most sensitive information against sophisticated, well-
resourced, and persistent adversaries. In response, we are accelerating
deployment of the tools we have and are working to bring cutting-edge
capabilities on-line. We are asking our partner agencies and Congress
to take action and work with us to strengthen the cybersecurity of our
Federal agencies.

Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Dr. Ozment.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Wilshusen for 5 minutes for
his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF GREGORY C. WILSHUSEN, DIRECTOR, INFORMATION
SECURITY ISSUES, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Mr. Wilshusen. Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member Richmond,
and Members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity
to testify at today's hearing on DHS's efforts to secure the
.gov domain.
As you know, the Federal Government faces an array of
cyber-based threats to its computer networks and systems, as
illustrated by the recent OPM data breaches which affected
millions of Federal employees. Such incidents underscore the
urgent need for effective implementation of information
security programs at Federal agencies.
Since 1997, we have designated Federal information security
as a Government-wide high-risk area and, in 2003, expanded the
area to include computerized systems supporting the Nation's
critical infrastructure. We further expanded this area in 2015
to include protecting the privacy of personally identifiable
information.
Today I will discuss several cybersecurity challenges
facing Federal agencies and Government-wide initiatives,
including those led by DHS aimed at improving agency
cybersecurity.
Before I begin, Mr. Chairman, if I may, I'd like to
recognize several members of my team who were instrumental in
developing my statement and some of the work underpinning it.
With me today is Larry Crosland, who is an assistant
director who led this work. Also, Brad Becker, Rosanna
Guerrero, Lee McCracken, Kush Malhotra, Chris Businsky, and
Scott Pettis also made significant contributions.
Mr. Chairman, most Federal agencies face challenges
securing their computer networks and systems. One such
challenge is designing and implementing risk-based
cybersecurity programs.
Agencies continue to have shortcomings in assessing risks,
developing and implementing security controls, and monitoring
results. Nineteen of 24 agencies covered by the CFO Act
reported that information security weaknesses were either a
significant deficiency or material weakness for financial
reporting purposes. In addition, IGs at 23 of these agencies
cited information security as a major management challenge for
their agency.
Overseeing security of contractor-operated systems is
another challenge. Agencies rely on contractors to perform a
wide variety of IT services. However, five of six agencies we
reviewed did not consistently assess or review assessments of
their contractors' information security practices and controls,
resulting in security lapses.
Even with effective control, security incidents and data
breaches can still occur. Agencies need to react swiftly and
appropriately when they do. However, seven agencies we reviewed
had not consistently implemented key operational practices for
responding to data breaches involving personally identifiable
information.
GAO and agency IGs have made hundreds of recommendations to
assist agencies in addressing these and other challenges.
Implementing these recommendations will strengthen agencies'
ability to protect their systems and information.
DHS and OMB have also launched several Government-wide
initiatives to enhance cybersecurity. One such initiative is
requiring strong authentication of users through the use of
personal identity verification, or PIV, cards.
These cards provide a more secure method of verifying a
user's identity than do passwords. However, OMB recently
reported that only 41 percent of agency user accounts at 23
civilian agencies required PIV cards for accessing agency
systems.
DHS' Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation Initiative is
intended to provide agencies with tools that identify and
prioritize cyber risk on an on-going basis and enable
cybersecurity personnel to mitigate the most significant
programs or problems first. If effectively implemented, the
initiative may assist agencies in resolving long-standing
security weaknesses.
The National Cybersecurity Protection System is intended to
detect and prevent malicious network traffic from entering
Federal civilian networks, among other things. GAO is presently
reviewing the implementation of this system. Our preliminary
observations indicate that the system's intrusion detection and
prevention capabilities may be useful, but are also limited.
While Government-wide initiatives hold promise for
bolstering the Federal cybersecurity posture, no single
technology or set of practices is sufficient to protect against
all cyber threats. A multi-layered defense-in-depth strategy
that includes well-trained personnel, effective and
consistently applied processes, and appropriate technologies is
needed to better manage these risks.
This concludes my statement. I'd be happy to answer your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wilshusen follows:]
Prepared Statement of Gregory C. Wilshusen
June 24, 2015
cybersecurity.--recent data breaches illustrate need for strong
controls across federal agencies
gao-15-725t
Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member Richmond, and Members of the
subcommittee: Thank you for inviting me to testify at today's hearing
on the Department of Homeland Security's (DHS) efforts to secure
Federal information systems. As you know, the Federal Government faces
an array of cyber-based threats to its systems and data, as illustrated
by the recently-reported data breaches at the Office of Personnel
Management (OPM), which affected millions of current and former Federal
employees. Such incidents underscore the urgent need for effective
implementation of information security controls at Federal agencies.
Since 1997, we have designated Federal information security as a
Government-wide high-risk area, and in 2003 expanded this area to
include computerized systems supporting the Nation's critical
infrastructure. Most recently, in the 2015 update to our high-risk
list, we further expanded this area to include protecting the privacy
of personally identifiable information (PII)\1\--that is, personal
information that is collected, maintained, and shared by both Federal
and non-Federal entities.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Personally identifiable information is information about an
individual, including information that can be used to distinguish or
trace an individual's identity, such as name, Social Security number,
mother's maiden name, or biometric records, and any other personal
information that is linked or linkable to an individual.
\2\ See GAO, High-Risk Series: An Update, GAO-15-290 (Washington,
DC: Feb. 11, 2015).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
My statement today will discuss: (1) Cybersecurity challenges that
Federal agencies face in securing their systems and information and (2)
Government-wide initiatives, including those led by DHS, aimed at
improving agencies' cybersecurity. In preparing this statement, we
relied on our previous work in these areas, as well as the preliminary
observations from our on-going review of DHS's EINSTEIN initiative. We
discussed these observations with DHS officials. The prior reports
cited throughout this statement contain detailed discussions of the
scope of the work and the methodology used to carry it out. All the
work on which this statement is based was conducted or is being
conducted in accordance with generally accepted Government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform audits to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We
believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
background
As computer technology has advanced, both Government and private
entities have become increasingly dependent on computerized information
systems to carry out operations and to process, maintain, and report
essential information. Public and private organizations rely on
computer systems to transmit proprietary and other sensitive
information, develop and maintain intellectual capital, conduct
operations, process business transactions, transfer funds, and deliver
services. In addition, the internet has grown increasingly important to
American business and consumers, serving as a medium for hundreds of
billions of dollars of commerce each year, and has developed into an
extended information and communications infrastructure that supports
vital services such as power distribution, health care, law
enforcement, and National defense.
Ineffective protection of these information systems and networks
can result in a failure to deliver these vital services, and result in:

loss or theft of computer resources, assets, and funds;

inappropriate access to and disclosure, modification, or
destruction of sensitive information, such as National security
information, PII, and proprietary business information;

disruption of essential operations supporting critical
infrastructure, National defense, or emergency services;

undermining of agency missions due to embarrassing incidents
that erode the public's confidence in Government;

use of computer resources for unauthorized purposes or to
launch attacks on other systems;

damage to networks and equipment; and

high costs for remediation.
Recognizing the importance of these issues, Congress enacted laws
intended to improve the protection of Federal information and systems.
These laws include the Federal Information Security Modernization Act
of 2014 (FISMA),\3\ which, among other things, authorizes DHS to: (1)
Assist the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) with overseeing and
monitoring agencies' implementation of security requirements; (2)
operate the Federal information security incident center; and (3)
provide agencies with operational and technical assistance, such as
that for continuously diagnosing and mitigating cyber threats and
vulnerabilities. The act also reiterated the 2002 FISMA requirement for
the head of each agency to provide information security protections
commensurate with the risk and magnitude of the harm resulting from
unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification, or
destruction of the agency's information or information systems. In
addition, the act requires Federal agencies to develop, document, and
implement an agency-wide information security program. The program is
to provide security for the information and information systems that
support the operations and assets of the agency, including those
provided or managed by another agency, contractor, or other source.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ The Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014
(Pub. L. No. 113-283, Dec. 18, 2014) largely superseded the very
similar Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002 (Title III,
Pub. L. No. 107-347, Dec. 17, 2002).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cyber Threats to Federal Systems
Risks to cyber-based assets can originate from unintentional or
intentional threats. Unintentional threats can be caused by, among
other things, natural disasters, defective computer or network
equipment, and careless or poorly-trained employees. Intentional
threats include both targeted and untargeted attacks from a variety of
sources, including criminal groups, hackers, disgruntled employees,
foreign nations engaged in espionage and information warfare, and
terrorists.
These adversaries vary in terms of their capabilities, willingness
to act, and motives, which can include seeking monetary gain or a
political, economic, or military advantage. For example, adversaries
possessing sophisticated levels of expertise and significant resources
to pursue their objectives--sometimes referred to as ``advanced
persistent threats''--pose increasing risks. They make use of various
techniques--or exploits--that may adversely affect Federal information,
computers, software, networks, and operations.
Since fiscal year 2006, the number of information security
incidents affecting systems supporting the Federal Government has
steadily increased each year: Rising from 5,503 in fiscal year 2006 to
67,168 in fiscal year 2014, an increase of 1,121 percent (see fig. 1).

Furthermore, the number of reported security incidents involving
PII at Federal agencies has more than doubled in recent years--from
10,481 incidents in fiscal year 2009 to 27,624 incidents in fiscal year
2014. These incidents and others like them can adversely affect
National security; damage public health and safety; and lead to
inappropriate access to and disclosure, modification, or destruction of
sensitive information. Recent examples highlight the impact of such
incidents:

In June 2015, OPM reported that an intrusion into its
systems affected personnel records of about 4 million current
and former Federal employees. The director of OPM also stated
that a separate incident may have compromised OPM systems
related to background investigations, but its scope and impact
have not yet been determined.

In June 2015, the commissioner of the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) testified that unauthorized third parties had
gained access to taxpayer information from its ``Get
Transcript'' application. According to IRS, criminals used
taxpayer-specific data acquired from non-IRS sources to gain
unauthorized access to information on approximately 100,000 tax
accounts. These data included Social Security information,
dates of birth, and street addresses.

In April 2015, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)
Office of Inspector General reported that two VA contractors
had improperly accessed the VA network from foreign countries
using personally-owned equipment.

In February 2015, the Director of National Intelligence
stated that unauthorized computer intrusions were detected in
2014 on OPM's networks and those of two of its contractors. The
two contractors were involved in processing sensitive PII
related to National security clearances for Federal employees.

In September 2014, a cyber-intrusion into the United States
Postal Service's information systems may have compromised PII
for more than 800,000 of its employees.
federal agencies face on-going cybersecurity challenges
Given the risks posed by cyber threats and the increasing number of
incidents, it is crucial that Federal agencies take appropriate steps
to secure their systems and information. We and agency inspectors
general have identified challenges in protecting Federal information
and systems, including those in the following key areas:

Designing and implementing risk-based cybersecurity programs
at Federal agencies..--Agencies continue to have shortcomings
in assessing risks, developing and implementing security
controls, and monitoring results. Specifically, for fiscal year
2014, 19 of the 24 Federal agencies covered by the Chief
Financial Officers (CFO) Act \4\ reported that information
security control deficiencies were either a material weakness
or a significant deficiency in internal controls over their
financial reporting.\5\ Moreover, inspectors general at 23 of
the 24 agencies cited information security as a major
management challenge for their agency.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ These are the Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, Defense,
Education, Energy, Health and Human Services, Homeland Security,
Housing and Urban Development, the Interior, Justice, Labor, State,
Transportation, the Treasury, and Veterans Affairs; the Environmental
Protection Agency; General Services Administration; National
Aeronautics and Space Administration; National Science Foundation;
Nuclear Regulatory Commission; Office of Personnel Management; Small
Business Administration; Social Security Administration; and the U.S.
Agency for International Development.
\5\ A material weakness is a deficiency, or combination of
deficiencies, that results in more than a remote likelihood that a
material misstatement of the financial statements will not be prevented
or detected. A significant deficiency is a control deficiency, or
combination of control deficiencies, in internal control that is less
severe than a material weakness, yet important enough to merit
attention by those charged with governance. A control deficiency exists
when the design or operation of a control does not allow management or
employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions,
to prevent or detect and correct misstatements on a timely basis.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As we testified in April 2015, for fiscal year 2014, most of the
agencies had weaknesses in the five key security control
categories.\6\ These control categories are: (1) Limiting,
preventing, and detecting inappropriate access to computer
resources; (2) managing the configuration of software and
hardware; (3) segregating duties to ensure that a single
individual does not have control over all key aspects of a
computer-related operation; (4) planning for continuity of
operations in the event of a disaster or disruption; and (5)
implementing agency-wide security management programs that are
critical to identifying control deficiencies, resolving
problems, and managing risks on an on-going basis. (See fig.
2.)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ GAO, Cybersecurity: Actions Needed to Address Challenges Facing
Federal Systems, GAO-15-573T (Washington, DC: Apr. 22, 2015).

Examples of these weaknesses include: (1) Granting users access
permissions that exceed the level required to perform their
legitimate job-related functions; (2) not ensuring that only
authorized users can access an agency's systems; (3) not using
encryption to protect sensitive data from being intercepted and
compromised; (4) not updating software with the current
versions and latest security patches to protect against known
vulnerabilities; and (5) not ensuring employees were trained
commensurate with their responsibilities. GAO and agency
inspectors general have made hundreds of recommendations to
agencies aimed at improving their implementation of these
information security controls.

Enhancing oversight of contractors providing IT services.--
In August 2014, we reported that five of six agencies we
reviewed were inconsistent in overseeing assessments of
contractors' implementation of security controls.\7\ This was
partly because agencies had not documented IT security
procedures for effectively overseeing contractor performance.
In addition, according to OMB, 16 of 24 agency inspectors
general determined that their agency's program for managing
contractor systems lacked at least one required element. We
recommended that OMB, in conjunction with DHS, develop and
clarify guidance to agencies for annually reporting the number
of contractor-operated systems and that the reviewed agencies
establish and implement IT security oversight procedures for
such systems. OMB did not comment on our report, but the
agencies generally concurred with our recommendations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ GAO, Information Security: Agencies Need to Improve Oversight
of Contractor Controls, GAO-14-612 (Washington, DC: Aug. 8, 2014).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Improving security incident response activities.--In April
2014, we reported that the 24 agencies did not consistently
demonstrate that they had effectively responded to cyber
incidents.\8\ Specifically, we estimated that agencies had not
completely documented actions taken in response to detected
incidents reported in fiscal year 2012 in about 65 percent of
cases.\9\ In addition, the 6 agencies we reviewed had not fully
developed comprehensive policies, plans, and procedures to
guide their incident response activities. We recommended that
OMB address agency incident response practices Government-wide
and that the 6 agencies improve the effectiveness of their
cyber incident response programs. The agencies generally agreed
with these recommendations. We also made two recommendations to
DHS concerning Government-wide incident response practices. DHS
concurred with the recommendations and, to date, has
implemented one of them.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ GAO, Information Security: Agencies Need to Improve Cyber
Incident Response Practices, GAO-14-354 (Washington, DC: Apr. 30,
2014).
\9\ This estimate was based on a statistical sample of cyber
incidents reported in fiscal year 2012, with 95 percent confidence that
the estimate falls between 58 and 72 percent.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Responding to breaches of PII.--In December 2013, we
reported that 8 Federal agencies had inconsistently implemented
policies and procedures for responding to data breaches
involving PII.\10\ In addition, OMB requirements for reporting
PII-related data breaches were not always feasible or
necessary. Thus, we concluded that agencies may not be
consistently taking actions to limit the risk to individuals
from PII-related data breaches and may be expending resources
to meet OMB reporting requirements that provide little value.
We recommended that OMB revise its guidance to agencies on
responding to a PII-related data breach and that the reviewed
agencies take specific actions to improve their response to
PII-related data breaches. OMB neither agreed nor disagreed
with our recommendation; four of the reviewed agencies agreed,
two partially agreed, and two neither agreed nor disagreed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ GAO, Information Security: Agency Responses to Breaches of
Personally Identifiable Information Need to Be More Consistent, GAO-14-
34 (Washington, DC: Dec. 9, 2013).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Implementing security programs at small agencies.--In June
2014, we reported that six small agencies (i.e., agencies with
6,000 or fewer employees) had not implemented or not fully
implemented their information security programs.\11\ For
example, key elements of their plans, policies, and procedures
were outdated, incomplete, or did not exist, and two of the
agencies had not developed an information security program with
the required elements. We recommended that OMB include a list
of agencies that did not report on the implementation of their
information security programs in its annual report to Congress
on compliance with the requirements of FISMA, and include
information on small agencies' programs. OMB generally
concurred with our recommendations. We also recommended that
DHS develop guidance and services targeted at small agencies.
DHS has implemented this recommendation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ GAO, Information Security: Additional Oversight Needed to
Improve Programs at Small Agencies, GAO-14-344 (Washington, DC: June
25, 2014).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until Federal agencies take actions to address these challenges--
including implementing the hundreds of recommendations we and
inspectors general have made--Federal systems and information will be
at an increased risk of compromise from cyber-based attacks and other
threats.
government-wide cybersecurity initiatives present potential benefits
and challenges
In addition to the efforts of individual agencies, DHS and OMB have
several initiatives under way to enhance cybersecurity across the
Federal Government. While these initiatives all have potential
benefits, they also have limitations.
Personal Identity Verification.--In August 2004, Homeland Security
Presidential Directive 12 ordered the establishment of a mandatory,
Government-wide standard for secure and reliable forms of
identification for Federal Government employees and contractor
personnel who access Government-controlled facilities and information
systems. Subsequently, the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) defined requirements for such personal identity
verification (PIV) credentials based on ``smart cards''--plastic cards
with integrated circuit chips to store and process data--and OMB
directed Federal agencies to issue and use PIV credentials to control
access to Federal facilities and systems.
In September 2011, we reported that OMB and the 8 agencies in our
review had made mixed progress for using PIV credentials for
controlling access to Federal facilities and information systems.\12\
We attributed this mixed progress to a number of obstacles, including
logistical problems in issuing PIV credentials to all agency personnel
and agencies not making this effort a priority. We made several
recommendations to the 8 agencies and to OMB to more fully implement
PIV card capabilities. Although 2 agencies did not comment, 7 agencies
agreed with our recommendations or discussed actions they were taking
to address them. For example, we made 4 recommendations to DHS, who
concurred and has taken action to implement them. In February 2015, OMB
reported that, as of the end of fiscal year 2014, only 41 percent of
agency user accounts at the 23 civilian CFO Act agencies required PIV
cards for accessing agency systems.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ GAO, Personal ID Verification: Agencies Should Set a Higher
Priority on Using the Capabilities of Standardized Identification
Cards, GAO-11-751 (Washington, DC: Sept. 20, 2011).
\13\ OMB, Annual Report to Congress: Federal Information Security
Management Act (Washington, DC: Feb. 27, 2015).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM).--According to DHS,
this program is intended to provide Federal departments and agencies
with capabilities and tools that identify cybersecurity risks on an on-
going basis, prioritize these risks based on potential impacts, and
enable cybersecurity personnel to mitigate the most significant
problems first. These tools include sensors that perform automated
searches for known cyber vulnerabilities, the results of which feed
into a dashboard that alerts network managers. These alerts can be
prioritized, enabling agencies to allocate resources based on risk.
DHS, in partnership with the General Services Administration, has
established a Government-wide contract that is intended to allow
Federal agencies (as well as State, local, and Tribal governmental
agencies) to acquire CDM tools at discounted rates.
In July 2011, we reported on the Department of State's (State)
implementation of its continuous monitoring program, referred to as
iPost.\14\ We determined that State's implementation of iPost had
improved visibility over information security at the Department and
helped IT administrators identify, monitor, and mitigate information
security weaknesses. However, we also noted limitations and challenges
with State's approach, including ensuring that its risk-scoring program
identified relevant risks and that iPost data were timely, complete,
and accurate. We made several recommendations to improve the
implementation of the iPost program, and State partially agreed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ GAO, Information Security: State Has Taken Steps to Implement
a Continuous Monitoring Application, but Key Challenges Remain, GAO-11-
149 (Washington, DC: July 8, 2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Cybersecurity Protection System (NCPS).--The National
Cybersecurity Protection System, operationally known as ``EINSTEIN,''
is a suite of capabilities intended to detect and prevent malicious
network traffic from entering and exiting Federal civilian Government
networks. The EINSTEIN capabilities of NCPS are described in table
1.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ In addition to the EINSTEIN capabilities listed in table 1,
NCPS also includes a set of capabilities related to analytics and
information sharing.

TABLE 1.--NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY PROTECTION SYSTEM EINSTEIN CAPABILITIES
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Capability
Operational Name               Intended           Description
------------------------------------------------------------------------
EINSTEIN 1......................  Network Flow......  Provides an
automated process
for collecting,
correlating, and
analyzing
agencies'
computer network
traffic
information from
sensors installed
at their internet
connections.*
EINSTEIN 2......................  Intrusion           Monitors Federal
Detection.          agency internet
connections for
specific
predefined
signatures of
known malicious
activity and
alerts US-CERT
when specific
network activity
matching the
predetermined
signatures is
detected.**
EINSTEIN 3 Accelerated..........  Intrusion           Automatically
Prevention.         blocks malicious
traffic from
entering or
leaving Federal
civilian
Executive branch
agency networks.
This capability
is managed by
internet service
providers, who
administer
intrusion
prevention and
threat-based
decision-making
using DHS-
developed
indicators of
malicious cyber
activity to
develop
signatures.***
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source.--GAO analysis of DHS documentation and prior GAO reports. GAO-15-
725T
* The network traffic information includes source and destination
Internet Protocol addresses used in the communication, source and
destination ports, the time the communication occurred, and the
protocol used to communicate.
** Signatures are recognizable, distinguishing patterns associated with
cyber attacks such as a binary string associated with a computer virus
or a particular set of keystrokes used to gain unauthorized access to
a system.
*** An indicator is defined by DHS as human-readable cyber data used to
identify some form of malicious cyber activity. These data may be
related to Internet Protocol addresses, domains, e-mail headers,
files, and character strings. Indicators can be either Classified or
Unclassified.

In March 2010, we reported that while agencies that participated in
EINSTEIN 1 improved their identification of incidents and mitigation of
attacks, DHS lacked performance measures to understand if the
initiative was meeting its objectives.\16\ We made four recommendations
regarding the management of the EINSTEIN program, and DHS has since
taken action to address them.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ GAO, Information Security: Concerted Effort Needed to
Consolidate and Secure Internet Connections at Federal Agencies, GAO-
10-237 (Washington, DC: Mar. 12, 2010).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Currently, we are reviewing NCPS, as mandated by Congress. The
objectives of our review are to determine the extent to which: (1) NCPS
meets stated objectives, (2) DHS has designed requirements for future
stages of the system, and (3) Federal agencies have adopted the system.
Our final report is expected to be released later this year, and our
preliminary observations include the following:

DHS appears to have developed and deployed aspects of the
intrusion detection and intrusion prevention capabilities, but
potential weaknesses may limit their ability to detect and
prevent computer intrusions. For example, NCPS detects
signature anomalies using only one of three detection
methodologies identified by NIST (signature-based, anomaly-
based, and stateful protocol analysis). Further, the system has
the ability to prevent intrusions, but is currently only able
to proactively mitigate threats across a limited subset of
network traffic (i.e., Domain Name System traffic and e-mail).

DHS has identified a set of NCPS capabilities that are
planned to be implemented in fiscal year 2016, but it does not
appear to have developed formalized requirements for
capabilities planned through fiscal year 2018.

The NCPS intrusion detection capability appears to have been
implemented at 23 CFO Act agencies.\17\ The intrusion
prevention capability appears to have limited deployment, at
portions of only 5 of these agencies. Deployment may have been
hampered by various implementation and policy challenges.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ The Department of Defense is not required to implement
EINSTEIN.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In conclusion, the danger posed by the wide array of cyber threats
facing the Nation is heightened by weaknesses in the Federal
Government's approach to protecting its systems and information. While
recent Government-wide initiatives hold promise for bolstering the
Federal cybersecurity posture, it is important to note that no single
technology or set of practices is sufficient to protect against all
these threats. A ``defense-in-depth'' strategy is required that
includes well-trained personnel, effective and consistently-applied
processes, and appropriately implemented technologies. While agencies
have elements of such a strategy in place, more needs to be done to
fully implement it and to address existing weaknesses. In particular,
implementing GAO and inspector general recommendations will strengthen
agencies' ability to protect their systems and information, reducing
the risk of a potentially devastating cyber attack.
Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member Richmond, and Members of the
subcommittee, this concludes my statement. I would be happy to answer
any questions you may have.

Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Wilshusen.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions. As I
mentioned in my opening statement, the OPM servers that were
breached contained National security clearance information and
other highly sensitive personal information.
When asked why that information was not encrypted, OPM
administrators have testified that the servers in question were
obsolete and would have crashed had that been attempted.
Dr. Ozment, if that is the case, it begs the question: Why
on earth would OPM be storing such sensitive information on
obsolete systems that cannot be encrypted?
Mr. Ozment. Mr. Chairman, I will defer to OPM to speak to
the specifics of their decision making, but I can talk to you
about some of the tradeoffs that CIOs, in general, face with
legacy systems.
As I mentioned in my opening remarks, looking across the
public and private sector, broadly I would say that, for the
last 20 years, both Government and industry have underinvested
in cybersecurity. So, frankly, there is a backlog of
cybersecurity work that needs to be done. That requires
significant investment.
If an organization also has legacy systems that require
investment to upgrade to more modern systems, the bill and
resources required to do that can be extraordinary.
So all CIOs are faced with extreme demands for a capability
that they have to balance with the need to manage risks
appropriately and, of course, in a world of limited resources.
Speaking specifically to encryption, I would note that, in
the case of this particular intrusion at OPM, the adversary
compromised what is known as an administrative credential.
Think about this as a computer network being an apartment
building where each user has a key to their own apartment, but
there's a superintendent who has keys to all the apartments in
the building. The adversary compromised, essentially copied,
the superintendent's key ring and, therefore, had legitimate
access to the information on the network.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Let me ask you about that, Dr. Ozment,
because I have two questions that relate to that.
I read a summary of your testimony last week, and it
appeared that it was your opinion that, even had this sensitive
information been encrypted, it wouldn't have made a difference
in the breach for that reason that you just mentioned.
But isn't it true that, had there been multi-factor
authentication in addition to encryption, that this breach
could have been prevented?
Mr. Ozment. As both Mr. Wilshusen and I mentioned in our
opening remarks, you need defense-in-depth. You need multiple
layers of security. Both encryption and multi-factor
authentication are important layers of security.
You cannot confidently say that you can prevent any given
intrusion, but the more layers of security you have, the more
difficult you make it for an adversary.
I do believe that multi-factor authentication is an
important security technique, and that is one reason why OMB,
for example, is highlighting that in their 30-day sprint.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Right. But I am asking for your opinion.
Do you think, had there been multi-factor authentication at
OPM, that this particular breach could have been prevented?
Mr. Ozment. I don't know that I can say the breach could
have been prevented. I think some of the damage could have been
mitigated. In fact, some of the damage was mitigated when OPM
rolled out multi-factor authentication in January 2015.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay. So let me ask you about this
authorized credentials that you just mentioned.
So, as I understand that, the user, if you will, on its
face was authorized to be there. That being the case, what
cybersecurity measures or best practices are intended to
specifically identify anomalies in the behavior of purported
authorized users?
In other words, some authorized users might be in places or
using devices that they typically wouldn't be using. Isn't that
right?
Mr. Ozment. That's right. So you can employ what is
generally known as insider threat detection technology.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Were those employed at OPM?
Mr. Ozment. I do not know for sure whether those were
employed at OPM or not.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay.
Mr. Ozment. But insider threat technology will stop either
a legitimate user who is behaving illegitimately or a
legitimate user whose accounts have been compromised. It is not
perfect, and you often have false positives that you have to
investigate. But, again, it is a useful layer of security to
add.
Mr. Ratcliffe. All right. Very quickly, Mr. Wilshusen, the
Chairman referenced the enactment of FISMA back in December
2014.
Do you think that the Department of Homeland Security has
the necessary authorities right now to be successful in
carrying out its mission of protecting Government networks?
Mr. Wilshusen. I think the provisions provided in the
modernized FISMA of 2014 greatly strengthened DHS' authorities
to perform those functions, which previously they had certain
responsibilities under a memorandum delegated to it by the
Office of Management and Budget. But given the statutory
authorities to DHS, certainly strengthens its hand in
performing those functions.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Terrific. I think Dr. Ozment commented on
the information-sharing bill that passed the House that the
Chairman referenced earlier. I would like your opinion.
Do you agree with Dr. Ozment that that bill could help
block future threats?
Mr. Wilshusen. I would say that sharing of cyber threat and
incident information is a critical element to assuring that
agencies in the Department have appropriate threat intelligence
to help protect against those threats.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you. My time is expired for this round
at least.
I would like to recognize the Ranking Member for 5 minutes
for his questions.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Ozment, Mr. Wilshusen, let me just ask a question. It
is something I have always toyed with.
I will start with Dr. Ozment. How much do you all spend
yearly on cybersecurity? Do you have an idea?
Mr. Ozment. My organization within the Department of
Homeland Security has an annual budget for fiscal year 2016 of
approximately $900 million. Some of that budget goes to
emergency communications, essentially ensuring that the phone
lines work in the case of a crisis, which, depending on your
definition of cybersecurity, could be included or not included.
Mr. Wilshusen. Government-wide OPM has reported that, for
fiscal year 2014, 24 agencies covered by the Chief Financial
Officers Act spent about $13 billion on cybersecurity
activities out of an IT budget of around $80 billion.
So the vast majority of that, though, relates to the
Department of Defense. Pulling that information--their budgets
out, the numbers are significantly less.
Mr. Richmond. I guess I was asking those questions because,
as we continuously focus on Government spending and spending
alone without looking at return on investment, without looking
at threats, and we continue to hear the mantra of ``We are
going to do less with more''--I guess my general question
becomes--and I think of it in terms of defending President Bush
and the fact that colleagues on my side of the aisle like to
say he squandered a surplus and, also, defending President
Obama in terms of looking at the National debt.
We have expenses we didn't have before. Before 9/11, you
didn't have TSA. Now, with the proliferation of the internet
and, as the Chairman just mentioned, the criminals and the
nation-states that are attempting to do bad things on the
internet, we didn't have those costs before.
So I am just trying to get a sense of--do you think that
this is an area where we can do less with more or do you think
this is an area where you think we are going to have to
continue to invest funds and resources to keep the .gov, .com,
.org, all of those domains, safe?
Mr. Ozment. From my perspective, sir, I think we are going
to have to continue to invest for two reasons. One is that we
are catching up on many years of underinvestment. The second
one is this is risk management. It is not risk elimination.
So the adversaries are not going to go away in cyber space.
As we improve our defenses, they will improve their offense. So
we will have to continue to invest to maintain pace with an
adversary who is also investing.
Mr. Wilshusen. I would agree that it will require effective
management in addition to resources to accomplish this.
One of the areas that we typically find on our audits of
agencies' systems is that many of the vulnerabilities and
defects in their security controls can be implemented without
necessarily the use or expenditure of additional resources.
It's basically applying patches in a timely manner,
assuring that agencies limit the privileges that they grant to
their users to the least privilege that's necessary for them to
perform their duties, as well as continually testing and
evaluating their systems and then taking corrective actions to
mitigate known vulnerabilities.
In certain instances, particularly now, agencies will
likely need to invest in improving their intrusion detection
capabilities to identify and mitigate and reduce the intrusions
and impact of intrusions that are likely to occur.
Mr. Richmond. My final question would be back to Dr.
Ozment. That is: How can your office accelerate the
Department's cyber strategy that confronts Federal targets, but
still maintain its focus on National critical infrastructure
needs against aggressive, persistent, malicious actors that
continue to target our Nation's critical infrastructure, for
example, for me, our ports? Do you need additional resources to
do that? If so, what do you think the ticket price is?
Mr. Ozment. Thank you.
You will find that our budget requests for cybersecurity in
the Department have been growing steadily over the years, and I
would not be surprised for them to continue to grow.
You put your finger on an important challenge, which is
that we have a responsibility both to the private sector, to
the Federal civilian government, and, also, to our State,
local, Tribal, and territorial government colleagues.
The good news is, as we improve our Federal cybersecurity,
we learn things that will also help us support our private
sector and State, local, Tribal, and territorial colleagues.
This is where cyber information sharing becomes so important.
When we use the EINSTEIN or CDM programs and detect a
threat and learn about a new threat, with the information-
sharing legislation, we'll be able to share that information
outward.
At the same time, when an adversary attacks a private-
sector network and they share that information with the
Government, if we're able to receive it, we can then use that
information to protect Government networks.
So there's absolutely a synergy between our work in the
private sector and our work in the Government. The crux of that
synergy is taking information that one entity learns and
sharing it with the Government or vice versa.
Mr. Richmond. With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Ratcliffe. The gentleman yields back.
The Chairman now recognizes and welcomes to the
subcommittee the former district attorney from New York and
gentleman from New York, Mr. Donovan, for 5 minutes for his
questions.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Doctor, I was just wondering if you could help me
understand this a little bit. There has been a lot of criticism
in the reportings about the breach that EINSTEIN didn't work.
My understanding is that it did what it was built to do and
it was part of a multi-layered approach to securing the data
and part of this defense-in-depth theory.
Did EINSTEIN actually do what it was created to do?
Mr. Ozment. Yes, sir, it did. I can go into more detail if
you'd like.
Mr. Donovan. Please.
Mr. Ozment. So, in this instance, first, OPM and the
Department of Interior are not covered by EINSTEIN 3 yet, which
is the system that blocks intrusions. We are working with the
Department of Interior to roll that out aggressively. It just
became available to them this winter.
It is not yet available to the OPM because we have not yet
completed the work with that internet service provider who
services OPM.
Now, what happened in this incident is OPM rolled out
security capabilities in accordance with a mitigation plan we
provided them in May 2014. As they rolled out those
capabilities, they caught an intruder on their networks and
they shared the cyber threat indicators with us.
We took those cyber threat indicators and put them into the
EINSTEIN system. With EINSTEIN 2, we looked back in time and
saw that the Department of Interior had also suffered an
intrusion, as evidenced by these threat indicators.
We then used EINSTEIN 1 to help us pinpoint what was
exfiltrated and from which computers at the Department of
Interior. In this case, it turned out to be OPM data that was
being stored at a data center at the Department of Interior.
That is the 4.2 million personnel records that you read about
in the media.
So the trick with EINSTEIN is, as it currently is built, it
has to know about a threat before it can detect or block it.
This is what it was designed to do. It is a necessary tool. It
is not a sufficient tool.
So even as we finish rolling out EINSTEIN across the
breadth of the Government, we are also focused on the depth of
capability that it offers. One layer of depth that we need to
provide is a layer that will help us detect and block
intrusions that we have not previously seen.
That gets riskier because you have false positives when you
are doing that. That means that we will block legitimate
traffic. That could be a problem, but that is a risk we will
have to take.
Mr. Donovan. Doctor, I am not well-versed in computers. In
fact, I still have a VCR that blinks 12.
Just so you could clarify for me, it seems that EINSTEIN
was created to block known intruders rather than allowing
friendly traffic to come through and block everyone else who is
not identified as friendly.
I understand from your analogy about the superintendent
that even that wouldn't have worked in this case because the
intruder was looked upon as a friendly user.
But is it a better system to just allow friendly users
instead of just blocking people who we know because we don't
know who all the intruders are?
Mr. Ozment. Representative, that is an accurate assessment
of the situation.
EINSTEIN goes around the entire Federal civilian
government. At that distance from an individual agency, it's
not possible to identify ``This is good traffic only, and we'll
only let in the known good traffic.''
Because departments and agencies conduct such wildly
different business, it's not possible to identify ``This is
what is appropriate and acceptable and only let this happen.''
Even within a single department in an agency that is probably
not possible.
There may be parts within the department or agency, smaller
systems or organizations, that have a limited remit that would
be able to say ``This is all that we do. And, therefore, we
only accept this type of traffic or communications from these
computers'' or something of that nature.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Doctor.
Chairman, I yield back my time.
Mr. Ratcliffe. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Rhode Island,
Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank our witnesses here today.
I want to point out one thing before I go into my
questions. We talk about the rollout of EINSTEIN 3 and where we
are today. It is unacceptable that we are at this for the
better part of a decade now and still such a small percentage
of the .gov network has even basic levels of EINSTEIN 3 on it
yet.
We have a long way to go. I understand that we are making
progress and rolling out EINSTEIN 3 to protect the .gov
network, but it is laughable that it has taken this long to get
to this point.
Part of the reason, Mr. Chairman, is the fact that no one
is in charge despite the fact that we have a cyber
coordinator--and I applaud the work that Michael Daniel does
with limited tools, really, at his disposal because he lacks
policy and budgetary authority to compel compliance of
departments and agencies to do more in cyber. Neither does the
Secretary of Homeland Security.
I know that in the last Congress we gave additional
authorities through FISMA reform, but still even the Secretary
of Homeland Security does not have the ability to reach across
Government and tell an agency like OPM they are not doing
enough on cyber, which is why we are here today and is why the
OPM breach happened, because OPM did not take cybersecurity
seriously enough.
It wasn't even like they were coming to Congress and asking
for more resources. It was only until fiscal year 2016 that
they asked for more money for cyber. It wasn't like they were
coming here asking for money and they were told no. They didn't
even ask. They weren't taking cyber seriously.
So I hope that, at some point, we will get somebody in
charge that does have both policy and budgetary authority who
can compel compliance of departments and agencies.
But, with that, Dr. Ozment, I noticed that you were at the
OGR hearing earlier this morning, and I have a number of
questions about the OPM breach.
So, to begin with--and I know the Chairman touched on this
briefly on the encryption side--you said that encrypting data
stolen may not have helped in this case. Now, you are not
suggesting that we shouldn't encrypt, I take it. I want to make
sure that you have the opportunity to be clear.
What is your view on encryption? Because I hope you would
still agree that encrypting PII is still a best practice that
agencies should be following. Is that correct?
Mr. Ozment. Encryption is absolutely a best practice that
agencies should follow, although I would highlight that you
always have a limited cybersecurity budget. Let's say its $100.
There's always $200 of layers of security you could buy.
So you look at a particular system and look at what's the
best value. You select the layers that provide the best value
based on the needs of that system.
Mr. Langevin. I would make the point that I think
encrypting is vitally important and, if someone were to think
that we shouldn't encrypt, it would be like saying, ``Well,
they came in through the window. So we shouldn't lock the front
door and the back door of the house just because they came
through the window.'' We want to make sure that we follow the
industry's best practices on the encryption.
Dr. Ozment, did the Federal Network Resilience division
work with OPM prior to the discovery of the March 2014 breach?
Mr. Ozment. So Federal Network Resilience is part of my
organization that manages, in part, the annual FISMA reporting.
So prior to the March 2014 breach, we collect data that
agencies report on their cybersecurity, and we use that data
with OMB to construct the annual FISMA report and, also, to
hold cyber stat sessions, sessions where we bring agencies to
the White House and essentially go through their cybersecurity
posture and work with them to address any challenges.
Mr. Langevin. Did you bring in OPM?
Mr. Ozment. I will have to come back to you on the date of
our last cyber stat with OPM. We have had one, but I don't
recall the date of the cyber stat surrounding the March 2014.
Mr. Langevin. I would appreciate it if you would get that
to the committee for the record.
It is my understanding that the Federal Network Resilience
division did not work with OPM and that OPM never made the
request.
The Federal Network Resilience division is precisely the
kind of entity that a department or agency whose private
mission isn't necessarily going to be cybersecurity could go to
the Federal Network Resilience division and ask for the
expertise and do a vulnerability assessment and say, ``How can
we get better?'' It is my understanding that OPM never did
that.
Dr. Ozment, just to clarify for my sake, does DHS view the
OPM breach of personnel data as part of the same incident as
the breach of security clearance information? The same threat
acted in both cases? Correct? The same threat acted in both
cases. Is that correct?
Mr. Ozment. I'm going to have to defer to the intelligence
community any questions about which actor in specific and even,
to a degree, the specifics about the relationships between
incidents.
What I will absolutely say is there are clearly
relationships between the Government incidents, including the
two that we are talking about today, and other recent incidents
targeting the PII, the personally identifiable information, of
Government employees.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I know my time is
expired. I hope we are going to do a second round. I have a
bunch of other questions. I yield back.
Mr. Ratcliffe. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes my colleague from the great State
of Texas, Ms. Jackson Lee.
Mr. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman, thank you for your kindness
and that of the Ranking Member, first of all, for this very
important hearing, and my dear colleague, Mr. Clawson, for
yielding not his time, but his place in order, to allow me just
a moment.
I have a meeting with the Secretary--and it is starting as
we speak--on some matters. But this committee I have always
said has been the front-line committee.
Mr. Langevin is correct that we have been talking about the
issues of cybersecurity and protecting data and documents for a
very long time. You know, I know there is a myriad of issues
that we are discussing, but it disturbs me that, in fact--and
we heard this generally--OPM used old software that could not
be encrypted. We face this enormous debacle that has many
fingerprints. We know that there are many elements to it.
I know that I served as the Chairwoman of the
Transportation Security and Infrastructure Protection Committee
before the Cybersecurity Committee was created, and we talked
about the percentage of infrastructure in the cyber world in
the private sector--85 percent--and that we had a small
percentage thereof.
So I guess for the record I want to express the recognition
of our public servants who work very hard, but my absolute
consternation and frustration that we are where we are today,
task forces that are being discerned and established not
necessarily under this administration.
Because, if it was 2015 under another administration--
unfortunately, hard heads made a very difficult spot to sit
down on. I am baffled why the Government finds itself in this
place.
My colleague indicated resources, that that was one of the
issues, but focusing one's mind--we talked about getting the
brightest and the best to be able to address this question. We
predicted it was coming. Not that we were geniuses, but the
writing was on the wall. Everyone was turning to technology.
Everyone was using technology.
I am enormously saddened for the millions of Federal
workers in this recent incident that are now subjected to
personal violations. But from the White House to the vast array
of Federal departments, agencies, we are not the standard-
bearer for the tightest cybersecurity that we can have, having
at hand, I think, a bipartisan commitment that this is a
serious issue. Many legislative initiatives have been
introduced.
So let me just ask. I indicated to Mr. Clawson I would not
be long. I have a number of questions. My staff, Mr. Chairman,
is going to frame them in a letter.
Let me indicate that some very thoughtful questions have
been put forward, but I do want to heighten this level of
frustration. I could listen to the Government Accountability,
but let me just ask the two witnesses, being mindful of the
time.
You have heard my level of frustration. We are here today.
Will we be here next week? Will we be here next month? Will we
be here next year? This hacking, breaching, is not going to
stop.
So I just want to ask this question: Why is the Government
at this place at this time? Why are we here?
Mr. Wilshusen. I think there are probably several reasons,
one of which is the fact that many of the computer systems that
Federal agencies use--and it's not dissimilar to what's
happening out in the private sector--is based on defective
software.
Much of the software that agencies use have a number of
vulnerabilities in it that aren't fixed before they're bought,
sold, purchased, and deployed. So, over time, as these
vulnerabilities come to light, agencies as well as any users of
that software need to take steps to mitigate and correct those
vulnerabilities.
Mr. Jackson Lee. I am not going to cut you off. You gave me
a powerful answer. As I said, I am going to follow up with
questions coming to you because I want to get to Mr. Wilshusen
for that very same question.
So is the answer now ``stop, move out all your software,
and begin again''? Yes or no.
Mr. Wilshusen. No. The answer is no. You can't stop and
move out all your software.
Mr. Jackson Lee. All right. I wanted to hear that.
So it is piecemeal.
Mr. Wilshusen. I think what one has to do is, as
corrections and patches are identified to correct
vulnerabilities in software, that they be applied promptly to
the----
Mr. Jackson Lee. Which we have had some problems with doing
that. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Jackson Lee. Mr. Wilshusen, why are we here where we
are today?
Mr. Ozment. So I would actually echo the points that Mr.
Wilshusen made. I would flag that it's, in part, the complexity
of software----
Mr. Jackson Lee. Sorry. Mr. Wilshusen was over here, and
you are over here. Sorry.
Mr. Ozment. No problem.
I would flag that it's the complexity of software, which
means that, even as we build it, it's insecure. Even if we
could build individual pieces of software securely, we, as a
Nation, don't know how to compose those into larger systems
that are themselves secure. This is a place where both the
Government and the private sector are.
We're in a world right now where we rely upon information
technology. We're not able to manage securely the complexity of
that technology, but neither can we back away from that
technology. So we are in a world where we will have to manage
the risks, but we will not be able to prevent intrusions.
Mr. Jackson Lee. Well, the first thing is to know that we
need to manage the risks in the Federal Government, even though
you have the larger--I think you are in the private sector--the
larger component.
You are in Homeland Security, but you do realize the
private sector has the largest amount. So we need to manage it.
That is what you are suggesting that we need to do.
We need to engage with the private sector, and we need to
confront the horror that it is and be diligent constantly on
our managing, on trying to get our hands around the issue.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I am going to yield back. Forgive
me for putting Government people in private hats. But I know
that they have probably weaved in and out of the private sector
at some point.
But I see that this is going to be a looming issue, and I
think this committee is right and the full committee is right
for us to be enormously penetrating on solutions of getting the
Government where it needs to be and getting the private sector
in its cooperative mode to help the Nation be where it needs to
be on this issue of cybersecurity.
With that, Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Clawson, thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the gentlelady. The gentlelady
yields back.
I now would like to recognize my friend and colleague from
Florida, Mr. Clawson, for his questions.
Mr. Clawson. Thank you for coming today.
I am going to lay out a couple of observations, two or
three maybe, and then you all can respond and tell me if you
agree with me or where you think I am wrong.
My first observation is, if one of my nieces and nephews
came to me and said they were going to take a job at the
Federal Government, I would say, ``Don't do it. Your
information is not secure. It is probably a lot less secure
than most places you could go to work.''
Therefore, I am not sure how we attract great talent to do
the things that we talk about doing in this committee not just
for the security, but just to run the Government.
I am not sure that putting employees at this kind of risk
will attract ``A'' players to work in the Government. Just all
of my instincts tell me there is going to be residual impact
from these kind of breaches that impact how well the Government
does across the board. That is my first observation.
My second observation is, if I was sitting there running
that enterprise, I would say to myself, ``Delete, delete, and
more delete.'' My guess is that there is a lot of legacy data
that aren't mission-critical right now, right now, particularly
employees that have come and gone, records that are years old.
I know you are going to tell me you can't. But all of my
own managerial experience would say to delete the hell out of
this so that, even though that might make our job more
difficult in the future, it will make the hacker's job
impossible. He can't hack what doesn't exist.
My third observation would be, from a managerial
perspective, to decentralize. Even if you roll it up on the
internet in summary format later, decentralize. Decentralize
everywhere you can.
I understand that everybody wants an ERP on a centralized
basis, but do that at a summary level and keep the data
decentralized so that the hacker's job is much more complicated
and you don't have a mother lode of data that he can get into.
Now, I know you are going to take issue with those things.
But if this was my board of directors and you all came in with
this problem to me, those would be my first three reactions. If
we ignore those outcomes and those possible solutions, it seems
to me that we are living in yesterday's world.
Now, I know you are going to tell me why what I say is
impracticable, but I still want to hear from you.
Mr. Wilshusen. I guess I'll take first crack versus your
first observation on whether or not an individual should be
hired or try to seek work with the Federal Government versus
private sector.
First, I would just say that the scourge of cyber
malfeasance is not unique to the Federal Government. The same
security vulnerabilities, the same types of attacks, the same
types of data leakage and theft, occurs in private sector as
well as the Federal Government. I think many Federal employees
look beyond just that element to work for the Federal
Government. It's more, perhaps, out of a civic duty and
responsibility.
Mr. Clawson. But you would agree--excuse me for
interrupting to reclaim my time--you would agree that a Chinese
hacker would probably rather get into the central government
than a shock absorber maker or a wheel maker or a basic
industry parts maker.
Mr. Wilshusen. It depends on their motives.
Mr. Clawson. When you make that equivalency, I am just
having a hard time with that. You know, having protected my own
network, I kind of have to call you on that. That doesn't feel
like the same level of being a target.
Mr. Wilshusen. It depends on what the motives of the hacker
are, whether it's economic, monetary gain, or seeking a
political or military advantage.
If I'm a competitor and I'm seeking to gain information
about a private company and what their products might be, I
might be interested in hacking a private company's system. I
might very well be in tune to trying to hack into Federal
Government because----
Mr. Clawson. Right. I have never had a personnel system
hacked. I have had my product designs hacked. I have had my
process technology hacked. I never had my personnel records
hacked. It doesn't help my competitor.
Mr. Wilshusen. As you mention, it's not just personnel
records. It's other proprietary information, intellectual
property, that might be the target of a hacker.
Regarding the deleting data, of course, in the Federal
Government, we do have records management requirements where we
have to retain and archive certain data for a period of time.
But I agree. After those time limits have expired, sure,
get rid of it. To the extent we're able to, deleting
information that's no longer necessary in accordance with
Federal requirements should be done on a regular basis.
Mr. Clawson. Well, if Congress can help with that at all, I
would really like to be involved. In our company, we kept
things a year unless we absolutely--you can't hack what was
there 3 years ago because it is gone. That would eliminate a
lot of risk, I think.
I am sorry I am going on here, Doctor. You can also take
issue with me.
Mr. Ozment. I agree with Mr. Wilshusen. So I won't belabor
the first two points.
I'll add to the final point that there is a constant
tension between centralization and decentralization in IT and,
also, between homogeneity and heterogeneity in the sense of do
you have a few systems of the same type or systems of very
different types.
It really depends on what you're trying to accomplish in
the broader environment. So I don't think there's a right
answer there. I think we should absolutely, however, consider
that question when we design our networks.
Mr. Clawson. My final follow-up. I spent a lot of years
trying to centralize, as you say, to get the same kind of data
all across the world.
I found out just by rolling it up on the internet and
leaving it decentralized it was just a lot cheaper. I didn't
have all this management problem. It ended up being safer
because I didn't have a lot of hackers in the Czech Republic.
I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Ratcliffe. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
Mr. Perry, for his questions.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I know it is a little unexpected. Sorry to be late to the
game here.
I am thinking about like the data services hub and the law
that we have in place now in particular where you are required
by law to be involved in the Government and then, by
transposition, your data is then within the Government purview
and then we don't necessarily have the best systems, maybe,
that we could or should and how we also, as a Government, treat
private entities that have been hacked and we penalize them for
having not done enough soon enough or notified appropriately or
what have you.
I don't know how we have the moral high ground, as the
Federal Government in this, you know, and we are not
necessarily talking about the particular OPM breach, but
because these things happen on a--at least the hacks happen on
a regular basis. Right? We know that there are those who have
been hacked and those who don't know it yet. Right? That is
kind of how things go.
So DHS, I think, has done everything within their current
power. Right? They have advised. They have urged other
agencies, ``This is the gold standard. This is where you need
to be.'' But they still have no authority to force the
agencies, like OPM or anybody else.
They can tell them where they think they should be based on
what DHS knows. ``This is why we have the Department of
Homeland Security, among other reasons, is to determine threats
that we have and solutions sets'' and so on and so forth. So
they can advise, but they have no authority.
So, in a broad sense, my question to you would be: Should
DHS have the authority regarding other agencies to impose--we
are talking about individual citizen's data which, in this
particular instance, not necessarily OPM, but the data services
hub associated with the ACA.
You are mandated by Federal law to have your data,
everything about you, be in that repository. If that is the
case, should it be DHS? Should they have the authority? If not,
who? If not anybody, then what is the solution set to make sure
that agencies are on the cutting edge of safeguarding America's
data?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well, with regard to the first question, in
terms of does DHS have the authority to compel agencies to take
certain actions, the Federal Information Security Modernization
Act of 2014 gave DHS statutory authorities to perform
additional activities to help assist Federal agencies in
improving their information security.
One of those tools that's available to the Department is
what is known as a binding operational directive. This is
guidance and actually direction to the agency that the agency
is required to implement. These directives are, I believe,
prepared and developed in collaboration with OMB and others.
But they do have a tool at least in their tool kit to help
direct agencies to take corrective actions.
Mr. Perry. They can help, they can assist, but they can't
compel, or they can compel?
Mr. Wilshusen. I believe those directives may be
compulsory. But I will defer to Dr. Ozment.
Mr. Langevin. Will the gentleman yield?
So what is the consequence if they fail to comply?
Mr. Ozment. I think, Mr. Langevin, Mr. Perry represents--
you get to the crux of the matter, which is we have the formal
authority to compel. We do not have a stick to enforce that
compulsory order.
That being said, I don't know that it's possible for one
department to be given that sort of compulsory ability with
some sort of budgetary authority over another department, the
way our overarching system is structured. So in the sense of
our ability to issue compulsory orders, I think we do have that
existing authority.
I would highlight the two areas where we absolutely are
lacking in necessary authorities right now are authorizing
legislation for the EINSTEIN program, which this committee
sponsored and passed and the House has passed, and, also, the
information-sharing legislation, again, which this committee
sponsored and the House has passed.
Mr. Perry. So you think that we have at least some form, in
the remaining time, of oversight to where we can urge and maybe
even compel, but there is no--you can compel all you want, but
if there is no consequence to inaction, there is nothing to
compel you.
Your assertion would be, as usual, not that--this isn't
meant to be personal. How can the Government penalize itself?
Because you are taking from one pocket--out of one pocket and
putting it another pocket, if it is financial or what have you.
But I think that smart folks like you and people on this
committee need to find a way to compel, if that is the right
solution set--you know, our individual citizen's data is at
risk here and, if we have that authority, we have a
responsibility to safeguard it. They are mandated to provide
that information, mandated to, and then it is at risk. That is
unacceptable, and I am sure you know it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Ratcliffe. The gentleman yields back.
Like Congressman Langevin, I was hoping that we might get
to a second round of questions. But based on the updated vote
schedule and out of respect to our witness on the second panel,
we will move now to that second panel.
So I thank the witnesses for their testimony and the
Members for their questions at this first part of our hearing
today.
As was indicated, some of the Members have additional
questions for the witnesses. We will ask you to respond to
those in writing. The committee will now take a very short
break so that the clerks can prepare the second panel.
[Recess.]
Mr. Ratcliffe. I would like to welcome our second
distinguished panel today, Dr. Daniel Gerstein, with The RAND
Corporation and former acting under secretary for the Science
and Technology Directorate at the Department of Homeland
Security.
Welcome, Dr. Gerstein. At this time I will ask you to stand
and raise your right hand so that I can swear you in to
testify.
[Witness sworn.]
Mr. Ratcliffe. You may be seated.
Dr. Gerstein's full statement will appear in the record.
The Chair recognizes you now for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF DANIEL M. GERSTEIN, THE RAND CORPORATION

Mr. Gerstein. Well, thank you. Good afternoon.
Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member Richmond, and
distinguished Members of the subcommittee, I thank you for the
opportunity to testify today on the strategies for defending
U.S. Government networks in cyberspace.
Recent events occurring on U.S. Government networks over
the past several years, punctuated most recently by the OPM
breach, demonstrate clearly the need for developing and
maintaining capabilities to assess the status of the
Government's internal networks and protect them from intrusion.
These events have also underscored concerns about the
growing sophistication of the threat and the risk posed to
personal data, Government networks, and even mission assurance.
Two foundational elements of the Department of Homeland
Security's cybersecurity program are EINSTEIN, also called
EINSTEIN 3A, and Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation, or CDM.
The two systems are designed to work in tandem, with EINSTEIN
focusing on keeping threats out of Federal networks and CDM
identifying them when the threats are inside the Government
networks. The phased rollouts of both CDM and EINSTEIN are
expected to continue over the next several years.
Now, despite recent progress, critics have argued that both
programs have taken too long to implement, and I have to say
there is some validity to these concerns. However, CDM is now
at a point in development and deployment where additional
resources could accelerate the program. EINSTEIN, on the other
hand, still requires additional development and coordination
with internet service providers, which will be contracted to
implement the program.
In my judgment, both programs are necessary, but not
sufficient for ensuring the security of Government networks.
Therefore, even with EINSTEIN and CDM, more will be needed to
defend Government networks in cyber space.
For the remainder of my remarks, I would like to provide a
more strategic look at this issue. Now, the internet is a
complex system of systems, requiring a comprehensive approach
to ensuring security across the vast Government network. Any
single approach or program will be insufficient to ensure
security in cyber space. As such, defense-in-depth strategies
will be essential for securing Government networks.
Now, when considering the development of a comprehensive
cybersecurity approach, one must examine how new policies and
processes, improvements to the internet architecture, hardware
and software hardening, and personnel training and education
must be combined into a system that will provide security,
privacy, and resiliency.
Inherent in efforts to secure the Federal cyberspace is the
critical need for a National cybersecurity strategy. Such a
document would include articulation of concepts for governance
of the .gov domain in addition to cyber doctrine for
deterrence, denial, attribution, response, and resilience.
Today no such doctrine exists.
It is my belief that the U.S. Government is at a crossroads
concerning cybersecurity. The goal to date has been to balance
two competing demands: Availability of data and security of the
enterprise.
As recent breaches have demonstrated over the past several
years and with the OPM breach as an exclamation point, it is
time to consider developing secure enclaves to protect key
Government information, data, and networks.
The technology exists today to re-architect the Government
internet systems, and several agencies within the National
security community have implemented such re-engineering with
good results.
Implementing these approaches to modernize and improve the
security architectures will require resources and focused
attention, both of which Congress and the Executive branch can
provide.
Appropriate funding for research, development, and
acquisition programs remains another foundational element in
the critical race to secure Federal Government networks.
Government must partner with the cyber industries to ensure the
pipeline of critical solutions continues to be developed.
Finally, workforce issues both for cyber professionals that
manage the Government networks and for the broader Government
workforce that utilizes the network must be considered as a top
priority.
In the Government's cyber space, the security of the
overall network is directly linked to the security of each of
the nodes, to include the individuals operating each terminal
device.
I appreciate the opportunity to discuss recommendations to
improve cybersecurity in our Government networks and, thereby,
the homeland security of our Nation, and I look forward to your
questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gerstein follows:]
Prepared Statement of Daniel M. Gerstein \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The opinions and conclusions expressed in this testimony are
the author's alone and should not be interpreted as representing those
of RAND or any of the sponsors of its research. This product is part of
the RAND Corporation testimony series. RAND testimonies record
testimony presented by RAND associates to Federal, State, or local
legislative committees; Government-appointed commissions and panels;
and private review and oversight bodies. The RAND Corporation is a non-
profit research organization providing objective analysis and effective
solutions that address the challenges facing the public and private
sectors around the world. RAND's publications do not necessarily
reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Strategies for Defending U.S. Government Networks in Cyberspace \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ This testimony is available for free download at http://
www.rand.org/pubs/testimonies/CT436.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
June 24, 2015
introduction
Good morning Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member Richmond, and
distinguished Members of the subcommittee. I thank you for the
opportunity to testify today on the Department of Homeland Security's
(DHS's) Federal cybersecurity efforts. Specifically, I will discuss
overarching cyber concerns, the Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation
(CDM) program, and other strategies for defending networks in cyber
space.
The CDM program is an important foundation for the security of
Government networks. The concept was designed to provide a set of tools
for enabling network administrators to know the state of their
respective networks, inform on current threats, and allow system
personnel to identify and mitigate issues at network speed. However, it
is worth noting that CDM is not intended to be a stand-alone system,
but rather one part of an overarching system-of-systems approach.
EINSTEIN, which provides perimeter security for U.S. Government
networks, is a complementary system to CDM. EINSTEIN functions by
installing sensors at web access points and employs signatures to
identify cyber attacks. Of note, both CDM and EINSTEIN are in early
stages of deployment.
Recent breaches occurring on U.S. Government networks over the past
several years demonstrate clearly the need for developing and
maintaining capabilities to assess the status of the Government's
internal networks and protect them from intrusion. These events have
also underscored concerns about the growing sophistication of the
threat and the risk to personal data, Government networks, and even
mission assurance.
overarching cyber issues and the continuous diagnostics and mitigation
(cdm) and einstein programs
Several key points undergird my comments about the CDM and EINSTEIN
programs. These points concern the nature of the cyber threat, the
demonstrated ability to sense and respond to threats, the importance of
the programs, and, finally, the need to employ CDM in concert with
others' cybersecurity strategies.
The cyber threat continues to grow and evolve
The range, pace, persistence, and intensity of cyber threats to
U.S. Government networks continues to grow. Even before this most
recent breach of Government data from the Office of Personnel
Management (OPM), ample evidence was available to indicate that our
networks have been and likely continue to be penetrated. The goals of
these attacks vary and include mapping Government networks, building
databases on personnel, and intellectual property theft. The
perpetrators include both state actors--in particular, China and
Russia--and non-state actors.
The cyber adversary is determined and technically competent and has
demonstrated significant agility in attacking Government networks.
Additionally, the cyber adversary has a low cost of entry, allowing for
large numbers of potential threat actors. Coupling the growing number
of hackers with the potential for high payoffs for successful attacks
provides indications that the current pace of attacks is unlikely to
change unless the perceived cost-benefit dynamics are also changed.
Concerning the recent OPM database hack, the private data of over 4
million people were compromised, with up to 18 million personnel whose
records were exposed to the hackers. Speculation is that the goal
behind the attack is to build a database of Federal employees, perhaps
even to use the stolen personal information to impersonate Government
workers or for future ``insider'' attacks. Experts speculate that the
goal behind the attack could be to reveal who has security clearances
and at what level, so that the Chinese may be able to identify, expose,
and even blackmail U.S. Government officials around the world.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See Andy Medici, ``Massive OPM Data Breach Went Undetected for
Months,'' Federal Times, June 5, 2015, and OPM, ``Information About
Recent Cybersecurity Incidents,'' web page, updated June 18, 2015
(http://www.opm.gov/news/latest-news/announcements/).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Several years ago, U.S. Cyber Command (CYBERCOM) estimated that
there were 250,000 probes or attacks every hour, or over 6 million per
day, against U.S. Government networks.\4\ Today, an estimated 3 billion
people use the internet, and another 4.9 billion devices are
connected--a phenomenon known as the Internet of Things (IoT).
Estimates are that by 2020, the number of IoT connections will be in
excess of 25 billion devices.\5\ This expansion implies that more
Government internet users, data, and systems will be placed at risk
from a rapidly expanding internet footprint.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Jim Garamone, ``Cybercom Chief Details Cyberspace Defense,''
DoD News, September 23, 2010.
\5\ Gartner, ``Gartner Says 4.9 Billion Connected `Things' Will Be
in Use in 2015,'' press release, Barcelona, Spain, November 11, 2014
(http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2905717).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The loss of Government intellectual property (IP) is another
significant cause for concern. Russia and China have active programs to
penetrate U.S. Government networks for the purpose of gaining IP. China
uses these intrusions to fill gaps in its own research programs, map
future targets, gather intelligence on U.S. strategies and plans,
enable future military operations, shorten research and development
(R&D) time lines for military technologies, and identify
vulnerabilities in U.S. systems and develop countermeasures.\6\
Estimates are that the loss of IP has exceeded well over $1 trillion
including the loss of plans and technical details for the F-22 and F-35
aircraft.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Larry M. Wortzel, Cyber Espionage and the Theft of U.S.
Intellectual Property and Technology, Testimony Before the House of
Representatives Committee on Energy and Commerce, Subcommittee on
Oversight and Investigations, Washington, DC, July 9, 2013.
\7\ Ellen Nakashima and Andrea Peterson, ``Report: Cybercrime and
Espionage Costs $445 Billion Annually,'' Washington Post, June 9, 2014.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Major concerns about our ability to sense threats in real time and
respond rapidly
The OPM data breach provides ample evidence that the Government's
ability to sense threats in real time has not been adequate. Reports
indicate that the OPM breach first occurred in December 2014, but was
not discovered until April 2015 or publically acknowledged until June
4, 2015.
Also noteworthy when considering the OPM breach is that the
intrusion was detected in April only after OPM's cybersecurity
detection and monitoring tools had been upgraded. Therefore, any
Government organization that has not already upgraded its detection and
monitoring tools is likely to be unaware of any similar intrusions that
are on-going or that previously occurred.
Given the large number of attacks on Government networks that
CYBERCOM estimates occur on a daily basis, one can conclude that there
is a high likelihood of additional successful malicious attacks that
have been conducted or are on-going and that have not been detected.
Continuous Diagnostic Monitoring (CDM) and EINSTEIN as key components
of our defensive cyber capacity for .gov users
The two foundational programs of DHS's cybersecurity program are
EINSTEIN (also called EINSTEIN 3A) and CDM. These two systems are
designed to work in tandem, with EINSTEIN focusing on keeping threats
out of Federal networks and CDM identifying them when they are inside
Government networks.
EINSTEIN provides a perimeter around Federal (or .gov) users, as
well as select users in the .com space that have responsibility for
critical infrastructure. EINSTEIN functions by installing sensors at
web access points and employs signatures to identify cyber attacks.
CDM, on the other hand, is designed to provide an embedded system
of sensors on internal Government networks. These sensors provide real-
time capacity to sense anomalous behavior and provide reports to
administrators through a scalable dashboard. It is composed of
commercial-off-the-shelf equipment coupled with a customized dashboard
that can be scaled for administrators at each level.
CDM operates by providing:

``Federal departments and agencies with capabilities and tools that
identify cybersecurity risks on an on-going basis, prioritize these
risks based upon potential impacts, and enable cybersecurity personnel
to mitigate the most significant problems first. Congress established
the CDM program to provide adequate, risk-based, and cost-effective
cybersecurity and more efficiently allocate cybersecurity
resources.''\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ U.S. Department of Homeland Security, ``Continuous Diagnostics
and Mitigation (CDM),'' web page, updated June 16, 2015 (http://
www.dhs.gov/cdm).

CDM will be fully implemented in three phases, allowing for 15
diagnostic capabilities. The first phase focuses on endpoint integrity,
which is the functionality that examines all endpoints attempting to
attach to the network and prohibits unsafe or noncompliant endpoints
from gaining access. Specifically, endpoint integrity includes
management of hardware and software assets, configuration management,
and vulnerability management, which are foundational capabilities to
protect systems and data. Phases 2 and 3 are continuing to be further
defined to include Least Privilege and Infrastructure Integrity, and
Boundary Protection and Event Management, respectively.\9\ In the end-
state, CDM is expected to cover over 60 Federal agencies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ U.S. Department of Homeland Security, ``Implementation of
Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM),'' web page, updated June
16, 2015 (http://www.dhs.gov/cdm-implementation).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
DHS, partnering with the General Services Administration (GSA),
established a Blanket Purchase Agreement (BPA) for CDM that allows
Government departments and agencies at the Federal, State, local,
Tribal, and territorial levels to contract for continuous diagnostic
monitoring. The BPA has a total ceiling of $6 billion.
The phased roll-outs of both CDM and EINSTEIN are expected to
continue over the next several years. Despite recent progress, critics
have argued that both programs have taken too long to implement, and
there is some validity to the concerns. However, CDM is now at a point
in development and deployment where additional resources could
accelerate the program. EINSTEIN, on the other hand, still requires
additional early-stage development and coordination with the internet
service providers that would be contracted to support the program.
Lack of defensive capacity is placing the Nation at risk and we should
expect additional intrusions and hacking to occur
The skill of the adversaries, low cost of entry, relative ease of
conducting attacks and the potential for high payoffs suggests that
cyber attacks against Government networks are likely to remain a
significant threat.
Programs such as EINSTEIN and CDM are necessary but not sufficient
to change the cost-benefit calculus or provide sufficient defensive
capacity to keep cyber attacks from penetrating U.S. Government
networks.
Recent legislative actions are also necessary but not sufficient to
ensure protection of Government networks. These include: (1) The
National Cybersecurity Protection Act of 2014, which provides explicit
authority for DHS to provide assistance to the private sector in
identifying vulnerabilities and restoring their networks following an
attack, and establishes in law the National Cybersecurity and
Communications Integration Center (NCCIC) as a Federal civilian
interface with the private sector; and (2) the Federal Information
Security Modernization Act of 2014, which provides DHS authority to
administer the implementation of Federal information security policies,
develop and oversee implementation of binding cybersecurity directives,
provide technical assistance to other agencies through the U.S.
Computer Emergency Response Team (US-CERT), and deploy cybersecurity
technology to other agencies upon their request.
A third piece of legislation that is still being debated is the
Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act of 2015. This legislation would
require the sharing of information between the Government and industry
concerning threats and other cyber information. While the specifics are
still being developed, the general concept of greater sharing of
information on cyber incidents between industry and the Government
would be welcomed. However, even with such new legislation, recent
cybersecurity trends are unlikely to be reversed without a more
comprehensive program.
Even with EINSTEIN and CDM, more will be needed to defend Government
networks in cyber space--developing doctrine for deterrence,
denial, attribution, and response will be imperative. It may
also be time to reevaluate the U.S. Government information
architecture.
The internet is a complex system-of-systems requiring a
comprehensive approach to ensuring security across the vast Government
network. Any single approach or program will be insufficient to ensure
security in cyber space. As such, a defense-in-depth strategy will be
essential for securing Government networks.
In considering the development of a comprehensive cybersecurity
approach, one must examine how new policies and processes, improvements
to the internet architecture, hardware and software hardening, and
personnel training and education must be combined into a system that
will provide security, privacy, and resiliency.
Inherent in efforts to secure the Federal cyber space is the
development of a National Cybersecurity Strategy. Such a document would
include articulation of concepts for governance of the .gov domain, in
addition to cyber doctrine for deterrence, denial, attribution,
response, and resilience.
In my judgment, the U.S. Government is at a crossroads concerning
cybersecurity. The goal to date has been to balance two competing
demands: Availability of data and security of the enterprise. As recent
breaches have demonstrated over the past several years--with the OPM
breach as an exclamation point--it is time to develop secure enclaves
to protect key Government information, data, and networks.
The technology exists today to re-architect Government internet
systems, and several agencies within the National security community
have implemented such a reengineering with good results.
Implementing these existing approaches to modernize and improve
security architectures will take resources and focused attention--both
of which Congress and the Executive branch can provide. We must start
thinking of security as one of the top imperatives and systematically
evaluate and change the U.S. Government's information architectures,
along with applying programs such as CDM and EINSTEIN, if we are going
to be better able to prevent, detect, and respond to these sorts of
attacks.
Appropriate funding for research, development, and acquisition
programs remains another foundational element in this critical race to
secure Federal Government networks. Government must partner with the
cyber industries to ensure that the pipeline of critical solutions
continues to be developed. At the same time, critical infrastructure
industries such as transportation and energy must be beneficiaries of
this cyber research, development, and acquisition.
Workforce issues, both for the cyber professionals that manage the
Government networks and for the broader Government workforce that
utilizes the network, must be considered as a top priority.
In the Government cyber space, the security of the overall network
is directly linked to the security of each node, including the
individuals operating the terminal devices. Training and education must
be fully embedded throughout the workforce.
conclusions
Recent cyber attacks demonstrate a disconcerting trajectory.
Attackers are evolving their strategies and are becoming more
emboldened. With little by way of deterrence, hackers--including state
and non-state actors--are continuing to find opportunities to penetrate
U.S. Government networks.
These networks have demonstrated significant weaknesses that have
been exploited resulting in loss of a large amount personal
identifiable information, intellectual property, acquisition
information, and sensitive security information.
CDM and Einstein must be considered as one part of a layered
defense strategy, but they cannot be the only tools employed. No one
technology or solution can be utilized in isolation. Employing a
systems approach to cybersecurity will be essential.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.

Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Dr. Gerstein.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions.
So, Dr. Gerstein, you were in the room today and had a
chance to listen to the testimony of our first panel. So I want
to start there.
Obviously, we spent some time in this hearing and much of
last week talking about the OPM breach. As a former DHS officer
now on the outside looking in, I would like to get your
perspective on that and specifically whether or not you have an
opinion to the question that I was asking earlier about whether
or not there is any legitimate excuse for why encryption and
multi-factor identification shouldn't have been deployed at
OPM.
Mr. Gerstein. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I absolutely believe that, in fact, OPM had been slow to
make necessary enhancements to its cyber network. The list of
deficiencies that they are trying remediate and have been
trying to remediate over the past, say, 9 months or so has been
quite long.
It begins with not even having a common understanding of
what systems were part of their network. So they had not had a
mapped network to be able to understand what was on their
entire OPM network. So that is problematic.
The multi-factor authentication is absolutely key. They
were not in charge of their configuration because they had not
had necessarily a professional IT force until 2013, when they
actually did get an IT staff. So you have those sorts of
systemic problems that are now being addressed.
I clearly think that Dr. Ozment's comment about we are
fighting a catch-up battle is right to the point, that we have
underinvested in cybersecurity strategies.
At the same time, interestingly, we have, in a sense,
overinvested in information-sharing strategies. That is, we
have put a premium on how to share information, but not
necessarily how to secure the information.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Well, you mentioned underinvesting. But
Federal agencies face similar problems with budgets and
resources all the time.
I guess I would like to know if you have any
recommendations for Federal CISOs with respect to devoting
those resources to combat this particular threat.
Mr. Gerstein. Well, Mr. Chairman, it's really above the
CISO. It's about strategic decisions to protect the network.
What we lack in this entire architecture is a governance
structure and a National cybersecurity strategy.
I go back to several months ago now. The Department of
Defense put out its own defense cybersecurity strategy.
Normally, when there is such a strategy, you would expect that
there would have been a National strategy that would have
helped to inform.
Such is always the case, for example, with the National
security strategy of the United States coming out, and then the
National military strategy falls shortly thereafter. One would
expect and one would hope there would be such a thing as a
National cybersecurity strategy.
This strategy, as I mentioned in my opening remarks, should
really think about, what is the doctrine for deterrence, how do
we tell potential adversaries what the consequences are for
actions in cyber space, how do we find the proper balance
between the security of the network and the privacy of
individuals? These are trade-off questions that have to be
addressed in such a strategy.
Mr. Ratcliffe. So, Dr. Gerstein, you heard Dr. Ozment's
testimony. I asked him specifically about--and he was able to
confirm--the published reports out there that this breach was
accomplished by using authorized credentials.
So, in effect, the user here with respect to the network
appeared to be an authorized user. We seem to be increasingly
seeing that as a cyber intrusion method in other places besides
the OPM attack.
So I guess I would like to hear your perspective on what
cybersecurity measures and best practices can be employed to
identify those anomalies where you have authorized users in
places where they shouldn't be.
Mr. Gerstein. So there are a number of different strategies
that one can consider. Certainly you brought out multi-factor
authentication. That is key. PIV cards. Incorporating those
into your architecture is also key. I think we need to look
hard now at, do we develop enclaves? Let me just talk for a
moment about that.
Today we have a system, an internet, which has evolved over
the past 40 years in which you have normal information sharing.
I use the tongue-in-cheek grandma's recipes residing on the
same system that you have industrial control systems for
hydroelectric plants and even nuclear facilities.
The question has to be: Is it now time to segment the
internet such that you do develop secure enclaves that have a
greater degree of security? This is something that should be
considered as part of this National cyber strategy that I've
alluded to.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Dr. Gerstein. My time has
expired.
The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Member, Mr. Richmond.
The gentlemen yields.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Rhode Island, Mr.
Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank the Ranking Member for yielding.
Dr. Gerstein, thank you for your testimony. It has been
very insightful.
I want to begin by saying I completely agree with you on
the National cyber strategy. In fact, the legislation that I
have introduced in now a few Congresses, including this one,
the Executive Cyberspace Coordination Act, would basically put
somebody in charge, giving them both policy and budgetary
authority. That act would also require a National strategy to
be completed within 1 year. So you and I are of like mind on
that subject.
So, Dr. Gerstein, in your written testimony, you say that
balancing data access and security has been a driving factor in
cybersecurity strategies. I understand that this is often a
fundamental trade-off and that we must support research and
development to allow us to better achieve both goals.
But I wonder if a bigger problem in many agencies like,
say, OPM is that the security risk assessments are not even
being conducted adequately. In other words, there is not so
much a conscious decision to prize usability at the expense of
security, but a lack of understanding that security is being
comprised. Is that a fair analysis?
Mr. Gerstein. Yes, sir. I think there is some of that. But
I do believe that some of the recent legislation--I think the
implementation of EINSTEIN and CDM across the .gov space will
be important.
We have to continue, though, to stress to all elements of
the network, which includes the personnel and their terminal
devices, how important they are as a first line of defense.
Many of the intrusions that occur are due to people not
understanding issues such as phishing attacks, spear-phishing
attacks, and, therefore, opening up their networks through
inadvertently opening up a piece of software that contains,
say, malware.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
So, Dr. Gerstein, I sincerely believe that we are going to
keep seeing breaches of sensitive Government networks,
unfortunately, until we start holding attackers accountable.
This is not to absolve OPM for the weak cybersecurity
posture. Far from it. But I do believe that the administration
and Congress have to take stronger actions in response to cyber
attacks.
Do you believe that we have sufficiently explored options
for deterrence? What avenues would we be exploring?
Mr. Gerstein. Absolutely not, sir. I think we have much
more to do in cyber deterrence. Today we're having discussions
about what constitutes an attack and what level of intrusion is
going to be acceptable on networks. I take you back to the Cold
War when there was spying going on between adversaries within
the Warsaw Pact and NATO.
So we have not yet said what is going to be our response to
such intrusions. Are we going to just consider them to be the
course of doing business or are we going to react?
I would presume that, if we did talk about deterrence in a
realistic and measured way, that we would come up with limits
on what we are prepared to accept before taking actions. These
actions need to be thought of across the full range, from
economic- and political-type activities and, if necessary, even
considering use-of-force activities. But we have not had those
discussions across the U.S. Government.
Mr. Langevin. Could you speculate on some of what those
actions would be beyond the broad categories that you talked
about?
Mr. Gerstein. Well, of course, there are a number of
opportunities to use organizations such as United Nations and
things at the lower end, such as demarche. You can have
economic sanctions. You can do something that is very
asymmetric. So you could have a blockade, for example.
But I'm not suggesting any one set of actions, rather, that
we need to, as a Government, consider what actions would be
reasonable, given the activities that are on-going.
Mr. Langevin. Well, I clearly agree that we should have
some more international rules of the road. This isn't just a
U.S. problem, but an international one. Right now it is kind of
the Wild West out there.
On the experience of the cyber attacks that we have
experienced here in the United States--and OPM is a perfect
example--our adversaries or these hackers are eating our lunch,
and we are not seeming to be able to stop it and not doing much
about it.
That should change. We have to change the calculus so that
our enemies or adversaries know that there is a cost to hacking
our systems and stealing our data.
So, with that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
I thank Dr. Gerstein for his testimony.
Mr. Ratcliffe. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
Mr. Perry.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Hey, Dr. Gerstein. Good to see you again.
So you were sitting here during the last panel and the
questioning that I had. I just would like to get your
perception, if you recall.
Is DHS the correct place? Do they have the authority? What
are the consequences? Your perception there. Also, just
thinking through some of your comments, National security
strategy, National military strategy, National cybersecurity
strategy, your thoughts on where--where would be the repository
of that strategy? Who would develop it? Maybe some tenets of
the strategy.
Also, what is topical today just came to me while we are
having this discussion. So maybe it has already been brought
up. But the naming convention, circumstances that we find
ourselves in now, is that something that should be included in
this strategy? Should the United States allow that to leave the
purview of our country and be more international with some
other international body? How does that tie in? Then we can
probably just have an on-going discussion based on your
answers.
Mr. Gerstein. So I was jotting down some. That was quite a
long list. But let me start at the top with the National
cybersecurity strategy.
What I would say there is that I think the precedent
exists. The National security strategy of the United States
comes from the White House, and it's an interagency product.
The interagency gets a chance to comment and to provide input.
I would see a National cybersecurity strategy similarly
that would have the responsibility to be developed by the White
House and coordinated and discussed within the interagency. So
I think that's key.
On the question of authorities, I believe that the
legislation concerning information sharing is critical. That's,
of course, the work that this body has done. I think that's
critical. Hopefully, in some form--I don't take a position on
whether each word is correct. But, rather, the general concept
of information sharing between the Government and industry in
this space is absolutely imperative.
When you look at capabilities such as CDM and EINSTEIN,
certainly EINSTEIN relies on signatures. The only way to get
signatures is if there is information sharing. So it's
absolutely essential.
On the broader question of authorities, I think for right
now the biggest issue that remains is this idea of governance.
Several years ago there were discussions on-going between three
Cabinet departments about who would have authorities in cyber
space, Department of Justice, FBI, and Department of Defense,
and Department of Homeland Security.
I still believe that there are likely some seams that need
to be considered, and I would think those should be considered
as part of the National cybersecurity strategy. That would give
an opportunity for the complete discussion to ensure that the
authorities are appropriate.
Mr. Perry. So two other questions in the time I have left.
The naming convention, just your thoughts on that. Just as,
you know, it is not appropriate or proper to set up a shotgun
in your cabin while you are away in case somebody shows up and
they open the door, it is locked, and so it is set with a
trigger with a string or something to shoot the intruder, that
is not appropriate.
But would it be appropriate in cyber space to set up--and
is it possible to set up a system where you are hacked by XYZ
country or company, the Federal Government or what have you,
that there is a response that is elicited by that attack that
does something similar to what happened to Aramco's computer
which rendered them useless? I mean, is that a possibility?
Would that be something that would be appropriate or is
contemplated?
Mr. Gerstein. So on the question first on the naming
convention, I guess what I would say on this, which I think is
pretty important to consider, is the naming convention is, with
respect to the internet, a fairly low-level discussion. It's a
technical discussion about how things are named. The sharing of
that throughout the globe, I think that would be fine.
But I think the more important discussion is at a higher
level: What is acceptable internet behavior for a State to
allow within its borders? Those sorts of discussions have been
had really more on an informal basis and not so much directly
with all States like we do with sort of a typical arms control
agreement.
This one has been--there have been some discussions with
particular States, and they've been on a bilateral basis where
they've talked about behaviors. But these continue to evolve.
So on your question about having some sort of shotgun
shell, here's what I would be concerned about. This goes back
to the question of attribution. So imagine if you think you
understand who the perpetrator of the act is, but you have no
way to definitively attribute a particular act. If you were to
take a catastrophic attack against who you think is the
perpetrator and you get it wrong, you would be doing a lot of
damage.
So this goes back to this question of you can't just depend
on attribution, retribution, proportionality, laws of war-type
activities, but you also have to go to the front end and say,
``How do I deter? How do I change the calculus of a potential
adversary who is thinking about intruding on my networks? Also,
how do I deny? So I won't be able to stop everything. But can I
set up enclaves so that I'm not exposing my entire network, so
I'm not exposing 4 million personnel records or perhaps 18-30
million''--as was reported today--``How do we do a better job
in parsing that off so that we're not exposing our entirety of
PII information?''
Mr. Ratcliffe. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Member, the gentleman
from Louisiana, Mr. Richmond.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will try not to
take up all of my time.
I will start where my colleague Mr. Perry left off. You
know, as I think of sports and other things, even war, I mean,
the best defense is a good offense.
So the question for me becomes maybe not the shotgun
approach. But what about the Trojan horse approach, that we
embed in all of our information something that, if you ever
take all of our information, we just activate it, which wipes
your computer out?
Look, I am not a programmer. I don't know code. I don't
know any of that. But there are people that do. I would just
think that we should be able to be in a position that we can
put land mines in all of our data that we can activate whenever
we need to activate it. If you just happen to have it by
accident, so be it, because you shouldn't have it.
Because I think that, you know, for folks back home, the
major concern is about our ability to sense these threats, our
ability to stop them. I guess the pervasive question is just,
where does it end? I don't think anybody fears us enough to not
do this.
So the question becomes: Is there anything we can do
besides defense to make hackers think twice about messing with
us or our information?
Mr. Gerstein. So there are people who are thinking about
offensive actions and how to use offensive capabilities.
Obviously, that discussion needs to be had in a closed session,
a Classified session.
But I think, from a general standpoint, again, I go back to
establishing attribution is really key to being able to take
any action, whether that action is legal action, for example,
in the case of the Chinese hackers, where we indicted them in
U.S. courts. So there are opportunities to do those kind of
things if one can establish attribution.
You know, one topic that we haven't talked as much about
today that concerns me greatly is the sensing capacity from the
standpoint of our networks today are likely penetrated with
either zero day attacks which have not been executed and are
awaiting a point in time at which they would be executed or
there's an on-going attack. I mean, the likelihood of such a
case is very high.
So I worry about being able to establish security on our
networks today with the capabilities that we have. As has been
pointed out both by the Members of this subcommittee as well as
by the other two witnesses, EINSTEIN and CDM have been slow to
roll out, and we're still in the process of rolling them out.
Even once that occurs, there will be developmental periods
and the departments and agencies will have to ensure that they
have the proper procedures in place. So it's not just the DHS
availability of the different programs, but it's the
implementation within the departments and agencies that's key.
To the point that you asked about, you know, can we do some
sort of Trojan horse, this is where research and development
and follow-on, hopefully, with acquisition is key. You have to
have robust research and development programs that are designed
to make headway in this very competitive environment called
cyber space. Right now we are largely in a defensive posture
where an attack is discovered and then we take some sort of
action to respond, mitigate, recover, resiliency, those sorts
of action.
Mr. Richmond. I will yield the remainder of my time to my
colleague, Mr. Perry.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Richmond.
So when you talk about attribution, much like what Mr.
Richmond was thinking, I was thinking of, you know, if your
computer, if your network, has our data--and I like the land
mine concept, but, essentially, it is self-actuating or maybe
it can be actuated by somebody on our side of the fence, so to
speak, that there are consequences.
I am trying to think about how and maybe why I care whether
somebody that didn't necessarily do the hack, so to speak, has
the latest plans or the plans to our latest fighter or our
personnel data. Do I care how they got them or why they got
them? They are not supposed to have them. They are critical to
us.
What does it hurt to just obliterate their system and make
it nonfunctional as a consequence and maybe even everybody down
the line, if that becomes an issue? Do hackers steal
information and then store it on somebody else's computer?
Mr. Gerstein. They do, indeed. In fact, they even use other
people's computers in what we call botnets. So a botnet is the
use of another computer. You load the software on and you have
attacks that emanate from, if you will, a computer that has
nothing to do with the attack other than it is used as a
platform.
In fact, if you look at the attacks against the financial
sector that were occurring with great regularity 3, 4 years
ago, those attacks were botnet attacks. They were denial,
distributed----
Mr. Perry. So is there no way--I mean, I think over time,
with your indulgence, Mr. Chairman, the investigators follow
the thread back through the botnet computer--right?--to find
the original source. I mean, if that capability exists now, why
can't the capability go along with it that follows the thread
back to the origination and then takes care of business where
it occurred?
Mr. Gerstein. Well, Congressman, I'm not saying that it
couldn't. I guess what I'm saying is I would go back to we need
a robust research and development program that looks at all
alternatives.
Look at iPhones or cellular telephones today. They now come
equipped with a kill switch so that, if your phone has been
stolen, you have the ability to turn off that phone and make it
so it is no longer anything viable for someone to use. It
erases all the data.
So there could be some sort of capability. I would prefer
not to speculate on the specifics, but rather say that a robust
research and development program should be looking at how do we
secure hardware, software, enclaves, networks, in a more
cohesive fashion than perhaps we have thought about heretofore.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield.
Mr. Ratcliffe. The gentleman yields back.
I thank Dr. Gerstein for his valuable testimony. I thank
the Members for their questions today.
The Members of the committee may have some additional
questions for you, Dr. Gerstein. If that is the case, we will
ask you to respond to those in writing.
Pursuant to committee rule 7(e), the hearing record will be
held open for a period of 10 days.
Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:28 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Questions From Chairman John Ratcliffe for Andy Ozment
Question 1. Today's agency networks are not compartmentalized and
as we've seen with several of the recent hacks, once the exterior
perimeter is breached, the hacker remains undetected for months and is
able to exploit vulnerabilities within the network(s) without passing
through additional inspection or security measures. There has been a
shift in the private sector towards a Zero Trust model of information
security where the networks are segmented and additional security is
brought within the network between compartments, thus limiting the
ability for the hacker to move internally.
This is becoming an important part of the so-called ``defense-in-
depth'' approach that agencies use today. Is DHS promoting this
practice across agencies?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. In April 2014, Deputy Under Secretary for Cybersecurity
Phyllis Schneck testified before the Senate Appropriations Committee,
``the lack of clear and updated laws reflecting the roles and
responsibilities of civilian network security caused unnecessary delays
in the incident response . . . In many cases 5 to 6 days were lost in
responding to the Heartbleed incident as a result.''
As of December 2014, FISMA was updated to give DHS the authorities
needed to carry out the operational mission to protect the .Gov domain.
Now that DHS has the needed authorities, what is in the way of fully
implementing the needed capabilities to protect our Government
networks? How does DHS plan to implement FISMA's new authorities?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable James R. Langevin for Andy Ozment
Question 1a. Dr. Ozment, is DHS treating the breach of personnel
records and the breach of the SF-86 forms as a single incident or
separate incidents?
What criteria does DHS use in making such a determination?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 1b. What specific criteria did DHS use in making the
determination regarding the OPM breach?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 1c. What was the time line for said determination?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2a. Dr. Ozment, I understand that OPM discovered the most
recent breach after upgrading their security based on recommendations
from US-CERT following the 2014 breach.
Was DHS aware of the indicator of compromise--not its existence on
the network but just the indicator itself--OPM used in making that
discovery prior to OPM's alerting DHS?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2b. How did OPM acquire that indicator of compromise?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3a. Dr. Ozment, in your testimony, you reference a binding
operational directive issued recently by DHS. The directive instructs
agencies to close known vulnerabilities on their internet-facing
systems.
Why weren't agencies already closing these known vulnerabilities?
Question 3b. Given that the statutory authority has been in place
since December, why did DHS wait until May to issue the directive?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3c. Was the issuance of the directive in any way
influenced by the OPM breach?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. Dr. Ozment, it is clear that OPM's security posture was
poor prior to the breach discovered in March 2014--US-CERT confirmed
this, and OPM's Inspector General has been saying so since at least
2007. Do you believe DHS could have done more to help prevent either
this most recent breach or the one earlier in 2014? If not, why not?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5. Dr. Ozment, in your opinion based on your experience
with DHS, is it reasonable to expect agencies to be primarily
responsible for defense of their own networks?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 6. Do agencies have the management capabilities to
understand the risks they face and make informed decisions about the
resources they need--relative to other demands--to protect their
systems and respond and recover from breaches?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 7. Do agencies have the acquisition capabilities to
appropriately contract for cybersecurity services?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Chairman John Ratcliffe for Gregory C. Wilshusen
Question 1. How would you characterize the current state of
cybersecurity for Federal civilian information systems?
Answer. The current state of cybersecurity for Federal civilian
information systems is that these systems are at high-risk of
unauthorized access, use, disclosure, modification, and disruption. In
fiscal year 2014, Federal agencies reported 50,289 cyber-related
information security incidents to the U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness
Team (US-CERT).\1\ These incidents included unauthorized access,
improper usage, suspicious network activity, social engineering,
malicious code, lost or stolen equipment, policy violations, phishing,
and denial of service.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The number of cyber-related information security incidents
(50,289) reported by Federal agencies was determined by subtracting the
number of reported non-cyber-related information security incidents
(16,879) from the total number of information security incidents
(67,168) reported by Federal agencies in fiscal year 2014.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cybersecurity for Federal civilian information systems needs
significant improvement. Agencies continue to have shortcomings in
assessing risks, developing and implementing security controls, and
monitoring results. As I have previously testified,\2\ for fiscal year
2014, 19 of the 24 Federal agencies covered by the Chief Financial
Officers (CFO) Act reported that information security control
deficiencies were either a material weakness or significant deficiency
in internal control for financial reporting purposes.\3\ In addition,
most agencies have weaknesses in five key control categories.\4\ For
example, 22 of the 24 CFO Act agencies had weaknesses with limiting,
preventing, and detecting inappropriate access to computer resources,
and managing the configuration of software and hardware. Moreover, the
Inspectors General at 23 of the 24 agencies cited information security
as a major management challenge for their agency.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ GAO, Cybersecurity: Actions Needed to Address Challenges Facing
Federal Systems, GAO-15-573T (Washington, DC, Apr. 22, 2015).
\3\ A material weakness is a deficiency, or combination of
deficiencies, that results in more than a remote likelihood that a
material misstatement of the financial statements will not be prevented
or detected. A significant deficiency is a control deficiency, or a
combination of control deficiencies, in internal control that is less
severe than a material weakness, yet important enough to merit
attention by those charged with governance. A control deficiency exists
when the design or operation of a control does not allow management or
employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions,
to prevent or detect and correct misstatements on a timely basis.
\4\ These categories include controls that are intended to: (1)
Limit, detect, and prevent unauthorized access to computer resources;
(2) manage the configuration of software and hardware; (3) segregate
incompatible duties to ensure that a single individual does not have
control over all key aspects of a computer-related operation; (4)
planning for continuity of operations in the event of a disaster or
disruption; and (5) implementing agency-wide security management
programs that are critical to identifying control deficiencies,
resolving problems, and managing risks on an on-going basis.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 2. In your view, who in the Federal Government is
responsible for protecting Federal civilian information systems? What
is DHS's role, and what is each Federal agency's role? Do you think
their respective roles are clearly defined? Who is responsible for
enforcing the standards and processes?
Answer. Every single user of Federal civilian information systems
is responsible for protecting the systems. In addition, the Secretary
of DHS, heads of Federal agencies, and the Director of the Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) have key responsibilities for protecting
these systems, as discussed below.
The Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA
2014) assigns DHS a key role in protecting Federal civilian information
systems.\5\ With an exception for National security systems, the
Secretary of DHS is to administer the implementation of agency
information security policies and practices for information systems. In
this regard, the Secretary of DHS is responsible for:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ The Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014
(Pub. L. 113-283, Dec. 18, 2014) largely superseded the very similar
Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002 (Title III, Pub. L.
No. 107-347, Dec. 17, 2002).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

assisting the director of OMB in carrying out his or her
authorities and functions overseeing agency information
security policies and practices;

developing and overseeing the implementation of binding
operational directives to agencies to implement the policies,
principles, standards, and guidelines developed by the director
of OMB and the requirements of the Act;

monitoring agency implementation of information security
policies and practices;

convening meetings with senior agency officials to help
ensure effective implementation of information security
policies and practices;

coordinating Government-wide efforts on information security
policies and practices; and

providing operational and technical assistance to agencies
in implementing policies, principles, standards, and guidelines
on information security.
The head of each Federal agency is to provide information security
protections commensurate with the risk and magnitude of harm resulting
from unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification, or
destruction of information systems used or operated by an agency or by
a contractor of an agency or other organization on the agency's behalf.
To this end, each agency is to develop, document, and implement an
agency-wide information security program to provide information
security for the information and information systems that support the
operations and assets ofthe agency, including those provided or managed
by another agency, contractor, or other source.
FISMA 2014 helped to clarify the roles of OMB, DHS, and Federal
agencies in protecting Federal civilian information systems and
bestowed additional esponsibilities upon DHS for ``administering the
implementation of agency information security policies and practices
for information systems.'' However, testimony by a DHS official at
recent Congressional hearings suggests that agencies have questioned
how sharing network data with DHS for security monitoring purposes
relates to their existing statutory restrictions on the use and
disclosure of agency data. Thus, the extent to which DHS can compel an
agency to take a specific action in the name of information security
may be unclear.
The director of OMB is responsible for enforcing information
security standards and processes. FISMA 2014 states that the director
shall oversee agency information security policies and practices
including overseeing agency compliance with the requirements of the
act. FISMA 2014 also states that the director can use any authorized
action under section 11303 of title 40 to enforce accountability for
compliance with such requirements. The authorized actions include
recommending a reduction or an increase in the amount of information
resources that the heard of the executive agency proposes for its
budget, reducing or otherwise adjusting apportionments and
reapportionments of appropriations for information resources, and using
other administrative controls over appropriations. The secretary of DHS
is responsible for assisting the director in carrying out this
authority and function.
Question 3. GAO reported in 2014 that agencies' information
security was a major struggle for 23 of 24 agencies. One major weakness
identified was agencies' lack of oversight of contractor standards,
which resulted in an inconsistent implementation of security standards.
What should Federal agencies be doing to address this problem? What
is the role for DHS?
Answer. In August 2014, we recommended that agencies establish and
implement IT security oversight procedures for contractor-operated
systems.\6\ Key procedures for effective oversight that agencies should
implement include:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ GAO, Information Security: Agencies Need to Improve Oversight
of Contractor Controls, GAO-14-612 (Washington, DC: August 8, 2014).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

communicating security and privacy requirements to
contractors;

selecting and documenting controls securing Federal
information;

selecting an independent assessor to evaluate contractor
security;

developing and executing a test plan for assessing security
controls;

recommending remedial actions to mitigate identified
vulnerabilities;

developing and implementing plans of actions and milestones
for remediation efforts; and

monitoring implementation and effectiveness of remedial
actions.
DHS has a role in monitoring agency implementation of information
security policies and practices and in providing operational and
technical assistance to agencies in implementing policies and
guidelines on information security. In this role, DHS can monitor and
assist agencies with effectively overseeing their contractors'
implementation of appropriate security controls over Federal
information and systems.
Question 4. The Binding Operational Directive issued by Secretary
Johnson directs agencies to fix the most critical vulnerabilities on
their systems within 30 days. This seems like going after the lowest-
hanging fruit. Why not direct agencies to address all their
vulnerabilities not just the most critical ones?
Answer. Directing agencies to fix the most critical vulnerabilities
helps to prioritize agency efforts by focusing remediation efforts on
the vulnerabilities that are more likely to be exploited and cause most
harm to the agency. In an environment of constrained resources, this is
prudent. Once the most critical vulnerabilities have been mitigated,
agencies should then proceed to resolve lower-priority vulnerabilities.
Questions From Chairman John Ratcliffe for Daniel M. Gerstein \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The opinions and conclusions expressed in this testimony are
the author's alone and should not be interpreted as representing those
of RAND or any of the sponsors of its research. This product is part of
the RAND Corporation testimony series. RAND testimonies record
testimony presented by RAND associates to Federal, State, or local
legislative committees; Government-appointed commissions and panels;
and private review and oversight bodies. The RAND Corporation is a
nonprofit research organization providing objective analysis and
effective solutions that address the challenges facing the public and
private sectors around the world. RAND's publications do not
necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
strategies for defending u.s. government networks in cyber space
addendum \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ This testimony is available for free download at http://
www.rand.org/pubs/testimonies/CT436z1.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 1a. From your time at the U.S. Department of Homeland
Security Science and Technology Directorate what do you see as
improvements that can be made to improve DHS' ability to assist Federal
agencies secure Government networks?
Answer. Cybersecurity must be looked at through the lens of a
campaign plan. In such a plan, numerous initiatives must be implemented
to ensure a layered defense, thereby increasing the difficulty of
penetrating Government networks.
EINSTEIN 3A and the Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM)
program are part of such a layered defense. These two systems are
designed to work in tandem, with EINSTEIN 3A focusing on keeping
threats out of Federal networks and CDM identifying risks inside
Government networks. These programs are necessary, but they are not
sufficient to ensure cybersecurity across Government networks. Other
measures must be developed that compliment these programs.
For example, hardware and software must be hardened. Enclaves can
be developed and deployed using a combination of hardened hardware
configurations in devices and operating software (such as network,
data, access, and security management systems). In addition, newer
concepts such as clouds and virtual machines are being used with some
success to build enclaves to protect valuable data and sensitive
computation. Emerging concepts under development--such as software-
defined networking, trusted protection modules, and secure-by-design
software systems--may improve our ability to create secure enclaves in
the future.
Software assurance must continue to be a point of emphasis. New
software must be developed that assures that products are free from
vulnerabilities and perform as intended. Legacy systems must be
evaluated to ensure that they have necessary security. In addition,
information architectures--particularly software and database
architectures--for our legacy systems should be rethought and perhaps
overhauled for systems containing or dealing with personally
identifiable information (PII). And consideration should be given to
any future placement of especially sensitive information (such as PII)
on secure sites. The Office of Personnel Management data breach should
be a serious wake-up call to apply resources and common sense against
these sensitive data.
Personnel who operate the networks and users of the systems must be
appropriately trained to understand and prevent the various types of
cyber attacks they are likely to face. Examining previous attacks
highlights the degree to which vulnerabilities result from insecurities
caused by individuals' actions (for example, during phishing attacks).
Information sharing is a critical component of cybersecurity. The
current system of securing software vulnerabilities largely relies on
discovering a network intrusion, identifying the attack signature, and
developing and deploying patches to address the vulnerabilities.
Therefore, information sharing is essential both to gain knowledge that
an attack has occurred and to share mitigation procedures.
Finally, inherent in efforts to secure the Federal cyber space is
the critical need for a National Cybersecurity Strategy. Such a
document would articulate concepts for governance of the .gov domain,
as well as cyber doctrine for deterrence, denial, attribution,
response, and resilience. Today, no such comprehensive document exists.
Question 1b. What should S&T's role be in helping further develop
these programs and future technologies?
Answer. Research and development will be critical to identifying
and deploying solutions to secure Federal networks. S&T must take the
longer view of the security requirements for the Federal space.
Additionally, the focus for DHS S&T should be to systematically examine
the cybersecurity landscape and develop solutions that contribute
directly to the future layered security architecture supporting
Government networks.
This examination also involves looking comprehensively at EINSTEIN
3A and the CDM program to assess their effectiveness and to think more
broadly about what the follow-on systems must look like to assure a
more forward-looking posture.
Given the importance of cybersecurity to the Department and its
components for both securing their networks and supporting their
missions, S&T must also assure a keen understanding of their
operational and security requirements and look to align its research
and development to address identified shortfalls and gaps.
S&T can also serve an important function in assisting non-
Governmental entities, such as the critical infrastructure sectors, in
coordinating research and development activities for security
solutions. One such S&T program exists in the oil and gas sector, and
expanding this program into other sectors could provide significant
benefit.
Question 2. In your short time at the RAND Corporation you have
done extensive research in the cybersecurity field.
Based on your research what more can be done to encourage Federal
agencies to adopt the most basic network security standards such as
proper cyber hygiene?
Answer. Cybersecurity is not a one-time issue. That is, the
Government cannot recruit a competent cyber workforce and train users
to operate their information technology systems and expect that this
will be sufficient. Rather, cybersecurity must receive constant
attention, by all employees and at all levels.
The cyber workforce must be trained and educated to have the latest
knowledge and capabilities. They must be continuously challenged
through exercises--including simulated and Red Team intrusions--to keep
their skills honed. The Federal cyber workforce must also be
continuously refreshed to attract the best and brightest to serve.
Limited-term appointments (including the highly-qualified experts
program) that allow industry experts to serve in Government for periods
of 2 or 3 years can provide a necessary infusion of talent.
Awareness campaigns serve to educate the workforce. The DHS ``Stop,
Think, Connect'' campaign is an example of a program designed to
increase personal awareness. In addition to awareness, training can be
helpful as well. Individuals must be trained to recognize malicious
cyber activity that could potentially surface during their interactions
on Government information technology systems.
CDM remains a critical component for supporting cyber hygiene on
Government networks. When fully deployed, CDM will allow for
understanding the network architecture and identifying in near real-
time the risks that are in the network by sensing vulnerabilities and
anomalous behaviors that could that signal an attack is under way.
Question 3. Federal agencies face similar problems with budgets and
resources when trying to address cybersecurity.
What recommendations do you have for DHS and Federal CISOs in
devoting resources to combating this threat?
Answer. DHS and Federal chief information security officers must
receive necessary funding that allows for up-to-date information
technology and security systems for their networks and the users that
reside on those networks. In some regards, this requires a culture
change. Typically, budgets have been allocated for ``mission''
activities first and have funded the security of internal networks at
minimum levels. This means that fielding advanced cybersecurity systems
and even up-to-date hardware and software does not receive the
necessary funding to defeat the determined threats that are targeting
Federal networks.

[all]
